
                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                JR/4719/2019

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR
Heard at Field House on 6 December 2019
Further submissions 11 and 18 December 2019



                                   Before

                       THE PRESIDENT, MR. JUSTICE LANE
                                     and
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                       THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF
                                   HN (1)
                                   MN (2)
                       (by their litigation friend SH)
                                                                  Applicants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                               - - - - - - - -

Ms Catherine Meredith, instructed by Simpson Millar Solicitors appeared
behalf of the Applicant

Ms Hafsah Masood, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.

                          _________________________

                                  JUDGMENT

                          _________________________




   1.  The  applicants  challenge  the  respondent's   refusal   to   accept
      responsibility for their asylum claim and the on-going delay in making
      arrangements for their transfer from Greece to the UK,  so  that  they
      can be reunited with their maternal uncle (SH).


   2. The claim concerns the application of Regulation No  604/2013  of  the
      European Parliament and of the Council of 26th  June 2013 establishing
      the  criteria  and  mechanisms  for  determining  the   Member   State
      responsible for examining an application for international  protection
      lodged in one of the Member States  by  a  third-country  national  or
      stateless person  ("Dublin  III"),  and  The  Commission  Implementing
      Regulation (EC) No 1560/2003, as amended ("IR")


   3. Although  Ms  Meredith  formulates  the  issues  before  the  Tribunal
      differently, in our judgment, the issues to be decided by the Tribunal
      distilled to their essence, are:


          i) Whether the respondent's  refusal  to  'take  charge'  of  the
             applicants is in breach of the Dublin III Regulation and/or in
             breach of Article 8 ECHR; and if so;


         ii) Whether there is an entitlement to damages  for  a  breach  of
             European Law and/or Article 8 ECHR


   4. This decision is concerned only with the first issue we have set  out.
      The matter will be listed for further hearing so that we  can  address
      the second issue, in light of the decision that we have reached.   For
      the reasons we have set out in this decision, we find the respondent's
      failure to accept transfer of the applicants to  the  UK  as  of  13th
      September 2019 was in breach of Dublin III, Article 8 ECHR and Article
      7 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights.


   5. It is convenient at this point to  set  out  the  relevant  legal  and
      policy framework that forms the backdrop to the respondent's decisions
      to refuse the take charge request and to maintain that decision.


The Legislative and Policy Framework


The Dublin III Regulation and the Implementing Regulation


   6. Since the European Council of Tampere in 1999 the European  Union  has
      sought to develop a common European asylum  system.  At  present,  the
      legal  framework  establishing  the  criteria   and   mechanisms   for
      determining the Member State responsible for examining an  application
      for international protection lodged in one Member State,  by  a  third
      country national, is set out in the Dublin III Regulation.


   7. The recitals in the preamble to the Dublin III Regulation include:


         "(4)     The Tampere conclusions also stated that the  CEAS  should
         include, in  the  short-term,  a  clear  and  workable  method  for
         determining the Member State responsible for the examination of  an
         asylum application.

         (5) Such a method should be based on objective, fair criteria  both
         for the Member States and for the persons concerned. It should,  in
         particular, make it possible to determine rapidly the Member  State
         responsible, so as to guarantee effective access to the  procedures
         for granting international protection and  not  to  compromise  the
         objective of the rapid processing of applications for international
         protection.

         ...

         (13) In accordance with the 1989 United Nations Convention  on  the
         Rights of the Child and with the Charter of Fundamental  Rights  of
         the European Union, the best interests of the  child  should  be  a
         primary  consideration  of  Member  States   when   applying   this
         Regulation. In assessing the best interests of  the  child,  Member
         States should, in particular, take due account of the minor's well-
         being and social development, safety  and  security  considerations
         and the views of the minor in accordance with his or  her  age  and
         maturity, including his or her background.  In  addition,  specific
         procedural guarantees for unaccompanied minors should be laid  down
         on account of their particular vulnerability.

         (14) In accordance with the European Convention for the  Protection
         of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms and with  the  Charter  of
         Fundamental Rights of the European Union, respect for  family  life
         should be a primary consideration of Member  States  when  applying
         this Regulation.

         ...

         (16) In order to ensure full respect for the  principle  of  family
         unity and for the best interests of the child, the existence  of  a
         relationship of dependency between an  applicant  and  his  or  her
         child, sibling or parent on account of the applicant's pregnancy or
         maternity, state of health or old  age,  should  become  a  binding
         responsibility criterion. When the applicant  is  an  unaccompanied
         minor, the presence of a family member or relative on the territory
         of another Member State who can take care of him or her should also
         become a binding responsibility criterion.

         (17)  Any  Member  State  should  be  able  to  derogate  from  the
         responsibility  criteria,  in  particular   on   humanitarian   and
         compassionate grounds, in order to bring together  family  members,
         relatives or any other family relations and examine an  application
         for international protection lodged with it or with another  Member
         State, even if such examination is not its responsibility under the
         binding criteria laid down in this Regulation.

         ...

         (19) In order to guarantee effective protection of  the  rights  of
         the persons  concerned,  legal  safeguards  and  the  right  to  an
         effective remedy in respect of decisions regarding transfers to the
         Member State responsible should be established, in  accordance,  in
         particular, with Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of
         the European Union. In order to ensure that  international  law  is
         respected, an effective remedy against such decisions should  cover
         both the examination of the application of this Regulation  and  of
         the legal and factual situation in the Member State  to  which  the
         applicant is transferred."




   8. Insofar as children are concerned, Article 6 emphasises that the  best
      interests of the child will be a primary consideration with respect to
      all of the procedures provided for in the Regulation  (Article  6(1)),
      and, in assessing such best interests,  Member  States  shall  closely
      cooperate and take into account family reunion possibilities  (Article
      6(3)).  Article 6(4) provides:


         "For the purpose of applying Article 8, the Member State where  the
         unaccompanied  minor  lodged  an  application   for   international
         protection shall, as soon as possible, take appropriate  action  to
         identify  the  family  members,  siblings  or  relatives   of   the
         unaccompanied minor on  the  territory  of  Member  States,  whilst
         protecting the best interest of the child".

   9. The determination of the Member State responsible is undertaken in the
      order in which they are set out in Chapter III (Article 7(1)),  and  a
      Member State is obliged to examine any asylum application  for  which,
      by the application of the hierarchy, it is responsible (Article 3(1)).




  10. Article 8 is at the top of the hierarchy of criteria and provides;


         "1. Where the applicant is an unaccompanied minor, the Member State
         responsible shall be that where a family member or a sibling of the
         unaccompanied minor is legally present, provided that it is in  the
         best interests of the minor....

         2. Where the applicant is an unaccompanied minor who has a relative
         who is legally present in another Member  State  and  where  it  is
         established, based on an individual examination, that the  relative
         can take care of him or her, that  Member  State  shall  unite  the
         minor with his or her  relative  and  shall  be  the  Member  State
         responsible, provided that it is  in  the  best  interests  of  the
         minor.

         ...

         5. The Commission shall be empowered to  adopt  delegated  acts  in
         accordance with Article 45 concerning the identification of  family
         members, siblings or relatives  of  the  unaccompanied  minor;  the
         criteria for establishing the existence of proven family links; the
         criteria for assessing the capacity of a relative to take  care  of
         the unaccompanied minor, including where family  members,  siblings
         or relatives of the unaccompanied  minor  stay  in  more  than  one
         Member State. In exercising its powers to adopt delegated acts, the
         Commission shall not exceed the scope of the best interests of  the
         child as provided for under Article 6(3).

         6. The Commission shall, by means of implementing  acts,  establish
         uniform  conditions  for  the  consultation  and  the  exchange  of
         information between Member States. Those implementing acts shall be
         adopted in accordance with the examination procedure referred to in
         Article 44(2)."

  11. Article 17 of the Regulation also includes provision for discretionary
      derogation as follows:


         "Discretionary clauses

         By way of derogation from  Article  3(1),  each  Member  State  may
         decide to  examine  an  application  for  international  protection
         lodged with it by a third-country national or a  stateless  person,
         even if such  examination  is  not  its  responsibility  under  the
         criteria laid down in this Regulation."

  12. The obligations of the Member State responsible are set out in Chapter
      V.  By operation of Article 18(1)(a), the Member State responsible  is
      obliged to take charge, under the conditions laid down in Articles 21,
      22 and 29, of  an  applicant  who  has  lodged  an  application  in  a
      different Member State.  The procedures for take charge  requests  are
      set out in Section II of Chapter VI.


         "Article 21

         Submitting a take charge request

         1. Where a Member State with which an application for international
            protection has been lodged considers that another  Member  State
            is responsible for examining the application, it may, as quickly
            as possible and in any event within three months of the date  on
            which the application was lodged within the meaning  of  Article
            20(2), request that other Member State to  take  charge  of  the
            applicant.

            ...

          3. In the cases referred to in paragraphs 1 and  2,  the  request
             that charge be taken by another Member  State  shall  be  made
             using a standard form and including  proof  or  circumstantial
             evidence as described in the two lists  mentioned  in  Article
             22(3) and/or relevant elements from the applicant's statement,
             enabling the authorities of  the  requested  Member  State  to
             check whether it is responsible on the basis of  the  criteria
             laid down in this Regulation.

            The Commission shall,  by  means  of  implementing  acts,  adopt
            uniform conditions on the preparation  and  submission  of  take
            charge requests. Those implementing acts  shall  be  adopted  in
            accordance with the examination procedure referred to in Article
            44(2).




         Article 22

         Replying to a take charge request

         1.       The requested Member State shall make the necessary checks
            and shall give a decision on the request to take charge  of  an
            applicant within two months of receipt of the request.

         2. In the procedure for determining the  Member  State  responsible
            elements of proof and circumstantial evidence shall be used.

         3. The Commission shall, by means of implementing acts,  establish,
            and review periodically, two  lists,  indicating  the  relevant
            elements of proof and  circumstantial  evidence  in  accordance
            with the criteria set  out  in  points  (a)  and  (b)  of  this
            paragraph.  Those  implementing  acts  shall  be   adopted   in
            accordance  with  the  examination  procedure  referred  to  in
            Article 44(2).

            (a) Proof:

                 (i)  this  refers  to   formal   proof   which   determines
                 responsibility pursuant to this Regulation, as long  as  it
                 is not refuted by proof to the contrary;

                 (ii) the Member States shall provide the Committee provided
                 for in Article 44 with models of  the  different  types  of
                 administrative documents, in accordance with  the  typology
                 established in the list of formal proofs;

            (b) Circumstantial evidence:

                 (i) this refers to indicative elements  which  while  being
                 refutable may be sufficient, in certain cases, according to
                 the evidentiary value attributed to them;

                 (ii)  their  evidentiary  value,   in   relation   to   the
                 responsibility   for   examining   the   application    for
                 international protection shall be assessed  on  a  case-by-
                 case basis.

         4.       The  requirement  of  proof  should  not  exceed  what  is
            necessary for the proper application of this Regulation.

         5.       If there is no formal proof, the  requested  Member  State
            shall acknowledge  its  responsibility  if  the  circumstantial
            evidence is coherent, verifiable and sufficiently  detailed  to
            establish responsibility.

         6.       Where the requesting Member State has pleaded  urgency  in
            accordance with the provisions of Article 21(2), the  requested
            Member State shall make every effort to comply  with  the  time
            limit  requested.  In  exceptional  cases,  where  it  can   be
            demonstrated that the  examination  of  a  request  for  taking
            charge of an applicant is particularly complex,  the  requested
            Member State may give its reply after the time limit requested,
            but in any event within  one  month.  In  such  situations  the
            requested  Member  State  must  communicate  its  decision   to
            postpone a reply to the requesting Member State within the time
            limit originally requested.

         7.       Failure to act within the two-month  period  mentioned  in
            paragraph 1 and the one-month period mentioned in  paragraph  6
            shall be tantamount to accepting the request,  and  entail  the
            obligation  to  take  charge  of  the  person,  including   the
            obligation to provide for proper arrangements for arrival.




         Article 29

         1) The transfer of the applicant or of another person  as  referred
            to in Article 18(1)(c) or (d) from the requesting  Member  State
            to  the  Member  State  responsible  shall  be  carried  out  in
            accordance with the national law of the requesting Member State,
            after consultation between the Member States concerned, as  soon
            as practically possible, and at the latest within six months  of
            acceptance of the request by another Member State to take charge
            or to take back the person concerned or of the final decision on
            an appeal or review  where  there  is  a  suspensive  effect  in
            accordance with Article 27(3).

         ...

         2) Where the transfer does not take place within  the  six  months'
            time limit, the Member State responsible shall  be  relieved  of
            its obligations to take  charge  or  to  take  back  the  person
            concerned, and responsibility shall then be transferred  to  the
            requesting Member State."

  13. Procedural safeguards for the notification of a transfer decision  are
      set out in Section IV of  Chapter  VI.   Those  procedural  safeguards
      place an obligation upon the requesting Member  State  to  notify  the
      person concerned of the decision to transfer him or her to the  Member
      State responsible and, where applicable, of not examining his  or  her
      application for international protection.


  14. The Commission Implementing Regulation (EC) No 1560/2003,  as  amended
      ("the IR") sets down detailed rules for the application of the  Dublin
      III Regulation.


  15. As this Tribunal held in MK, IK -v- SSHD [2016] UKUT  00231  (at  para
      38)


         "...The scheme of the Dublin Regulation is that the  more  detailed
         outworking of these duties are not specified in the measure  itself
         but are,  rather,  to  be  found  in  the  ancillary,  implementing
         legislation adopted by the Commission, namely the  2003  Regulation
         as amended. These two measures must be considered together and as a
         whole."

  16. Article 5 of the implementing Regulation deals with a  negative  reply
      where the requested Member State considers that the evidence submitted
      does not  establish  its  responsibility  and  for  re-examination  of
      requests.

            "Negative reply

            1. Where, after checks are carried  out,  the  requested  Member
               State  considers  that  the  evidence  submitted   does   not
               establish its responsibility, the negative reply it sends  to
               the requesting Member State shall  state  full  and  detailed
               reasons for its refusal.

            2. Where the requesting Member State feels that such  a  refusal
               is based on  a  misappraisal,  or  where  it  has  additional
               evidence to put forward, it may ask for its request to be re-
               examined. This option must be exercised  within  three  weeks
               following receipt of the negative reply. The requested Member
               State shall endeavour to reply within two weeks.

               In any event, this additional procedure shall not extend  the
               time limits laid down in Article 18(1) and  (6)  and  Article
               20(1)(b) of Regulation (EC) No 343/2003."


  17. Article 8 of the  Implementing  Regulation  makes  provision  for  the
      transfer and imposes a requirement of cooperation between  the  Member
      States regarding the transfer:

            "Cooperation on transfers
            1.  It is the obligation of the  Member  State  responsible  to
              allow the asylum seeker's transfer to take place  as  quickly
              as possible and to ensure that no obstacles are  put  in  his
              way. That Member State shall  determine,  where  appropriate,
              the location on its territory to which the asylum seeker will
              be transferred or handed over to the  competent  authorities,
              taking account  of  geographical  constraints  and  modes  of
              transport available to the Member State making the  transfer.
              In no case may a  requirement  be  imposed  that  the  escort
              accompany the asylum seeker beyond the point  of  arrival  of
              the international means of transport used or that the  Member
              State making the transfer meet the costs of transport  beyond
              that point.
            2. The Member State organising the transfer shall  arrange  the
              transport for the asylum seeker and his escort and decide, in
              consultation with the Member State responsible, on  the  time
              of arrival and,  where  necessary,  on  the  details  of  the
              handover to  the  competent  authorities.  The  Member  State
              responsible may require that three working  days'  notice  be
              given."

  18. Article 10 of the Implementing Regulation  expressly  makes  provision
      for the procedure for 'Transfer following an acceptance  by  default'.
      It provides:


             "Transfer following an acceptance by default

             1. Where, pursuant to Article 18(7)  or  Article  20(1)(c)  of
                Regulation (EC) No 343/2003 as appropriate,  the  requested
                Member State is deemed to have accepted a request  to  take
                charge or to take back, the requesting Member  State  shall
                initiate the consultations needed to organise the transfer.

             2. If asked to do so  by  the  requesting  Member  State,  the
                Member State responsible must confirm in  writing,  without
                delay, that it acknowledges its responsibility as a  result
                of its failure to reply within the time limit.  The  Member
                State  responsible  shall  take  the  necessary  steps   to
                determine the asylum seeker's place of arrival  as  quickly
                as  possible  and,  where  applicable,   agree   with   the
                requesting  Member  State  the  time  of  arrival  and  the
                practical  details  of  the  handover  to   the   competent
                authorities."

  19. Article 12 of the Implementing Regulation states:


             "Unaccompanied minors

             1.  Where the decision to entrust the care of an unaccompanied
                 minor to a relative other than the mother, father or  legal
                 guardian  is  likely  to  cause  particular   difficulties,
                 particularly where the adult concerned resides outside  the
                 jurisdiction of the Member State in  which  the  minor  has
                 applied  for  asylum,  cooperation  between  the  competent
                 authorities  in  the  Member  States,  in  particular   the
                 authorities or courts responsible  for  the  protection  of
                 minors, shall be facilitated and the necessary steps  taken
                 to ensure that those  authorities  can  decide,  with  full
                 knowledge of the facts, on the  ability  of  the  adult  or
                 adults concerned to take charge of the minor in a way which
                 serves his best interests.

                 Options now  available  in  the  field  of  cooperation  on
                 judicial and civil matters shall be  taken  account  of  in
                 this connection.

             2.  The fact that the duration of  procedures  for  placing  a
                 minor may lead to a failure to observe the time limits  set
                 in Article 18(1) and (6) and Article  19(4)  of  Regulation
                 (EC) No 343/2003 shall not necessarily be  an  obstacle  to
                 continuing the procedure for determining the  Member  State
                 responsible or carrying out a transfer."







Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union


  20. The recitals to the Dublin III Regulation expressly  provide  that  in
      accordance with the 1989 United Nations Convention on  the  rights  of
      the Child and with the Charter of Fundamental Rights of  the  European
      Union,  the  best  interests  of  the  child  should  be   a   primary
      consideration of Member States when applying the Regulation.   Article
      24 of  the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European  Union
      recognises the rights of the child:


         "1.   Children shall have the right to such protection and care  as
         is necessary for their well-being. They  may  express  their  views
         freely. Such views shall be taken  into  consideration  on  matters
         which concern them in accordance with their age and maturity.

         2.   In all actions relating to children, whether taken  by  public
         authorities or private institutions,  the  child's  best  interests
         must be a primary consideration.

         3.   Every child shall have the right  to  maintain  on  a  regular
         basis a personal relationship and direct contact with both  his  or
         her parents, unless that is contrary to his or her interests."

Home  Office  Guidance  Dublin  III  Regulation  'Version  1'  published  02
November 2017


  21. The respondent has issued guidance about the processes involved when a
      request is made by another State for the UK to  accept  responsibility
      for considering an asylum claim under the Dublin III Regulation.   The
      guidance in force when the TCR was received in August 2018 was version
      1, published on 2nd November 2017.  Version 2 was  published  on  18th
      April 2019. There is, as far as we are aware, no difference in the two
      versions of the guidance insofar as the issues that we are to consider
      are concerned.


  22. The guidance explains to caseworkers, the process to be  adopted  when
      an asylum claim has been lodged in another Member State and  there  is
      evidence to suggest that the UK may be responsible for  taking  charge
      of  the  applicant  and  to  examine  the  claim   for   international
      protection. Insofar as is  relevant  to  the  issues  before  us,  the
      guidance states:


         "Criteria and evidence when  considering  a  request  from  another
      Dublin State

         Cases must meet at least one of the criteria and at least one piece
         of evidence for a  request  to  be  accepted.  The  request  should
         include a copy of all available evidence (including  circumstantial
         evidence) to show the UK is the State responsible for examining  an
         asylum claim. Article 22 of the Regulation provides  that  2  lists
         shall be established to set out the relevant elements of proof  and
         circumstantial evidence (including detailed statements) to be  used
         by Dublin States when considering whether to make requests to  take
         responsibility. The 2 lists  can  be  found  in  Annex  II  of  the
         Implementing Regulation 118/2014. Caseworkers must be familiar with
         the lists on the relevant  elements  of  proof  and  circumstantial
         evidence. Formal requests for the UK to take ownership of an asylum
         claim can be made on the basis of a number of Articles contained in
         the Dublin III Regulation. An asylum claim must have been  formally
         lodged in the requesting Member State before the  UK  can  consider
         the request under Dublin. Articles 8, 9,  10,  11  and  16  of  the
         Dublin III Regulation contain specific provisions on  family  unity
         and dependency, including cases that concern unaccompanied children
         with family members in another Dublin State.

         Mandatory checks

         Security checks must be conducted on the applicant and  the  family
         member(s) or relative(s)  in  the  UK  on  receipt  of  all  formal
         requests.

         ...

         Requests involving children

         As per Article 8(1), if the applicant is  an  unaccompanied  child,
         the responsible Dublin State  shall  be  that  where  a  qualifying
         family member (insofar as the family  existed  in  the  country  of
         origin, the mother, father or another adult responsible by the  law
         or practice of the Dublin State where the adult is present -as  per
         Article 2(g)) or sibling is legally present provided that is in the
         best interests of the child. For  Article  8(1)  cases,  where  the
         family member or sibling cannot accommodate the child, the  UK  has
         an obligation to accept the take charge request, provided it is  in
         the best  interests  of  the  child  and  all  other  criteria  and
         requirements are met.  As stated under Article 8(2), where  another
         relative (adult aunt, uncle or grandparent -as per Article 2(h)) is
         legally present and where it can be established that  the  relative
         can take care of the child and it is in the best interests  of  the
         child, then the Dublin State where the relative is present shall be
         responsible.  Article  8(2)  presents  an  additional   requirement
         (compared to 8(1)) on being able  to  demonstrate  they  can  'take
         care' of the child. In order to accept  the  take  charge  request,
         there must be evidence the UK based qualifying family member(s) are
         able to accommodate and support the child.

         Both Articles 8(1) and 8(2) require the transfer to be in the  best
         interests of the child. The best interests of the child must always
         be a primary consideration when applying the Regulation  in  family
         unity cases. When assessing a child's best interests, Dublin States
         should cooperate with each other taking due account of factors such
         as family reunification possibilities, the child's  well-being  and
         social development, safety  and  security  considerations  and  the
         views of the child in accordance with their age and  maturity,  and
         background. The European Intake Unit (EIU) will work with the local
         authority in which the family member, sibling or  relative  of  the
         child is residing. Local authorities will be requested to undertake
         an assessment with the family or relative(s)  in  addition  to  the
         checks undertaken by EIU, which will inform a recommendation to EIU
         as to whether the request  should  be  accepted  or  rejected.  The
         checks and assessment to be undertaken by the local authority  will
         be outlined in the Department for Education's  forthcoming  Friends
         and Family Guidance. All decisions on whether to accept  a  request
         to take charge of a child's asylum application (and so  accept  the
         transfer of a child to the UK) will be the  responsibility  of  the
         Home Office; however, these  decisions  will  be  informed  by  the
         assessment and recommendation provided by local authorities.

         Article 6 and 8 of  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  provides  further
         information on guarantees  for  minors  (children)  in  the  Dublin
         procedure: caseworkers must be familiar with these articles.

         In addition, Article 12 of  Implementing  Regulation  1560/2003  as
         amended  by  Implementing  Regulation  118/2014  provides   further
         guidance on the application  of  the  provisions  on  unaccompanied
         children, including that if the duration of procedures for  placing
         a child leads to a failure  to  observe  the  time  limits  set  in
         Article 22(1) and 22(6) (on replying to a request to  take  charge)
         and Article 29(2) (on modalities and time limits for  transfer)  of
         the Dublin  III  Regulation,  this  shall  not  necessarily  be  an
         obstacle  to  continuing  the   procedure   for   determining   the
         responsible State or carrying out a transfer.

         Unaccompanied children: notifying local authorities and  or  social
         services

         You must ensure that both local authority  children's  social  care
         services at the child's point of entry and where the child's family
         member, sibling or relative reside are  notified  of  the  transfer
         request under the Dublin III Regulation. This must be done as  soon
         as possible after the formal request to  take  charge  is  received
         from the requesting State.

         You must engage local authorities'  children's  social  care  teams
         throughout the process, seeking their advice  in  every  case.  You
         must keep accurate records of what information is relayed,  who  is
         spoken to, when  and  by  whom.  Article  12  of  the  Implementing
         Regulation  1560/2003,  as  amended  by   Implementing   Regulation
         118/2014 refers to the role  of  authorities  responsible  for  the
         protection of children  having  full  knowledge  of  the  facts  to
         consider the ability of the  adult  or  adults  concerned  to  take
         charge of the child in a way which serves their best interests.

         ...

         Once the request from another Dublin State to  take  charge  of  an
         asylum seeking child has been accepted by the UK, on the basis that
         the UK is responsible for examining the child's asylum claim  under
         the Dublin III Regulation, the process of arranging transfer to the
         UK and to  the  'sponsoring'  family  is  a  shared  responsibility
         between UKVI and the  local  authority  where  the  child  will  be
         living.

         The UKVI role is to facilitate the arrival of the child into the UK
         with the sending  Dublin  State.  Local  authorities  will  provide
         additional information and advice on the wellbeing of the child  if
         they are transferred to the UK.

         Best interests of the child and section 55 consideration

         Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
         places a  statutory  safeguarding  duty  on  the  Home  Office.  It
         requires the Home Secretary to make arrangements:

             'To ensure that immigration, asylum, nationality  and  customs
             functions  are  discharged  having  regard  to  the  need   to
             safeguard and promote the welfare of children in the UK'

         In respect of the Dublin III Regulation, the section 55  obligation
         applies only where a child is physically present in the UK.  It  is
         for the requesting State to be satisfied that the request they  are
         making is in keeping with the child's best interests.

         Full guidance on the  UK  legislation  can  be  found  in  part  1,
         paragraph 1.4 of Every Child Matters:  Change  for  Children.  This
         provides further guidance on the extent to which the spirit of  the
         duty should be applied to children who are overseas.

         When considering a request to transfer an  unaccompanied  child  to
         the UK under the Dublin III Regulation,  you  must  adhere  to  the
         spirit of the section 55 duty and  careful  consideration  must  be
         given to their safeguarding and welfare needs  in  assessing  their
         best  interests.  You  must  work  with   local   statutory   child
         safeguarding agencies in the UK in order  to  develop  arrangements
         that protect children  and  reduce  the  risk  of  trafficking  and
         exploitation.

         The re-establishment of family links would normally be regarded  as
         being in accordance with the section 55  duty,  but  this  may  not
         always  be  the  case.  Whilst  a  non-exhaustive  list,  the   re-
         establishment of family links  would  not  be  in  accordance  with
         section 55, for example, if it is identified that:

             .the safety of the child or their family will be jeopardised

             .the child has a well founded fear of relevant family members

             .the  relevant  family  members  are  the  alleged  actors  of
             persecution within the claim for asylum which has not yet been
             finally determined

             .the child is a recognised or potential victim of  trafficking
             in which the family were knowingly complicit

             .the child has shown to  have  been  previously  exploited  or
             abused or neglected by their family, or claims  to  have  been
             previously exploited or abused or neglected  by  their  family
             and this has not been conclusively discounted

         It is important that  you  demonstrate  and  record  how  you  have
         considered a child's best interests in line  with  the  section  55
         duty. All aspects of this  consideration  must  always  be  clearly
         recorded both on the casefile and on CID."



The factual background


  23. The applicants are both nationals of Afghanistan.  They  are  brothers
      and are 17 and 16 years of age respectively.  They claim to have  fled
      Afghanistan several years ago and travelled through Pakistan, Iran and
      Turkey before arriving in Greece in April  2018.  Their  journey  from
      Afghanistan to Greece is set out  in  a  witness  statement  made,  on
      instructions, by their solicitor. They describe a difficult journey to
      Turkey that took around 23 days and they claim to have spent 3 to 3  �
      years in Turkey before travelling to Greece.  They arrived  in  Greece
      on 7th April 2018 and made a protection claim on  1st  June  2018.  As
      matters stand, the applicants remain in Greece.


  24. On 31st August 2018, a 'take charge request' ("TCR") was  communicated
      by the Greek National Dublin Unit to the respondent in respect of each
      applicant.  The requests  provided  the  address  of  the  applicants'
      maternal uncle who lives in the UK.  The following further information
      was set out:


         "... During his examination he stated that his maternal uncle  [SH]
         resides in the United Kingdom as a  recognised  refugee.  For  this
         reason he wishes to be transferred to the United  Kingdom  and  his
         application for asylum to be examined by your authorities  so  that
         the family members be reunited.


         The above-mentioned unaccompanied minor alien also stated that  his
         parents along with his three siblings are in Afghanistan.


         On the same day the applicant's  minor  brother  also  applied  for
         asylum. A  separate  request  concerning  him  will  be  sent  with
         reference number ...


         We are sending you attached all the relevant  documents  concerning
         this case and his written consent."


  25. On 12th October 2018 a letter was sent by  the  respondent's  European
      Intake Unit ("EIU") to the Immigration  Directorate  in  Greece.   The
      letter stated:


         "... To assist in demonstrating the claimed family link between the
         claimed relative and minor, may we request you provide the  contact
         details  to  the  British  Red  Cross  of  the  minor/guardian   or
         representatives so  that  they  can  provide  consent  and  further
         information.

         The British Red Cross can  be  contacted  by  using  the  following
         details: ...

         Please inform the minor that failure to  contact  the  British  Red
         Cross within 15 days will result in the take charge  request  being
         considered  using  only   the   information   that   is   currently
         available...."

  26. There was no response to that letter from the Greek authorities  until
      8th March 2019. On that day, an email was sent by  the  Department  of
      the National Dublin Unit in Greece, to  the  respondent,  enclosing  a
      number of documents to support the claim made by the  applicants  that
      they are related to SH as claimed.


  27. On 12th June 2019, the respondent refused the TCR's.  The letters sent
      by the respondent to the Immigration Directorate  in  Greece  were  in
      identical terms and stated:


         "... The evidence submitted in the  original  application  did  not
         demonstrate the family link. [The applicant's] case was referred to
         the British Red Cross to assist with family tracing process and  to
         submit further information that could support the  family  link  as
         claimed between him and the claimed uncle in the UK.  On  08  March
         2019, further evidence was submitted to assist the  United  Kingdom
         make a decision.

         In responding to your request all evidence  in  the  original  Take
         Charge Request lodged on 31 August 2018 were considered, as well as
         the  following  additional  information  submitted  following   the
         assistance from the British Red Cross:

            [Evidence listed]

         The United Kingdom has further examined  all  documentary  evidence
         submitted, and the HO record of the UK-based relative. It is  noted
         the parents details given by the UK-based relative does  not  match
         the parents details shown in the applicant's mother  (sic)  Tazkira
         and Family Tree. Therefore familial link has not been  demonstrated
         that applicant's mother  and  the  claimed  UK-based  relative  are
         related. It  is  therefore  not  demonstrated  that  (SH)  UK-based
         relative and [the applicant] are related as claimed

         Consequently, I regret to inform you that the take  charge  request
         is refused.

         Should you wish to pursue Dublin III action in  this  case,  it  is
         open for those supporting [the applicant] to  contact  the  British
         Red Cross through the established channels to assist with gathering
         information to support a reconsideration within 21 days of  receipt
         of the letter."

  28. It is the respondent's decision of 12th June 2019 that was the subject
      of the claim for judicial review when it was issued. Matters did  not,
      however,  end  there.  By  letter  dated  1st  July  2019,  the  Greek
      Department of  the  National  Dublin  Unit  wrote  to  the  respondent
      stating:


         "Following your rejection letters sent on 12/06/2019 with reference
         numbers ...., we kindly ask you to keep this case  open  since  the
         uncle and his nephews have agreed to undergo a DNA Test in order to
         prove  their  relationship.  Please  find  attached   the   uncle's
         statement.

         We would appreciate if you confirmed the UK.'s  agreement  to  this
         prospect. We will forward you the results as  soon  as  we  receive
         them."

  29. DNA test were commissioned by the applicants' representatives and  DNA
      reports  dated  9th  September  2019  were  sent  by  the  applicants'
      representatives to the  respondent  and  to  their  representative  in
      Greece, on 10th September 2019. The following day, the respondent sent
      an email to the applicants representative stating:


         "Just to advise you that we have now  received  the  re-examination
         request from our Greek colleagues and  will  proceed  to  having  a
         family assessment request sent to  the  local  authority  for  [the
         applicants'] UK relative's home. Please note this is  part  of  our
         process and until that has been undertaken by the  local  authority
         we cannot have the young persons transferred to the UK..."

  30. On 12th  September  2019  the  respondent  wrote  to  the  Immigration
      Directorate - Greece in the following terms:


         "... On the basis of the evidence submitted with  your  request  to
         take  charge  and  our  own  checks  we  are  satisfied  that   the
         relationship between him and his family member is as claimed.

         A UK local government authority care  assessment  is  now  underway
         with the UK family to aid in the consideration of the child's  best
         interests as per the requirements of the Dublin III  Regulation  in
         respect of unaccompanied minors.

         We will endeavour to inform you of our decision on the request upon
         receipt of  the  action  undertaken  by  the  UK  local  government
         authority..."

  31. On the same day, the  respondent  requested  a  family  assessment  be
      completed by Derby City Council. In the absence of a response from the
      local authority, the respondent sent an email on 26th  September  2019
      to the local authority requesting an update. On 27th  September  2019,
      the social worker confirmed that the assessment was  to  be  completed
      and an update will be provided after a visit has  been  completed.  On
      11th October 2019 the respondent was informed that the assessment  has
      been completed and the outcome was negative.


  32. On  14th  October  2019,  the  respondent  wrote  to  the  Immigration
      Directorate - Greece in the following terms:


         "... Following a Family Assessment concerning  the  applicant,  the
         applicant's uncle shows concerns with the following:

                 . Significant safeguarding risk

                 . There are concerns about his capacity to care

         It is our understanding that the applicant's  claimed  uncle  would
         not be able to accommodate the  applicant.  Instead  the  applicant
         would, be placed in our social care system. The UK believes that it
         is not in the best interests of the applicant to simply  move  from
         their current arrangements, education and healthcare to  simply  be
         placed in another. Unfortunately, on the grounds of the applicant's
         claimed uncle's inability to care  for  the  applicant  the  United
         Kingdom cannot advise the transfer of [the applicant]

         ... The applicant's uncle would have to be able  to  care  for  and
         accommodate the above in order for a transfer to be arranged, as he
         poses a significant  safeguarding  risk  it  is  not  in  the  best
         interests of [the applicant]. Therefore I regret to inform you that
         your re-examination has been rejected and maintained...."

  33. The amended grounds for judicial review include  a  challenge  to  the
      respondent's decision of 14th October 2019.  In support of  the  claim
      for judicial review the applicants have secured an independent  social
      work summary report completed by Maria Mooney, an  Independent  Social
      Worker.  In her report she sets out her opinion as to whether it would
      be in the applicants' best interests to be placed with their uncle  or
      in local authority care in the UK, as against the applicants remaining
      in Greece.  The applicants have also been subjected to  a  psychiatric
      assessment and the outcome of  the  assessments  is  set  out  in  the
      reports of Dr  Batsheva  Habel,  a  Consultant  Child  and  Adolescent
      Psychiatrist.


  34. When the hearing before us commenced, we were informed by Ms  Meredith
      that the respondent  has  made  yet  a  further  decision,  dated  5th
      December 2019, that purports to deal with the independent social  work
      report and psychiatric assessments.  We were provided with a  copy  of
      that decision, and we have also been provided with a copy of  a  draft
      statement that was  prepared  by  the  social  worker  at  Derby  City
      Council, but which had not been filed and served, or  relied  upon  by
      the respondent. There was no application for  an  adjournment  and  Ms
      Meredith confirmed that she was content to proceed  with  the  hearing
      and would address the most recent decision, in her submissions  before
      us.


The applicants' case


  35. There are four strands to the applicants' claim that the  respondent's
      refusal to 'take charge' of the applicants is in breach of Dublin III.
      First, the applicants rely  upon  Article  22(1)  of  the  Dublin  III
      Regulation that provides for  a  2-month  maximum  time-limit  to  the
      requested State for  investigating  and  providing  a  fully  reasoned
      response to a 'take charge request'.  The applicants claim the failure
      to make a decision within that 2-month time limit - i.e. by 31 October
      2018 - resulted in automatic  allocation  of  responsibility  for  the
      applicants' asylum claims to the UK.


  36. The applicants rely upon the concession made by  the  respondent  that
      there was "deemed acceptance" of responsibility for the examination of
      the applicants' asylum claims, and  that  entails  the  obligation  to
      provide for proper arrangements for arrival pursuant to Article 22(7).
       The applicants claim, once automatic acceptance  has  occurred  under
      Article 22(7), as in this case, any assessment of whether  a  relative
      is able to take care of a child, or,  whether  it  is  in  their  best
      interests  to  join  them,  no  longer  affects  the   allocation   of
      responsibility, because the  UK  is  already  the  responsible  Member
      State. The applicants claim that upon a proper application  of  Dublin
      III, once  responsibility  has  passed,  the  best  interests  of  the
      applicants  are  relevant  to  the  arrangements  for   transfer   and
      accommodation on arrival; including the  decision  as  to  whether  to
      place the applicants  with  their  uncle  or  alternatively  in  local
      authority care.


  37. Second, the  applicants  claim  the  respondent's  reliance  upon  the
      implementing Regulations is erroneous.  They claim  Article  12(2)  of
      the IR does not provide for the allocation  of  responsibility  to  be
      reversed, and in any event, even if it did, it could  do  so  only  in
      extreme  circumstances  where  the  best  interests  of  the  children
      necessitate the applicants remaining in a  different  jurisdiction  to
      the one which is responsible for them under Dublin  III.   They  claim
      that to come even close to demonstrating that high threshold  is  met,
      the respondent is required to  demonstrate  the  applicants  would  be
      placed at a positive and "serious risk" from the family member in this
      jurisdiction, as  accepted  in  the  context  of  assessing  the  best
      interests test for responsibility under Article 8 (or in  relation  to
      Article 6) in the respondent's own published policy guidance.


  38. Third, the applicants submit the respondent's assertion that it is not
      in the applicants' best interests to  be  transferred  to  the  UK  is
      without any evidential foundation.  They say,  to  the  contrary,  the
      only evidence before the Tribunal is that it  is  in  the  applicants'
      best interests to be transferred to the UK as quickly as possible; and
      that they are being placed at significant risk of harm in Greece. They
      point to the reports of  Dr  Habel,  and  Maria  Rooney,  although  Ms
      Meredith accepts that evidence relied upon  by  the  applicants  post-
      dates the decisions challenged.


  39. Finally, the applicants claim the respondent's decisions of 12th  June
      and 14th October 2019 were also unlawful due to a series  of  breaches
      of  the  respondent's  investigative  duty  and  procedural   fairness
      obligations.  They claim the  respondent  failed  to  take  reasonable
      steps to investigate the take charge requests and unlawfully  confined
      her investigation to checking  the  evidence  provided  by  the  Greek
      authorities against the Home  Office  records  of  SH  and  failed  to
      consider DNA testing.  They claim the respondent unlawfully failed  to
      engage with the local  authority  prior  to  rejecting  the  requests,
      contrary to her own published policy and failed to give the applicants
      or SH the opportunity to respond to her doubts about the  relationship
      prior to the refusal.


The respondent's pleaded case as set out in the Detailed Grounds of Defence


  40. The respondent concedes, at paragraph [30] of the Detailed Grounds  of
      Defence, that she  did  not  give  a  decision  on  the  'Take  Charge
      Requests' within two months of receipt.  The  respondent  acknowledges
      that there was deemed acceptance on 31st October 2018.   However,  the
      respondent maintains that it is not in the applicants' best  interests
      to  be  transferred  to  the  UK  and  for  their   applications   for
      international protection to be examined by the UK.


  41. The respondent claims that having received the take  charge  requests,
      it was open to her to  conclude  that  the  information  and  evidence
      submitted with the requests, taken together with the records  held  by
      the respondent in respect of SH, was insufficient to  demonstrate  the
      claimed family link and to seek further  information  from  the  Greek
      authorities.  It was open to the respondent  to  write  to  the  Greek
      authorities on 12th October 2018, and the respondent made that request
      for  further  information  within  the  two  months  permitted  for  a
      decision.


  42. The respondent claims that notwithstanding the  deemed  acceptance  it
      was entirely appropriate and proper for the respondent to continue  to
      make enquiries about the claimed familial link and best  interests  of
      the applicants. The respondent claims that  by  operation  of  Article
      12(2) of the IR, the respondent is permitted to continue her enquiries
      even after she was deemed to have accepted the take charge request and
      claims that on any view, it would not have been appropriate and in the
      best interests of the applicants to transfer them to  the  UK  without
      making the relevant enquiries.


  43. The respondent claims the information  subsequently  provided  by  the
      Greek authorities on 8th March 2019 was considered with all the  other
      information available and it was open to the  respondent  to  conclude
      that the family link had not been established. It  is  said  that  the
      applicants and Greek authorities were on notice from 12th October 2018
      that the respondent required further information  in  respect  of  the
      claimed family link. It was open  to  the  applicants  throughout,  to
      provide DNA evidence of that relationship earlier but they  failed  to
      do so.


  44. The respondent claims that in October 2019, by which time the  claimed
      family link had been accepted, the relevant local authority had raised
      concerns about the ability of  SH  to  care  for  the  applicants  and
      reunification was not recommended. It is said that it was open to  the
      respondent in her decision  of  14th  October  2019  to  maintain  the
      decision to refuse the take charge request because of  SH's  inability
      to care for the applicants.


  45. The respondent claims that the criteria set out  in  Article  8(2)  of
      Dublin III are not met, because it has not been established  following
      an individual examination, that SH can take care  of  the  applicants.
      Further, or alternatively, it was open to the respondent  to  conclude
      that it is not in the best interests of the applicants to reunite them
      with SH in the United Kingdom.


  46. The respondent claims that there has been no breach of the applicants'
      Article 8 ECHR rights and no breach  of  the  Charter  of  Fundamental
      Rights of the European Union.


Preliminary


  47. At the outset of the hearing before us,  we  noted  that  surprisingly
      although both parties refer obliquely to Article 29 of Dublin  III  in
      their skeleton arguments, neither party has addressed  the  impact  of
      Article 29(2).  We informed the parties that our preliminary  view  is
      that  Article  29(2)  is  relevant  on  the   facts   here.    It   is
      uncontroversial   that   the   respondent   was   deemed   to   accept
      responsibility on 31st August  2018.   As  the  applicants  appear  to
      accept at paragraph  [42]  of  their  skeleton  argument,  Article  29
      requires the requesting member state to carry out the transfer as soon
      as practically possible, and at the latest  within  six  months.   The
      transfer of the applicants from Greece to the UK should therefore have
      taken place before 30th April 2019. According to Article 29(2),  where
      the transfer does not take place within the six  months'  time  limit,
      the Member State responsible shall be relieved of its  obligations  to
      take charge or to take back the person concerned,  and  responsibility
      shall then be transferred to the requesting Member State.  The parties
      were  given  an  opportunity   to   address   the   question   whether
      responsibility had reverted to Greece by operation of Article 29(2) on
      30th April 2019, in their submissions before  the  Tribunal  and  were
      given a further opportunity  to  provide  the  Tribunal  with  written
      submissions following the hearing before us.


The respondent's further submissions


  48. In the further submissions  filed  by  the  respondent  following  the
      hearing before us on 6th December 2019, the respondent states that  in
      light of the unreported decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Blum in KF -v-
       SSHD JR/1642/2019, the respondent does  not  claim  that  the  deemed
      acceptance following a failure to respond within the permitted time is
      otiose, where the requesting  Member  State  makes  a  reconsideration
      request rather than to initiate the consultations needed  to  organise
      the transfer.


  49. The respondent claims that following deemed acceptance  under  Article
      22(7) of  Dublin III,  it  is  for  the  requesting  Member  State  to
      initiate consultations with a view to organising the transfer, and  it
      is only if asked to do so by the requesting  Member  State,  that  the
      requested State must (in writing and without  delay)  acknowledge  its
      responsibility as a result of the failure  to  comply  with  the  time
      limit.  The respondent acknowledges that there continues to be  deemed
      acceptance (and an obligation to take charge), and that responsibility
      can only pass to the requesting Member State  via  the  mechanisms  in
      Dublin III, including, for example, the operation  of  Article  29(2).
      The respondent claims the requested Member State  need  not  take  any
      steps following deemed acceptance,  particularly  regarding  transfer,
      unless and until the requesting Member State takes the required  steps
      in Article 10 of the IR.


  50. Further or alternatively, the respondent claims that following  deemed
      acceptance on 31st October 2018, the  six-month  time  limit  for  the
      transfer of the applicants  to  the  UK  commenced.   The  applicants'
      transfer did not take place within six-months  of  that  date  and  it
      follows that on the expiry of the six-month time  limit,  the  UK  was
      relieved of its obligations to take charge.


  51. The respondent acknowledges that she did make decisions in respect  of
      the requests following the expiry of  the  six-month  time  limit  but
      claims that that does not mean that transfer of responsibility did not
      revert to Greece under Article 29(2) of Dublin III.


The applicants' further submissions in reply


  52. The applicants oppose the fundamental change in the respondent's  case
      as set out in the further submissions filed following the  hearing  of
      the claim before us. The applicants submit  the  Tribunal  should  not
      entertain the new unpleaded case  being  advanced  by  the  respondent
      relying  upon  Article  29(2)  of  Dublin  and  Article  10   of   the
      Implementing Regulation.  The applicants' objection is twofold. First,
      the respondent  did  not  rely  upon  Article  29(2)  and  Article  10
      previously and has taken no steps  whatsoever  to  amend  her  pleaded
      case.  Notwithstanding what is said in  the  further  submissions  now
      relied upon by the respondent, there has been no application to  amend
      the Grounds of Defence and it is wholly inappropriate for the Tribunal
      to accede to any formal application for relief from sanctions  and  to
      amend the Detailed Grounds of Defence following  the  hearing  of  the
      claim for judicial review. The applicants submit that entertaining the
      claim the respondent now wishes to advance, would inevitably result in
      further delay and would  be  contrary  to  the  overriding  objective.
      Second, in reaching the two decisions that  are  the  subject  of  the
      claim for judicial review, the respondent did not at any  point  claim
      that she was  relieved  of  any  obligation  to  take  charge  of  the
      applicants by operation of Article 29(2) of the Dublin III  Regulation
      and  Article  10  of  the  Implementing  Regulation.   The  respondent
      proceeded upon an erroneous interpretation of  Article  12(2)  of  the
      Implementing Regulation and the claim  the  respondent  now  seeks  to
      advance is  inconsistent  with  the  reasons  for  the  decisions  the
      Tribunal is concerned with.


  53. We accept the submissions made by  Ms  Meredith  that  we  should  not
      entertain the new unpleaded case  being  advanced  by  the  respondent
      relying upon Article 29(2) of Dublin III and Article  10  of  the  IR.
      This claim  for  judicial  review  was  listed  for  hearing  with  an
      expedited timetable in view of the particular  difficulties  that  the
      applicants find themselves in, and the need for a swift resolution  of
      the claim. The filing of Detailed  Grounds  of  Defence  required  the
      respondent to assist the Tribunal by producing  documents  and  giving
      such reasons as are needed  to  enable  the  Tribunal  to  fulfil  its
      judicial function and determine whether the respondent was in error in
      reaching her decisions.  Here, as Ms Meredith submits, in reaching the
      two decisions that are the subject of the claim for  judicial  review,
      the respondent did not at any point claim that she was relieved of any
      obligation to take charge of the applicants by  operation  of  Article
      29(2) of the Dublin III Regulation and Article 10 of the  Implementing
      Regulation.  In fact the two decisions that are  the  subject  of  the
      claim for judicial review were both made after responsibility  appears
      to have reverted to the Greek authorities,  but  in  neither  decision
      does the respondent claim that she is relieved of  her  obligation  to
      take charge.  The matters now relied upon by  the  respondent  in  the
      further submissions do not explain how and why the respondent  reached
      her  decisions  but  amount   to   a   process   of   'after-the-event
      rationalisation'.  Although it is appropriate for the Tribunal to make
      its own observations  as  to  the  proper  application  of  the  legal
      framework, we make it clear that we  have  decided  these  claims  for
      judicial review, solely upon the respondent's pleaded case as set  out
      in the Detailed Grounds of Defence and the submissions that were  made
      at the hearing before us.


DISCUSSION


Overview of the Dublin III Regulation and Implementing Regulation


  54. Before we turn to the respondent's decisions of 12th June  2019,  14th
      October 2019 and 5th December 2019, in our judgment, drawing  together
      the  threads  of  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  and  the  Implementing
      Regulation, upon a proper application of the  Dublin  III  Regulation,
      the respondent's failure to communicate a decision upon the TCR within
      the  permitted  two  months  was,  as  the  respondent  now   accepts,
      tantamount to accepting the request, and entailed  the  obligation  to
      take charge of the applicants.  Once responsibility had passed to  the
      UK:


        i. The obligation  to  take  charge,  included  the  obligation  to
           provide for proper  arrangements  for  arrival;  (Article  22(7)
           Dublin III)


       ii. The transfer from the requesting Member State  (Greece)  to  the
           Member State responsible (the UK) was required to be carried out
           in accordance with the national law  of  the  requesting  Member
           State (Greece), as soon  as  practically  possible  and  at  the
           latest within six months of acceptance of the  request  to  take
           charge;  (Article 29(1) Dublin III)


      iii. Article 10 of the  Implementing  Regulation  required  that  the
           requesting Member State (Greece) shall (our  emphasis)  initiate
           the consultations needed to organise the transfer. If  asked  to
           do so by the Greek authorities, the respondent was required to:


             a)   confirm in writing, without delay,  that  it  acknowledged
                its responsibility as a  result  of  its  failure  to  reply
                within the time limit; and


             b)   take the necessary  steps  to  determine  the  applicants'
                place of arrival as quickly as possible  and,  if  required,
                agree with the Greek authorities the time of arrival and the
                practical details of the handover.


       iv.  Article  8(1)  of  the  Implementing  Regulation   imposed   an
           obligation on the Member State responsible (the UK) to allow the
           transfer to take place as quickly as possible and to ensure that
           no obstacles are put in the way.


  55. As we have not permitted the  respondent  to  rely  upon  the  matters
      referred to in the further submissions filed  after  the  hearing,  we
      have not heard full argument  regarding  the  application  of  Article
      29(2).  In the written submissions made by Ms Meredith, she refers  to
      the decision of the CJEU in Petrosian Case C-19/08 [2009] 2  CMLR  33,
      and the conclusions which were relied on by Advocate General Sharpston
      in Shiri [2018] 2 CMLR 3 that the period for carrying out the transfer
      may begin to run only as from the time the  future  implementation  of
      the transfer is, in principle, agreed upon and certain, and  only  the
      practical details remain to be determined.  However, the circumstances
      being considered there were quite different.  It was said in Petrosian
      that the Regulations are to be interpreted as meaning that, where  the
      legislation of the requesting Member  State  provides  for  suspensive
      effect of an appeal, the period for  implementation  of  the  transfer
      begins to run, not as  from  the  time  of  the  provisional  judicial
      decision suspending the implementation of the transfer procedure,  but
      only as from the time of the judicial  decision  which  rules  on  the
      merits of the procedure and which is no longer such as to prevent  its
      implementation.  The implementation could not  be  regarded  as  being
      certain, if a court of the requesting Member State which is hearing an
      appeal had not yet ruled on the merits of the appeal  but  had  merely
      ruled on an  application  for  suspension  of  the  operation  of  the
      contested decision.  Plainly, if the transfer decision  is  contested,
      it is easy to see that the six-month time limit cannot properly  begin
      to run until the court has determined where responsibility rests.


  56. Where the transfer decision is not the subject of  any  challenge,  in
      our judgment, upon a proper application of Dublin III,  Article  29(2)
      makes it clear that where the transfer does not take place within  the
      six months' time limit, the Member State responsible shall be relieved
      of its obligations to take charge and  responsibility  shall  then  be
      transferred to the requesting Member State.


  57. That however is subject to one important caveat.  Insofar as  children
      are concerned, Dublin  III  repeatedly  emphasises  the  principle  of
      family unity and  the  best  interests  of  children.  There  are  two
      relevant  provisions   within   the   framework   that   ensure   that
      notwithstanding responsibility under  the  Regulation,  Member  States
      can,  where  appropriate,   derogate   from   the   determination   of
      responsibility under a strict application of the Regulations.   First,
      Article 17 of Dublin III includes a discretion by way  of  derogation,
      for  a  Member  State  to  decide  to  examine  an   application   for
      international  protection,  even  if  such  examination  is  not   its
      responsibility  under  the  criteria  laid  down  in  the  Regulation.
      Second, Article 12 of the IR expressly provides that the fact that the
      duration of procedures for placing a minor may lead to  a  failure  to
      observe the time limit (including the time limit set in Article  29(1)
      - formerly Article 19(4)) shall not  necessarily  be  an  obstacle  to
      continuing the procedure for carrying out a transfer.  The  provisions
      read in that way are consistent with  the  objective  to  ensure  full
      respect for the principle of family unity and to bring together family
      members, in particular on humanitarian and compassionate grounds.








The Take Charge Requests and the respondent's response


  58. Having considered the relevant legal framework, we  now  turn  to  the
      respondent's decision-making in this claim.  Article 21(1) imposes  an
      obligation  upon  the  Member  State  in  which  an  application   for
      international protection has been lodged to make a take charge request
      where it considers  that  another  Member  State  is  responsible  for
      examining the application and provides the time  limits  within  which
      such a request must be made.  Here, the Greek  authorities  considered
      the UK to be responsible for examining the  applications  and  it  was
      open to the Greek authorities to request that the UK  take  charge  of
      the applicants.  It is uncontroversial that the Greek authorities  did
      so, albeit on the last possible day.  It is what happened  thereafter,
      that goes to the heart of this claim for judicial review.


  59. Article 22(1) placed an obligation upon the requested Member State  to
      make the necessary checks and give a decision on  the  request  within
      two months of receipt of the request. Here, a decision  was  therefore
      required from the respondent by 31st October 2018.  In the absence  of
      a decision, the UK had become the Member State responsible, by default
      on 31st October 2018.


  60. We reject the claim that the respondent's failure to  formally  accept
      responsibility for the applicant's asylum claims or to  communicate  a
      decision in  itself  amounts  to  a  breach  of  Dublin  III.   It  is
      undoubtedly preferable for a response to a TCR to be  provided  within
      the  two  months  permitted  because  the  Regulation  is  after  all,
      concerned with determining rapidly the Member  State  responsible  and
      the rapid processing of applications for international protection.  We
      accept, as Ms Meredith submits, that the need for expedition in  cases
      involving  particularly  vulnerable  persons  such  as   unaccompanied
      children is recognised in the Regulation and authorities; (ZT  (Syria)
      -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 810).  However, Beatson LJ stated:


         "87. There will be a need for expedition in  many  cases  involving
         unaccompanied  minors.  The  circumstances  of   the   first   four
         respondents' cases, especially the psychiatric evidence,  suggested
         in their cases there was a particular  need  for  urgency.  But  an
         orderly process is also important in cases of unaccompanied minors.
         The need to examine their identity, age, and claimed  relationships
         remains, and there is a particular need  to  guard  against  people
         trafficking."

  61. If a decision had been communicated whether positive or negative,  the
      respondent would not be deemed responsible by default by operation  of
      Article 22(7) of Dublin III.  The failure to  communicate  a  decision
      was not in itself unlawful.  The consequence of the failure to make  a
      decision is provided for in Dublin III itself and, as  the  respondent
      accepts, by operation of Article 22(7) there was deemed acceptance  of
      the TCR's.


  62. The applicants submit following deemed acceptance of  the  TCR's,  the
      respondent was dutybound  to  "provide  for  proper  arrangements  for
      arrival"; (Article 22(7) Dublin III), to  facilitate  the  applicants'
      transfer "as soon as practically possible" (Article  29  Dublin  III);
      and to allow the transfer to take place as quickly as possible and  to
      ensure that no obstacles were put in the way; (Article 8(1)  IR).  The
      applicants submit that rather than comply with these obligations,  the
      respondent proceeded to breach them by making  unlawful  decisions  on
      12th June 2019, 14th October 2019 and 5th December 2019.


  63. The obligations to provide for proper  arrangements  for  arrival,  to
      carry out the transfer as soon as practically possible, to  allow  the
      transfer to take place as quickly as possible and to  ensure  that  no
      obstacles are put in the way, flow in our judgment, from a request  by
      the requesting member state which is under an obligation  to  initiate
      the consultations needed to organise the transfer;  (Article  10  IR).
      That  it  is  for  the  requesting  member  state  to   initiate   the
      consultation so that the transfer can  take  place,  is  supported  by
      Article 29 of Dublin III.  Article 29  requires  the  transfer  to  be
      carried out in accordance with the  national  law  of  the  requesting
      Member State.  It was for Greece to initiate the consultation so  that
      the transfer could take place in accordance with the national laws  of
      Greece before 31st April 2019.


  64. We accept, as Ms  Meredith  submits,  once  responsibility  passes  by
      default under Article 22(7), the affected individual has  a  right  to
      enforce that passage of responsibility.  Article 26 of Dublin III sets
      out procedural safeguards. Article 26(1) imposed  an  obligation  upon
      the Greek authorities (as the requesting Member State) to  notify  the
      applicants of the decision to transfer them to the UK (as  the  Member
      State responsible),  and,  of  not  examining  their  application  for
      international protection.  The applicants have remained in Greece  and
      they have made their application for  protection  in  Greece.   It  is
      clear the Greek authorities did  not  initiate  any  consultations  to
      organise the transfer.  It would have been open to the  applicants  to
      mount a challenge in the Greek Courts if the Greek authorities refused
      to initiate the consultations to organise the transfer, but  they  did
      not do so.


Article 12 of the Implementing Regulation


  65. The respondent claims that notwithstanding the  deemed  acceptance  it
      was entirely appropriate and  proper  for  her  to  continue  to  make
      enquiries about the claimed family  link,  and  the  applicants'  best
      interests. She relies upon Article 12(2) IR and claims  Article  12(2)
      enables enquiries and  an  assessment  to  continue,  even  after  the
      deeming provision takes effect.


  66. On behalf of the  applicants  Ms  Meredith  submits  the  respondent's
      reliance  upon  the  Implementing  Regulation   is   erroneous.    The
      applicants claim Article 12(2) does not provide for the allocation  of
      responsibility to be reversed, and, even if it did,  it  could  do  so
      only in extreme circumstances where the best interests of the children
      necessitate the applicants remaining in a  different  jurisdiction  to
      the one which is responsible for them under Dublin III.   Ms  Meredith
      submits that to come even close to demonstrating that  high  threshold
      is met, the respondent is required to demonstrate the applicants would
      be placed at a positive and "serious risk" from the family  member  in
      this jurisdiction, as accepted in the context of  assessing  the  best
      interests test for responsibility referred to in the respondent's  own
      published guidance.


  67. The  respondent's  reliance  upon  Article  12  of  the  IR  has  been
      considered by this Tribunal in three unreported decisions.  Permission
      is granted for these cases to be cited before us and we are  satisfied
      that the requirements of Practice Direction 11 are met in  respect  of
      them.  In FA &  others  JR/5523/2018,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Frances
      considered three linked claims concerning the respondent's  delay  and
      failure to accept Take Charge Requests made by the French  authorities
      under Dublin III.  Each of the applicants was a child with  a  sibling
      in the United Kingdom. In each case, the French authorities had made a
      TCR to the respondent and in each case, the respondent had  failed  to
      reach a decision within two months so that in each  case,  the  United
      Kingdom was deemed responsible by operation of Article 22(7) of Dublin
      III.   In  each  case  the  respondent   had   purported   to   accept
      responsibility  some  time  later  and  each  of  the  applicants  was
      transferred to the UK.  The respondent advanced two interpretations of
      Article  12(2).  It  either  prevented  the  deeming  provision   from
      operating or it operated in parallel and the parties would not proceed
      with a transfer whilst negotiations were continuing. It was  submitted
      on behalf of the respondent that Article 12 either extended the period
      or enabled the withdrawal of any  acceptance.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Frances stated, at [66]:


             "Article 12(2) of  the  IR  does  not  assist  the  respondent
             because, on the facts of  these  cases,  there  was  no  'best
             interests reasons' preventing the UK from accepting the TCR's.
             Acceptance is beneficial to the Dublin III process because the
             UAM is  more  likely  to  remain  engaged  with  the  transfer
             process. The deeming provision in  Article  22(7)  means  that
             there is no need to extend the acceptance period. It cannot be
             done under Dublin III. In that respect I am of the  view  that
             Article 12(2) of the IR applies in extreme cases  where  there
             are 'best interest reasons' for not complying  with  the  time
             limit. That was not the case here."

  68. In FwF & FrR -v- SSHD JR/1626,  a decision handed down  shortly  after
      the decision in FA -v- SSHD, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kamara  considered
      similar  claims  made  by  two   Afghan   nationals   concerning   the
      respondent's delay and failure to accept a Take Charge Request made by
      the French authorities.   France had made a TCR in respect of the  two
      applicants on 15th November 2018.  On 28th  January  2019,  the  SSHD,
      after the two months permitted for a reply had  passed,  rejected  the
      TCR in relation to FwF. A similar decision was made to reject the  TCR
      in respect of FrF's claim, but that  decision  was  not  communicated.
      After the claim for judicial review had been issued, on 22nd May 2019,
      the  SSHD  confirmed  she  accepted  the  relationship   between   the
      applicants and their brother.  Insofar as the respondent  relied  upon
      Article 12 of the Implementing Regulation in her defence to the claim,
      Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara stated:


             "92.  The  respondent  relies  on   Article   12(2)   of   the
             Implementing Regulation as well  as  Article  2(5)(a)  of  the
             Sandhurst Treaty, stating that the latter requires a departure
             from the  time-limit  in  Article  22(7)  of  Dublin  III  and
             consequently the UK is not deemed responsible for minors until
             at least ten working days after "the conclusion of  engagement
             with  the  relevant  UK  local  authority."  This  is  not  an
             attractive argument.  The  Sandhurst  Treaty  enables  a  more
             rapid, simplified, process for the purpose of  protecting  the
             best interests of unaccompanied minors as opposed to  enabling
             the  UK  to  evade  the  strict  timescales  of  Dublin   III.
             Furthermore, Article 2.4 of the Sandhurst Treaty  states  that
             Dublin  III  timescales  apply  and,  in  any  event,  has  no
             relevance to the applicants' case because no referral  to  the
             LA was ever made.

             93. While Article 12(2) applies to the duration of procedures,
             in that a  failure  to  observe  the  time  limits  shall  not
             necessarily be an obstacle to  determining  the  member  state
             responsible, this does not assist the Secretary of State given
             the series of failings by the EIU which led to the  delays  in
             this case or the resulting damage to the mental health of  the
             applicants. The purpose of Article 12(2)  is  to  protect  the
             best interests of the child and it is for  the  respondent  to
             demonstrate why it was in the best interests of the applicants
             to exceed the timescales. That argument has not been made."

  69. In KF -v- SHHD JR/1642/2019, an Afghan National registered a claim for
      asylum in Greece and on 11th October 2018 a TCR  was  communicated  to
      the UK. When the claim was heard in  September  2019,  the  respondent
      accepted she had become responsible for  determining  the  applicant's
      asylum claim on 11th December 2018.  Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  noted,
      at [74], that until promulgation of the  decision  of  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Frances in FA & Others, the  respondent  believed  she  was  not
      bound by the two-month time limit in Article 22(1) of the  Dublin  III
      Regulation.  Upper Tribunal Judge  Blum  did  not  disagree  with  the
      decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Frances in FA & Others  that  Article
      12(2) IR applies in extreme  cases  where  there  are  'best  interest
      reasons for not  complying  with  the  time  limits',  but  found  the
      respondent  had  erroneously  believed  that  Article  12(2)  of   the
      Implementing Regulation modified Article  22  of  Dublin  III  in  the
      context of unaccompanied children.


  70. The respondent does  not  maintain  before  us,  the  claim  that  was
      advanced in FA  &  Others  that  Article  12(2)  of  the  Implementing
      Regulation  prevented  the  deeming  provision  from  operating.   The
      respondent has refined her position and before us, does not even go so
      far as to say the parties would not proceed  with  a  transfer  whilst
      negotiations were continuing.  In her skeleton argument, at  paragraph
      [16], the respondent simply maintains that Article 12(2)  IR  operates
      in parallel to Article 22(7) of the Dublin III Regulation.


  71. Here, there was deemed acceptance on 31st October  2018,  and  in  our
      judgment it was open to the respondent to await further  communication
      from the Greek authorities, not least because it  was  for  the  Greek
      authorities to initiate the consultations for the transfer.  There can
      be a myriad of reasons why the Member State in  which  the  applicants
      are present may not wish to pursue the transfer notwithstanding deemed
      acceptance.  For example, the Member State may have decided to examine
      the application even though such examination is not its responsibility
      as it is permitted to do under Article 17, because of information that
      has become available to it but would not be  known  to  the  receiving
      Member State.


  72. Notwithstanding a significant period of inactivity on the part of both
      Member States, on 8th March 2019, the Greek authorities  responded  to
      the  respondent's  letter  of  12th  October  2018.  By   that   time,
      responsibility had already transferred to the respondent and the focus
      should have been  upon  the  arrangements  for  the  transfer  of  the
      applicants to the UK.  That  is,  a  determination  of  the  reception
      arrangements for the  applicant's  including  the  time  and  date  of
      arrival and the practical details for the handover.


  73. However, the email received from the Greek authorities  on  8th  March
      2019 is silent as to the deemed transfer of responsibility.  The Greek
      authorities provided further information  to  establish  the  familial
      link between the applicants and SH.  The evidence provided, formed the
      backdrop  to  the  respondent's  decision  of  12th  June  2019.   The
      respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  a  familial   link   had   been
      demonstrated to establish that the applicant's mother is related to SH
      as claimed.   The  Greek  authorities  responded  on  1st  July  2019,
      treating the respondent's letter of 12th June  2019  as  a  "rejection
      letter", and inviting the respondent to keep the case open  since  the
      applicants and their uncle had agreed to undergo a DNA test  to  prove
      their relationship.  A DNA test report was provided to the  respondent
      on 10th September 2019 and by a letter dated 12th September 2019,  the
      respondent  confirmed  that  on  the  evidence  now   available,   the
      respondent is satisfied that the relationship between  the  applicants
      and SH, is, as claimed.  The respondent made arrangements for a family
      assessment to be completed by Derby City Council, and  following  that
      negative  assessment,  informed  the  Greek   authorities   that   the
      respondent believes that it is  not  in  the  best  interests  of  the
      applicants to  simply  move  from  their  current  care  arrangements,
      education and healthcare, to be placed in the care system in the UK.


  74. The applicants claim that once automatic acceptance has occurred under
      Article 22(7), any assessment of whether a relative is  able  to  take
      care of a child, or, whether it is in their  best  interests  to  join
      them, no longer affects the allocation of responsibility, because  the
      UK is already the responsible Member State. The applicants claim  that
      once responsibility has already passed,  the  best  interests  of  the
      applicants are relevant only to  the  arrangements  for  transfer  and
      accommodation on arrival, including a decision here, as to whether  to
      place the applicants with their uncle or  alternatively  in  care.  Ms
      Meredith submits Article 12(2)  does  not  permit  the  respondent  to
      "continue" to make enquiries after deemed acceptance  or  continue  to
      determine responsibility under Article 8(2).


  75. We note that under Article 8(1) of Dublin III the presumption is  that
      the unaccompanied minor will be reunited with  the  family  member  or
      sibling provided it is in the best interests of the minor.   The  test
      is modified where the unaccompanied minor has a relative  (defined  in
      Article 2(h) to include an adult uncle)  who  is  legally  present  in
      another member state.  In our judgment, under Article 8(2), it must be
      established, based on an individual examination, that  (a)  the  minor
      has a relative who is legally present in the requested  member  state;
      and (b) that relative can take care of him or her. Where those two pre-
      conditions are met, the receiving Member State shall unite  the  minor
      with that  relative,  and  shall  be  the  Member  State  responsible,
      provided also that it is in the best interests of the minor.


  76. We accept that once a Member State is deemed to accept  responsibility
      for examining a claim, there is an obligation for  the  transfer  from
      the requesting Member State to the  Member  State  responsible  to  be
      carried out in accordance with the  national  law  of  the  requesting
      Member State, as soon as practically possible.  That  is  not  to  say
      that that is the end of the  matter  and  there  is  a  binary  choice
      between transfer taking place  within  6  months  in  accordance  with
      Article 29(1), or responsibility reverting to  the  requesting  Member
      State.


  77. In our judgment, Article  12  IR  must,  as  the  respondent  submits,
      operate in parallel with the  deemed  acceptance  of  the  TCR.   Once
      responsibility has  passed  under  Article  22(7),  the  focus  should
      primarily  be  upon  the  arrangements  for  the   transfer   of   the
      unaccompanied minor to the requested Member State but that is  not  to
      say that having failed to respond  to  the  TCR  and  having  accepted
      responsibility by default, the requested  Member  State  is  bound  to
      accept the transfer no  matter  what,  and  under  any  circumstances.
      Article  12  of  the  Implementing  Regulation   is   concerned   with
      'Unaccompanied minors' and expressly provides that the fact  that  the
      duration of procedures for placing a minor may lead to  a  failure  to
      observe the time limits set out in what are now Articles 22 and  29(1)
      of Dublin III, shall not necessarily be an obstacle to continuing  the
      procedure for determining the Member State responsible or carrying out
      a transfer. There is therefore scope for  the  disapplication  of  the
      time limits, if warranted.


  78. Article 12(2) IR is not in our judgement, concerned with  a  'reversal
      of  the  obligation'  to  take   charge,   or   'the   withdrawal   of
      responsibility', but  is  concerned  with  reaching  a  decision  that
      promotes the best interests of the child as  a  primary  consideration
      and ensures full respect for the principle of  family  unity.   It  is
      simply concerned with reaching a decision that in the end, is  reached
      in full knowledge of the facts, and serves the best  interest  of  the
      child.


  79. Where children are concerned, we are fortified by  referring  back  to
      the recitals set out in Dublin III  that  make  clear  that  the  best
      interests of children lie at  the  heart  of  Dublin  III;  "the  best
      interests of the child should be a  primary  consideration  of  Member
      States when applying this Regulation" - recital [13];   "In  order  to
      ensure full respect for the principle of family unity and for the best
      interests of the child...When the applicant is an unaccompanied minor,
      the presence of a family  member  or  relative  on  the  territory  of
      another Member State who can take care  of  him  or  her  should  also
      become a binding responsibility criterion" - recital [16],  and,  "Any
      Member State should  be  able  to  derogate  from  the  responsibility
      criteria, in particular on humanitarian and compassionate grounds,  in
      order to bring together family members, relatives or any other  family
      relations" - recital [17]


  80. In MK & IK -v- SSHD the Upper Tribunal stated:


            "42. We find nothing in either the  Dublin  Regulation  or  its
            sister instrument to support the argument that the Secretary of
            State's acknowledged duty  of  investigation  was  extinguished
            once the initial refusal decision  had  been  made.   There  is
            nothing in this regime to suggest that a decision  on  a  "take
            charge" request is in all cases final and  conclusive,  subject
            only  to  legal  challenge  under  (inter  alia)  Article   27.
            Furthermore, this  would  be  entirely  inconsistent  with  the
            concept of practical and effective protection and  the  broader
            context of the real world of asylum claims.  The phenomenon  of
            renewed "take charge" requests  and  successive  "take  charge"
            decisions by the requested State is, in  our  view,  implicitly
            recognised in the Dublin Regulation.  Furthermore, it  was  not
            argued that the Secretary  of  State's  reconsidered  decision,
            made pursuant to a renewed "take charge" request, was  in  some
            way a voluntary act of grace,  as opposed to the discharge of a
            decision making duty.  Nor was it argued that the Secretary  of
            State's  later  decisions,  made  in  the   course   of   these
            proceedings,  were  in  some  way  divorced  from  the   Dublin
            Regulation context.

            43.  The present cases  are  a  paradigm  illustration  of  the
            truism that, in certain contexts, there  may  be  a  series  of
            formal requests by one Member State  and  a  series  of  formal
            decisions by the requested Member State.  We are  in  no  doubt
            that  all  such  decisions  and  associated   decision   making
            processes are governed by the Dublin Regulation and its  sister
            instrument..."

  81. There is a consistent thread within Dublin III  and  the  Implementing
      Regulation that the best interests of a  child  should  be  a  primary
      consideration.  One only has to read Article 8 of Dublin  III  to  see
      that the allocation of responsibility under Article 8(1)  and  (2)  is
      subject to the proviso "... provided that it is in the best  interests
      of the minor ...".


  82. Article 12(2) of the Implementing Regulation acknowledges  that  where
      the decision to entrust the  care  of  an  unaccompanied  minor  to  a
      relative other than the mother, father or legal guardian is likely  to
      cause particular difficulties, particularly where the adult  concerned
      resides outside the jurisdiction of the  Member  State  in  which  the
      minor has applied for asylum, there should be cooperation between  the
      competent authorities in the  Member  States,  to  ensure  that  those
      authorities can decide, with full  knowledge  of  the  facts,  on  the
      ability of the adult(s) concerned to take charge of the minor in a way
      which  serves  his  best  interests.   The   Implementing   Regulation
      expressly anticipates that the duration of procedures  for  placing  a
      minor may lead to a failure to observe the time limits set  in  Dublin
      III and there will therefore be cases  in  which  notwithstanding  the
      time limit referred to, the failure to observe the time limits  should
      not necessarily  be  an  obstacle  to  continuing  the  procedure  for
      determining the member state responsible or carrying out a transfer.


  83. There is nothing in either the Dublin Regulation or  the  Implementing
      Regulation to support a claim  that  the  duty  of  investigation  was
      extinguished once a decision  has  been  made,  whether  expressly  or
      deemed. It would in our judgment  be  extraordinary  in  circumstances
      where the best interests of a child are a primary  consideration,  for
      there to be a strict application of responsibility  under  Dublin  III
      without any opportunity to revisit the obligations imposed in light of
      any information that subsequently comes to  light.  Here,  as  matters
      stand, upon a strict application of  Articles  22  and  29(1)  of  the
      Dublin III Regulation, responsibility  for  examining  the  claim  for
      international  protection  appears  to  have  reverted  to  the  Greek
      authorities. It would be extraordinary if there was no opportunity for
      the dialogue between  the  Member  States  to  continue,  so  that  as
      required  by  the  legal  framework,  a  decision  is   reached   that
      acknowledges the best interests of a child as a primary consideration.
      Article 12(2) of the IR confirms that the fact that  the  duration  of
      procedures for placing a minor may lead to a failure  to  observe  the
      time  limits  set  out,  shall  not  necessarily  be  an  obstacle  to
      continuing the  procedure  for  carrying  out  the  transfer,  thereby
      enabling a transfer to be completed  notwithstanding  the  requirement
      under Article 29(1) for the transfer to  be  carried  out  within  six
      months.


  84. If there is, as the applicants appear to claim, no opportunity for any
      further consideration by the respondent, there was little to be gained
      by the applicants when their representatives served the  DNA  reports,
      in their endeavour to persuade the respondent  of  their  relationship
      with SH in September 2019.  It would be contrary to the best interests
      of the children and contrary to Article 8(1) and (2)  of  Dublin  III,
      if, once the UK was deemed to have taken responsibility it  was  never
      open to the respondent to contend that transfer to the United  Kingdom
      would not in fact, be in  the  best  interests  of  the  unaccompanied
      minors.  On-going enquiry might reveal  that  the  transfer  could  be
      positively harmful  to  them.   The  respondent's  published  guidance
      provides a non-exhaustive list of useful examples of circumstances  in
      which transfer to the  UK  would  not  be  in  the  best  interest  of
      children.  In ZT (Syria) -v- SSHD, Beatson LJ identified the  need  to
      guard against people trafficking as an  example  of  circumstances  in
      which the need for expedition may be outweighed by  the  need  for  an
      orderly process of enquiry.


  85. To further illustrate the  difficulty  with  the  submission  made  on
      behalf of the applicants, the identified family  member/relative  may,
      following enquiry that has taken more than two months,  be  identified
      as a person who has sexually abused the minor in  their  home  country
      and poses a significant risk to them, if they were to be in  the  same
      country. In such a  case,  Article  8(1)  and  (2)  would  compel  the
      conclusion that the minors should not  come  to  the  United  Kingdom,
      regardless of the fact that the  United  Kingdom  is  deemed  to  have
      accepted the take charge request. Similarly, if  after  the  two-month
      time limit has passed, it is established that the child is not related
      to the adult in the UK as claimed, it is unlikely to be  in  the  best
      interest of the child to be united with that adult in the UK.   In our
      judgment, if as part of the ongoing dialogue, enquiries establish that
      it is not in the best interests of the child to be transferred to  the
      UK, it is open to the respondent to reach a decision to  that  effect.
      That is entirely consistent with the closing words of Article 8(1) and
      (2) of Dublin III which establish that the  Member  State  responsible
      will be that where there is a  family  member,  sibling  or  relative,
      "provided that it is in the best interests of the minor".


  86. We reject the submission made by Ms  Meredith  that  the  respondent's
      refusals of the TCR on 12th June  2019  and  14th  October  2019  were
      unlawful simply by reason of the deemed acceptance of  responsibility.
      It is apparent the best interests of  a  child  should  be  a  primary
      consideration of Member States when applying the Regulations. It would
      be contrary to the best interests of an  unaccompanied  minor  if  the
      simple failure to observe the time  limit  set  out,  resulted  in  no
      further enquiries, or an end to any on-going enquiry  that  could,  in
      the  end,  further  the  objective  of  promoting  family  unity,   or
      conversely reveal information that establishes that  the  transfer  is
      not in the best interests of the child.  In FA & others -v- SSHD Upper
      Tribunal Judge Frances expressed the view that Article 12(2) of the IR
      applies in extreme cases where there are best interest reasons for not
      complying with the time limit.  The question is not in  our  judgement
      whether there are best interests reasons for not  complying  with  the
      time limit, but whether there  are  best  interests  reasons  for  not
      carrying out the transfer.  We agree that in this context,  where  the
      decision maker is concerned with the  best  interests  of  the  child,
      Article  12(2)  of  the  Implementing  Regulation  does   not   permit
      derogation from responsibility save where there is  some  particularly
      good reason to do so. In the respondent's  published  guidance  it  is
      said that:


            "... the re-establishment of  family  links  would  not  be  in
            accordance with section 55, for example, if  it  is  identified
            that:

            .the safety of the child or their family will be jeopardised

            .the child has a well founded fear of relevant family members

            .the  relevant  family  members  are  the  alleged  actors   of
            persecution within the claim for asylum which has not yet  been
            finally determined

            .the child is a recognised or potential victim  of  trafficking
            in which the family were knowingly complicit

            .the child has shown  to  have  been  previously  exploited  or
            abused or neglected by their family, or  claims  to  have  been
            previously exploited or abused or neglected by their family and
            this has not been conclusively discounted"

  87. Whilst that  is  a  non-exhaustive  list,  it  does  in  our  judgment
      illustrate the threshold of severity that must be  established  before
      it can be said that the transfer would not be in the best interests of
      the child.  In our judgment, the respondent would  need  to  establish
      that there is some significant risk to the safety or  welfare  of  the
      child, such that it cannot be in the best interests of the child to be
      united with the family member.


The decision of 12th June 2019


  88.  The  respondent's  decision  of  12th  June  2019  was   made   after
      consideration of the evidence provided by the Greek  Authorities  with
      the email on 8th March 2019. In reaching that decision, the respondent
      considered the original TCR as  well  as  the  additional  information
      submitted.  The  respondent  maintained  she  was  not  satisfied  the
      applicants have a relative who is in the UK.


  89. The applicants claimed to be the nephews of SH.  They are said  to  be
      the sons of SH's elder sister.  Our attention has been  drawn  to  the
      relevant material.  The respondent  has  now  disclosed  the  relevant
      unredacted extracts from the Home Office records held  in  respect  of
      SH.  SH had disclosed the names of his parents and two  siblings.   In
      the hearing bundle before  us,  the  applicants  have  provided  their
      mother's identity documents with an English translation.  The identity
      documents give the names of her father and grandfather.  Her  father's
      name as set out in the identity documents, is not the same as the name
      of SH's father as provided by him and  set  out  in  the  respondent's
      records.  It was in  the  circumstances  open  to  the  respondent  to
      conclude on 12th June 2019 that the  applicants  had  not  established
      that the applicant's mother and SH  are  related  as  claimed  and  by
      extension, that SH and the applicants are not related as clamed.


  90.  Article  8(2)  of  Dublin  III,  requires,  based  on  an  individual
      examination, that the minor has a relative who is legally  present  in
      the requested Member State.  Based upon the material  relied  upon  by
      the applicants, the respondent was entitled to conclude on  12th  June
      2019 that the applicants did not have a relative, as defined in Dublin
      III in the UK. In the absence of an  accepted  familial  relationship,
      the question of family unity did not arise.   In  any  event,  in  our
      judgment a case in which the unaccompanied minor is unable to  satisfy
      the respondent of the claimed relationship is an  obvious  example  in
      which, notwithstanding deemed acceptance of responsibility,  it  could
      not be in  the  best  interests  of  the  unaccompanied  minor  to  be
      transferred to the requested Member State, such  that  here,  on  12th
      June  2019  it  was  open  to  the   respondent   to   derogate   from
      responsibility.


The respondent's decision of 14th October 2019


  91. Following the respondent's decision of 12th June 2019, the  applicants
      provided DNA evidence  and  on  12th  September  2019  the  respondent
      accepted the applicants are related to SH as  claimed.   On  the  same
      day, the respondent  notified  the  Greek  authorities  that  she  was
      satisfied that the relationship between the applicants and  SH  is  as
      claimed and that "a UK local government authority care  assessment  is
      now underway"  to  aid  in  the  consideration  of  the  child's  best
      interests.  In fact, a care assessment was not underway, but had  been
      requested that day. The respondent arranged for a family assessment to
      be completed by Derby City Council.  In her decision of  14th  October
      2019 refusing the TCR's, the  respondent  relied  upon  a  significant
      safeguarding risk and concerns about SH's capacity to care.


  92. We have been provided with a copy of the 'Family Assessment' completed
      by the social worker employed by Derby City Council  on  11th  October
      2019.  It appears that a visit was completed by the social  worker  on
      7th October 2019.  The checklist completed by the social worker states
      that SH had informed the social worker that he resides alone,  however
      there was evidence of someone residing in  a  third  bedroom.   It  is
      recorded that SH denied this and claimed someone had just  left  their
      items of clothing there. The social work noted that  SH  had  informed
      the Probation Service that he resides with another person so the  rent
      can be shared.  The social worker noted that "the home conditions were
      well maintained and of a good standard. Whilst [SH] resides in a large
      property that could accommodate his nephews, it is not felt that he is
      being truthful about individuals who also reside with him whom  social
      care would need to complete  relevant  safeguarding  checks  on."   SH
      confirmed he is in regular contact with the applicants in  Greece  and
      that he intends to care for them alone.  He informed the social worker
      that he is engaged to a woman currently in Afghanistan, although there
      was no set date for marriage and he "generally seemed uncertain  about
      any plans.".  The social worker recorded that SH expressed a  wish  to
      care for his nephews but recorded that there are  concerns  about  his
      capacity to care.  The social worker noted SH does not have any  prior
      experience of caring for children or young people and he struggled  to
      identify how he would meet the applicants needs and did not appear  to
      have considered their day-to-day needs and how he would tend to  them.
      The safeguarding/welfare issues are identified as follows:


             "[SH] is known to probation services and he was  convicted  of
             grievous bodily harm and possession of a  blade  in  a  public
             place in June 2019. He  currently  has  a  suspended  sentence
             order.

             He also advises that he resides alone but there  was  evidence
             of another person's belongings  in  the  property.  Given  the
             nature of his conviction, associates of his could also present
             risks to young people.

             Probation services also advise that his employment history has
             been unstable questioning his capacity to financially  support
             the young people. He states that he is currently self-employed
             as a chef and is not in permanent or stable employment."

  93. The social worker concluded:


             "There are concerns regarding [SH's] capacity to care  for  to
             young people given his violence-related  conviction,  unstable
             employment and current living  circumstances.  At  this  time,
             this reunification is not recommended  by  Derby  City  Social
             Care."

  94.  Having  carefully  considered  the  material  that  was  before   the
      respondent when she reached her decision of 14th October 2019 and  5th
      December 2019, although we acknowledge that there were  some  concerns
      regarding the ability of SH to care for the  applicants,  the  matters
      relied upon by the respondent are not in our  judgment  sufficient  to
      outweigh  the  best  interests  of  the  applicants  and  the  overall
      principle set  out  in  Dublin  III  of  family  unity  as  a  binding
      responsibility  criteria.  Neither  the  local   authority   nor   the
      respondent considered whether it may be  appropriate  to  arrange  for
      short-term  local  authority  care,  whilst  further  enquiries   were
      completed, and arrangements were made for the applicants to live  with
      SH or near to him. It follows that in our judgement, the  respondent's
      decision of 14th October 2019, is a decision  that  is  in  breach  of
      Dublin III.


The investigative duty


  95.  The  applicants  also  submit  the  respondent's  failure  to  accept
      responsibility for the applicant's asylum claims in her  decisions  of
      12th June 2019 and 14th October 2019 is in any event unlawful  because
      the respondent failed to comply with her investigative duties.  It  is
      said that following receipt of  the  TCR,  the  respondent  unlawfully
      confined her investigation to checking the evidence provided with  the
      requests against the Home Office records and failed  to  consider  DNA
      testing to establish whether the  applicants  are  related  to  SH  as
      claimed.  The applicants also claim the respondent  failed  to  engage
      with the local authority prior to rejecting the requests  contrary  to
      her own published policy.


  96. As the Tribunal held in MK, IK -v- SSHD (para  40)  the  investigative
      and evidence gathering duties imposed on Member States by  the  Dublin
      Regulation  are  unavoidably  factually  and  contextually  sensitive.
      There, the key to breaking the impasse was DNA evidence  to  establish
      the familial relationship between a mother and her daughters: but none
      was available.  The applicants were unable to  provide  such  evidence
      for a variety of reasons, including, in particular, lack of  resources
      and uncertainties relating to French law.  The Tribunal found the SSHD
      was at all material times in a position to proactively take  steps  to
      at least attempt to overcome  this  impasse.   However,  the  evidence
      before the Upper Tribunal established that nothing  was  done  by  the
      SSHD.


  97. Unlike in MK, IK -v- SSHD, we have been provided with no  evidence  or
      reason why the applicants here, could not have secured DNA evidence to
      establish the relationship between them and SH much earlier.  We  note
      the applicants had arrived in Greece in April 2018  and  there  was  a
      delay of almost 2 months before they registered their claim for asylum
      there. In his witness statement, SH confirms that he was contacted  by
      HN after they had arrived in Turkey, and from that point  on,  he  has
      been in regular contact with them.  He  confirms  that  he  maintained
      regular  contact  with  the  applicants  following  their  arrival  in
      mainland Greece.


  98. The GCID records show that after a period of inactivity following  the
      request received from Greece  on  31st  August  2018,  the  respondent
      recalled her records regarding SH on 4th October 2018.   On  the  same
      day, the GCID records record "undertaking letter sent to UK  relative:
      Yes ...".  The records show that on 10th October 2018, the Home Office
      records for SH were  examined  and  there  was  nothing  within  those
      records that established a family link between SH and the  applicants.
      A negative response letter  was  drafted  for  approval  by  a  senior
      caseworker.  The negative response was approved on 11th October  2018,
      but the GCID records also record; "... As  a  UASC  refusal  based  on
      insufficient evidence, this case has now entered the British red Cross
      (BRC) Family Tracing Program. Case  forwarded  to  ...  to  send  hold
      letter to Greece ...".  The respondent sent  a  letter  to  the  Greek
      authorities on 12th October  2018.  In  that  letter,  the  respondent
      requested further information to establish the  familial  relationship
      between the applicants and their maternal uncle.  By that letter,  the
      applicants  were  on  notice  that  the  respondent  required  further
      evidence to  demonstrate  the  claimed  family  link.  We  reject  the
      submission by Ms Meredith that  the  respondent  failed  to  give  the
      applicants an opportunity to address the concerns held  regarding  the
      relationship before a decision was made.   It  was  open  to  them  to
      obtain and submit DNA evidence to establish  their  relationship  with
      SH, but they did not do so.


  99. Ms Meredith referred to the GCID records that have been  disclosed  by
      the respondent.  She referred us to the entry dated 12th October 2018,
      in which the letter of 12th October 2018 sent to the Greek authorities
      is referred to as a  'Hold  letter'.   She  submits  it  is  now  well
      established that the use of a 'holding  letter'  in  this  context  is
      unlawful.  Although described as a 'hold letter' in  the  respondent's
      GCID records, having considered the GCID records that are referred  to
      in the paragraph above,  and the content of that letter for ourselves,
      we are quite satisfied  that  it  was  a  letter  the  respondent  was
      entitled to send to the Greek authorities to establish whether the  UK
      is the member state responsible.  Article 8(2) of Dublin III  requires
      an individual examination, that  the  minor  has  a  relative  who  is
      legally present in the requested member state, and that  the  relative
      can take care of him or her.


 100. In the letter of 12th October 2018, the respondent  requested  further
      information  to  establish  the  familial  relationship  between   the
      applicants and their maternal uncle before a final decision was  made.
      Such an enquiry could not be objectional.  The respondent had said  in
      that letter that ".. failure to contact the British Red  Cross  within
      15 days will result in the take charge request being considered  using
      only the  information  that  is  currently  available.".   Although  a
      negative reply  had  been  drafted,  it  appears  the  respondent  was
      prepared to delay reaching a decision until 27th  October  2018.   The
      respondent was required to reach  a  decision  within  two  months  of
      receiving the take charge request. Had a decision been reached  before
      31st October 2018, whether based upon any further information that had
      been forthcoming or in the absence of further information,  there  can
      be no doubt the respondent would have been acting in  accordance  with
      Dublin III.  The respondent concedes there was no  decision  upon  the
      request and as we have said, the failure to communicate a decision was
      not in itself unlawful.


 101. There is a further element to the investigative duty  that  is  relied
      upon by the applicants.  That is, the respondent's failure  to  engage
      with the local authority until the respondent was satisfied  that  the
      appellants are related to SH as claimed.  Article  12(1)  IR  requires
      cooperation between the competent authorities in  the  Member  States,
      including cooperation with the authorities or courts  responsible  for
      the protection of minors, and for the necessary steps to be  taken  to
      ensure that those authorities can decide, with full knowledge  of  the
      facts, on the ability of the adult or adults concerned to take  charge
      of the minor in a way which serves his best interests.  That,  in  our
      judgment, is part of the investigative duty imposed on  member  states
      and applies throughout the consideration of any take  charge  request.
      It applies as much  to  the  investigations  carried  out  during  the
      initial two months permitted to reach a decision, as it  does  to  any
      steps that may be taken  by  Member  States  following  acceptance  of
      responsibility  by  default.   The  respondent's  published   guidance
      states:


            "Unaccompanied children: notifying  local  authorities  and  or
        social services

            You must ensure that both  local  authority  children's  social
            care services at the child's  point  of  entry  and  where  the
            child's family member, sibling or relative reside are  notified
            of the transfer request under the Dublin III  Regulation.  This
            must be done as soon as possible after the  formal  request  to
            take charge is received from the requesting State.

            You must engage local authorities' children's social care teams
            throughout the process, seeking their advice in every case."

 102. The GCID records that we have been  referred  to,  establish  the  DNA
      evidence relied upon by the applicants was received by the  respondent
      on 11th September 2019  and  it  was  not  until  the  respondent  had
      accepted the family link, that  on  12th  September  2019  Derby  City
      Council was approached to complete a family assessment.


 103. The failure to engage with the local authority  much  earlier  was  in
      breach of Dublin III and the respondent's published guidance. However,
      the obligation to take charge did not arise until the  respondent  was
      satisfied the applicants had a relative who is legally present in  the
      UK.  It was not until 12th September  2019  that  the  respondent  was
      satisfied that that fundamental requirement was met.  Any  failure  to
      act  in  accordance  with  Dublin  III  and  in  accordance  with  the
      respondent's published guidance is of no assistance to the  applicants
      until 12th September 2019.


 104. Ms Meredith submits that, had the TCR's been accepted when they should
      have been, the applicants should have been transferred within 6 months
      of the date of deemed acceptance; by 31st April 2019.  The  difficulty
      with that submission is  threefold.  First,  the  respondent  was  not
      obliged to accept the Take Charge Requests.  There was a duty to  make
      the necessary checks, and the consequence for the  respondent  of  any
      failure in that duty and the failure to make  a  decision  within  two
      months is that  the  respondent  is  deemed  to  accept  the  request.
      Second, as we have already set out, once the respondent was deemed  to
      have accepted the  request,  it  was  for  the  Greek  authorities  to
      initiate the consultations needed to organise the transfer.  They  did
      not do so, and the applicants did not challenge  the  failure  of  the
      Greek authorities to take steps to transfer the applicants to the  UK.
      Third, it was not until 10th September 2019 that the  applicants  sent
      the DNA evidence to the respondent to establish the  claimed  familial
      link.  The respondent accepted, on 12th September 2019,  that  SH  and
      the applicants are related as claimed.


 105. We are however quite satisfied that if the  respondent  had  acted  in
      accordance with Dublin III and  her  published  guidance,  the  family
      assessment would have been completed earlier than 11th  October  2019.
      Absent some particularly good reason to establish that the transfer to
      the UK is not in the applicants best interests (akin to  the  examples
      referred to in the respondent's published guidance) there could not be
      any reasonable or rational justification for refusing the TCR once the
      respondent had accepted on  12th  September  2019,  that  SH  and  the
      applicants are related as claimed. In our  judgement,  the  respondent
      has therefore been in breach of the Dublin III Regulation  since  13th
      September 2019.


 106. It follows from our finding that the respondent has been in breach  of
      Dublin III since 13th September 2019 and there has  been  a  delay  in
      uniting the applicants with SH since that date.    The respondent  has
      throughout relied upon Article 12 of the IR as justification  for  her
      decisions.  Having acknowledged the relationship between  SH  and  the
      applicants, and having decided to consider whether the UK remains  the
      Member State responsible, it was not rationally open to the respondent
      to conclude that  transfer  is  not  in  the  best  interests  of  the
      applicants and delay the transfer of the applicants to  the  UK  after
      13th September 2019.





Article 8 ECHR and Article 7 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights


 107. The parties  have  provided  the  Tribunal  with  written  submissions
      addressing  the  applicants'  claims  under  Article  8   ECHR.    The
      applicants submit the  respondent's  decisions  are  unlawful  and  in
      breach of their right to a family and private  life.   The  applicants
      submit the evidence before the Tribunal  demonstrates  that  there  is
      family life between the applicants and SH, and the nature and  quality
      of that  family  life  is  demonstrated  by  SH  offering  significant
      emotional encouragement and support to the applicants  who  remain  in
      Greece without family support.  They claim the right to  private  life
      is in any event engaged between the applicants  and  SH,  and  private
      life is engaged on the individual aspects of each  of  the  applicants
      physical and moral integrity. They submit the  respondent's  decisions
      amount to  a  disproportionate  interference  with  their  family  and
      private life.


 108. In ZT (Syria) -v- SSHD Beatson LJ said it is  clear  that  the  Dublin
      regime does not operate to the exclusion of the  human  rights  regime
      but exists side by side with it. Article 8 of the ECHR provides:


             "Article 8 - Right to respect for private and family life

             1. Everyone has the right  to  respect  for  his  private  and
             family life, his home and his correspondence.

             2. There shall be no interference by a public  authority  with
             the exercise of this right except such  as  is  in  accordance
             with the law and is necessary in a democratic society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others."

 109. Article 7 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights ("the  EU  Charter")
      also provides for the right to respect for private and family life.


 110. In addressing the Article 8 claim on  both  private  and  family  life
      grounds, we have carefully considered  the  evidence  before  us.  The
      applicants are brothers.  HN is shown on a Taskira as having been born
      on 11th June 2002 and is now 17.  MN's Taskira shows that he was  born
      on 18th August 2003 and  he  is  now  16.   They  were  both  born  in
      Afghanistan.  In her witness statement, Sarah Collier states:


             "The applicants have met their uncle, SH on two occasions when
             he was visiting Afghanistan from the UK in 2012 and 2014.  The
             applicants were young at the time, but they remember  spending
             time with their uncle and the wider family. SH  also  told  us
             that he recalls both trips very well. He remembers taking  his
             nephews on various trips to local lakes and rivers, and taking
             picnics or eating out in restaurants together. He told me that
             in 2012 he took HN, HN's father, and  SH's  brother  to  visit
             Mazar for a few days. He told me that MN  did  not  come  with
             them as he was too young at the time.

 111. Ms Collier states the applicants fled Afghanistan  several  years  ago
      and travelled through Pakistan and Iran to Turkey, where they remained
      for over three years. She states they had a very difficult journey  to
      Turkey, which they believe to have taken around 23 days.   She  states
      the applicants remained in Turkey for around 3 to 3 � years until they
      were  14  and  15  years  old.   Ms  Collier  states  that  after  the
      applicants' arrival in Turkey, the applicants contacted  SH  and  told
      him they were in Turkey having fled Afghanistan. After this, they were
      in regular contact with him. The applicants then  managed  to  arrange
      their  transport  through  an  agent  to  Greece.   That  journey  was
      relatively short,  only  taking  a  few  days  but  it  was  extremely
      traumatic.  The applicant arrived on mainland Greece in April 2018.


 112. We have also been provided with a witness statement signed  by  SH  on
      10th September 2019.  He confirms that he is the applicant's  maternal
      uncle and the younger brother of their mother.  He  confirms  that  he
      has been living in the UK since arriving  from  Afghanistan  in  March
      2002. He confirms that he visited Afghanistan in around 2012 and  2014
      and states he "spent a lot of time with  the  applicants  during  both
      visits.". He confirms that he was contacted by HN after the applicants
      had arrived in Turkey and confirms that he has been in regular contact
      with them since. He explains:


             "I have kept in regular  contact  with  the  applicants  since
             their arrival in mainland  Greece  and  speak  to  them  using
             WhatsApp and Facebook Messenger on a  regular  basis.  I  have
             provided screenshots of our contact for  use  in  their  case.
             Unfortunately I have not been able to visit them in Greece  as
             my work is extremely busy and I have very little time off  for
             holidays...."

 113. Although not before the respondent when she reached her  decisions  of
      12th June 2019 and 14th October 2019, we have been provided  with  the
      independent social work summary report prepared by Maria Rooney  dated
      27th  November  2019.   She   was   instructed   by   the   applicants
      representatives to give an opinion as to the adequacy  of  the  family
      assessment completed by Derby City Council and whether it would be  in
      the applicants best interests  to  be  placed  with  SH  or  in  local
      authority care in the UK, as opposed to their remaining in Greece. She
      spoke to the applicants by telephone on 26th November  2019.   In  the
      summary report, she states:


             "My  assessment  is  that  due  to  [HN]  and   [MN]'s   ages,
             vulnerabilities and  lack  of  protective  factors  there  are
             significant safeguarding concerns in regards to their  safety,
             well-being and welfare in their current  placement.  They  are
             constantly being exposed to  inappropriate  behaviour  in  the
             environment - self-harm, substance misuse and violence,  which
             is placing them both at  significant  risk  of  victimisation,
             child trafficking and Child Criminal Exploitation  (CCE)  from
             organised criminal gangs and also  Child  Sexual  Exploitation
             (CSE). Due to  their  background/lived  experience,  ages  and
             vulnerabilities, [HN] and [MN] require a high level  of  care,
             support and supervision to ensure their safety and  well-being
             at all times.

             It is clearly evident that [HN] and [MN]'s  current  placement
             is not suitable or able to promote their  safety  and  welfare
             and meet their needs. I have significant safeguarding concerns
             in regards to their safety, well-being  and  welfare  in  this
             placement. They  have  been  resident  in  this  inappropriate
             accommodation in Greece  for  almost  2  years  and  both  are
             suffering from mental health and physical health problems as a
             result."

 114. Maria Rooney concludes:


             "[HN] and [MN] are two highly  vulnerable  young  people  with
             (sic) have suffered significant trauma, neglect and abuse.  As
             a result of this they are now  suffering  from  emotional  and
             mental health difficulties where they are  not  receiving  the
             appropriate care, treatment and emotional support  which  they
             require. They are currently placed  in  extremely  unsuitable,
             unsafe and volatile conditions.  They  would  benefit  greatly
             from the love, care and attention of their uncle who is trying
             his hardest to enable his nephews to return to his care. I  am
             sure that with a safe, consistent and stable home  environment
             accompanied with a high level of emotional support from  their
             uncle, that [HN] and [MN]'s  transition  back  home  to  their
             uncle  will  be  a  successful  and  positive  move  for   all
             involved."

 115. We also have before us the Psychiatric assessments of  the  applicants
      carried out by Dr Batsheva Habel.  The reports of Dr  Habel  refer  to
      the  applicants'  family  and  early  history  and  their  experiences
      following their departure from Afghanistan.  They  are  said  to  have
      witnessed distressing scenes, including seeing dead bodies by the side
      of the road and being forced to work very long hours for  very  little
      money in poor conditions. The aspect of the history which caused  much
      distress to both applicants was their recounting of MN's experience of
      being  separated  from  HN  in  Turkey.   HN  is  described  as  being
      heartbroken by the state of his brother when they were  reunited.   HN
      witnessed his brother fall off the back of a moving vehicle and MN has
      experienced a significant assault at his accommodation in Greece.


 116. Although there is no formal diagnosis of PTSD, Dr Habel expresses  the
      opinion  that  HN  presents  with  symptoms  of  trauma   and   having
      experienced the trauma and virtually fulfilling a diagnosis  of  PTSD,
      has placed  him  at  increased  risk  of  developing  other  emotional
      disorders.  HN is diagnosed as  suffering  from  prolonged  depressive
      reaction,  which  describes  a  mild  depressive  state  occurring  in
      response to a prolonged exposure to a stressful  situation  but  of  a
      duration not exceeding two years.   The  severity  of  the  depressive
      illness is said by Dr Habel to be mild to moderate.


 117. MN is said to fulfil the criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD  which  will
      have placed him at an increased risk  of  developing  other  emotional
      disorders and experiencing serious mood symptoms associated with PTSD.
       Dr Habel expresses the opinion that there is  evidence  that  MN  has
      experienced a deterioration in his mood linked to the  delays  in  his
      reunification with his uncle. Dr Habel considers the reaction  to  the
      delay in decision-making can be characterised as one of the adjustment
      disorders and due to the number and severity of symptoms they would be
      best understood under the diagnostic  category  of  'Major  Depressive
      Disorder'.


 118. Dr Habel notes that both applicants have experienced a large number of
      potential stressors  from  early  on  in  their  life  that  would  be
      considered as traumatising for a child of their age. The multiple  and
      chronic nature of the traumas make it difficult to  clearly  apportion
      causation.


 119. We also have before us a witness statement made by  Sarah  Danby,  the
      manager of the Sindos Community Centre, in  Greece,  setting  out  her
      concerns about the mental and physical well-being of  the  applicants.
      She believes the education provision for the applicants, as it is,  is
      inadequate and the ongoing delay is impacting upon their physical  and
      mental health. She believes the applicants are not living in  a  safe,
      stable or healthy environment that  is  suitable  for  two  vulnerable
      teenage boys.


 120. In considering the Article 8 claim we have considered the decision  of
      the House of Lords in Razgar, v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  The first  issue
      for us to consider is whether the applicants enjoy family life  within
      the meaning of Article  8(1)  with  SH.     Ultimately,  the  question
      whether an individual enjoys family life is one of fact and depends on
      a careful consideration of all the relevant facts  of  the  particular
      case.  The question is highly fact sensitive.   In Kugathas  -v-  SSHD
      [2003] EWCA Civ 31, at  [14],  Sedley  LJ  cited  with  approval,  the
      Commission's observation in S v  United  Kingdom  (1984)  40  DR  196:
      "Generally the protection of family  life  under  Article  8  involves
      cohabiting dependents, such as  parents  and  their  dependent,  minor
      children. Whether it extends to other  relationships  depends  on  the
      circumstances of the particular case.". There is no presumption that a
      person has a family life, and the Tribunal must consider  a  range  of
      factors that are relevant. Such factors  include  a  consideration  of
      matters such as the family members with whom the individual has lived,
      identifying who the  direct  relatives  and  extended  family  of  the
      appellant are, the nature of the links between them, the  age  of  the
      applicants, where and with whom they have resided in the past, and the
      forms of contact they have maintained with the other  members  of  the
      family with whom they claim to have a family life.


 121. The notion of 'family life' extends to other  relationships  including
      relationships,  as  here,  between  the  applicant  and  their  uncle,
      provided that sufficiently close links in  the  form  of  demonstrable
      interest, commitment and dependency is established.  In Kugathas,  the
      Court of Appeal held that there must be real, committed  or  effective
      support between the family members, and 'neither blood  ties  nor  the
      concern and affection that  ordinarily go with them are, by themselves
      or together', sufficient to be called 'family life' in the  Article  8
      sense.


 122. The respondent now  accepts  the  applicants  are  related  to  SH  as
      claimed.  On the evidence before us we do not accept that the evidence
      is sufficient to establish 'family life' in the Article 8  sense,  but
      we do accept, as  Ms  Meredith  submits,  the  relationship  that  has
      developed between the applicants and SH forms part  of  their  private
      life.  In AA -v- UK [2011] ECHR 1345, the ECtHR said:


         "49. An examination of the Court's case-law would tend  to  suggest
         that the applicant, a young adult of 24 years old, who resides with
         his mother and has not yet founded a family  of  his  own,  can  be
         regarded as having "family life". However, it is not  necessary  to
         decide the question given that, as  Article  8  also  protects  the
         right to establish  and  develop  relationships  with  other  human
         beings and the outside world and can sometimes embrace  aspects  of
         an individual's social identity,  it  must  be  accepted  that  the
         totality of social ties between settled migrants and the  community
         in which they  are  living  constitutes  part  of  the  concept  of
         "private life" within the meaning of Article 8....Thus,  regardless
         of the existence or otherwise of a "family life", the expulsion  of
         a settled migrant constitutes an interference  with  his  right  to
         respect for private life. While the Court has  previously  referred
         to the need to decide in the circumstances of the  particular  case
         before it whether it is  appropriate  to  focus  on  "family  life"
         rather than "private  life",  it  observes  that  in  practice  the
         factors to be examined in order to assess  the  proportionality  of
         the deportation measure are the same regardless of  whether  family
         or private life is engaged (�ner, cited above, �� 57-60)."

 123. SH has lived in the UK since March 2002.  That is before either of the
      applicants were born.   We  have  no  evidence  of  any  communication
      between SH and the applicants at all between 2002 and  2012.   At  its
      highest, the evidence before us is that SH visited Afghanistan in 2012
      and again in 2014. There is no evidence before us as to the length  of
      time that SH spent in Afghanistan on  each  of  those  occasions,  and
      where he lived.  The evidence of SH is that he recalls taking  various
      trips with the applicants on both visits, to  go  and  see  lakes  and
      rivers nearby, to go on picnics, and to visit other  cities.  He  also
      recalls taking the applicants out for meals in local  restaurants.  He
      recalls that during the visit in 2012, he took HN, his father and SH's
      brother on a trip to the city of Mazar for a few days. HN  would  have
      been 10 in 2012 and 12 in 2014 when his uncle visited Afghanistan.  MN
      would have been 9 in 2012 and 11 in 2014.  As Ms Collier states in her
      statement, the  applicants  were  young  at  the  time,  and  SH  will
      undoubtedly have spent time  with  the  applicants  during  those  two
      visits, when SH visited his elder sister.


 124. From the account set out in the witness statement of  Ms  Collier  and
      SH, it is reasonable to conclude that the applicants left  Afghanistan
      in or about 2015. They were about 12 and 13 years of age at that time.
      They had spent their lives living with  their  parents  and  immediate
      family in Afghanistan, with some very limited contact  with  SH.   The
      applicants appear to have arrived in Turkey in or  about  early  2015,
      and they appear to have maintained contact with SH  via  social  media
      but there has been no direct face to face contact between them.


 125. That in our judgement is  insufficient  to  establish  a  family  life
      between the applicants  and  SH.   However,  the  evidence  before  us
      regarding the on-going communication between the applicants and SH and
      the support that he provides to them in the hope  that  they  will  be
      united in the UK so that he can care for the applicants is  such  that
      we are satisfied that there is evidence of a  protected  private  life
      within the meaning of Article 8.  The delay in completing the transfer
      of the applicants to the UK has consequences of  such  gravity  as  to
      engage the operation of Article 8.


 126. Here, we are concerned with  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  the
      ability to take up private and family life here. The ultimate question
      is whether there has been an unjustified lack of respect  for  private
      and family life and the focus should be on whether, in  the  light  of
      the positive obligations on the UK, there has been a failure to act in
      the particular circumstances of the case. An interference  with  right
      to respect for private life will be in breach  of  Article  8  of  the
      Convention unless it can be justified under paragraph 2 of  Article  8
      as being "in accordance with the law", as pursuing one or more of  the
      legitimate aims  listed  and  as  being  "necessary  in  a  democratic
      society" in order to achieve the aim or aims concerned.


 127. Once the existence of family or private life in the UK is  established
      its  character  and  intensity  affects  the  proportionality  of  the
      proposed interference with it. In ZT (Syria) Beatson LJ, referred,  at
      [65], to the decisions in Sen v The  Netherlands  (2003)  36  EHRR  7,
      Tuquabo-Tekle v The Netherlands application 60665/00 [2006] 1 FLR  798
      , and Mayeka v Belgium (2008) 46 EHRR 23, that show that a  state  can
      owe a positive duty under Article 8 of the ECHR to  admit  persons  to
      its territory for family reunification. He went on:


         "... They also show that  the  extent  of  that  obligation  varies
         according to the particular circumstances of the  persons  involved
         and the general interest, and that in cases involving children  the
         best interests of the child are  a  primary  consideration  in  the
         proportionality exercise."

 128. We are satisfied the delay in transferring the applicants  to  the  UK
      amounts to an interference with the right to a private life.  We  have
      carefully considered the evidence before us regarding the quality  and
      nature of the relationship between the applicants and SH as set out in
      the  witness  statements  and  reports  before  us.   An  individual's
      physical and moral integrity are important aspects  of  their  private
      life and we have carefully considered the impact that the delay in the
      transfer is having upon  the  physical  and  moral  integrity  of  the
      applicants, as set out in the report of the independent social  worker
      and the psychiatric assessments. Article 8 requires States  to  desist
      from steps which would have an adverse impact  upon  the  individual's
      mental health and there is at least some  evidence  that  the  ongoing
      delay is impacting upon the applicants' mental health.


 129. We have already found that  the  respondent's  failure  to  agree  the
      transfer of the applicants to the UK was in accordance with Dublin III
      until 12th September 2019, but it  was  not  rationally  open  to  the
      respondent to delay the transfer of the applicants  to  the  UK  after
      12th September 2019.  It is uncontroversial that the  interference  is
      necessary in  a  democratic  society  in  the  interests  of  national
      security, public safety or the economic well-being of the country.


 130. We must therefore consider whether the interference  is  proportionate
      to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.  The  strength  of
      the relationship and the private life is a relevant  consideration  in
      any assessment of proportionality.  For the reasons  we  have  already
      set out earlier in this decision, the obligation to  take  charge  did
      not arise until the respondent was satisfied  the  applicants  have  a
      relative who is legally present in the UK.  That was  not  until  12th
      September 2019.  The assessment of proportionality  is  entirely  fact
      specific.  There  are  a  number  of  factors  that  lead  us  to  the
      conclusion that the failure to transfer the applicants to  the  United
      Kingdom before 12th September 2019 was  not  disproportionate  to  the
      legitimate aim, but was disproportionate thereafter.


 131. First, the respondent's failure to formally accept responsibility  for
      the applicants' asylum claims or to communicate a  decision  within  2
      months of receiving a request was not of itself  a  breach  of  Dublin
      III.  The consequence was that the respondent was 'deemed'  to  accept
      responsibility.  Second, having accepted responsibility by default, it
      was for the Greek authorities to initiate the consultation  needed  to
      organise the transfer, but they did not do so.  Instead,  both  Member
      States continued to  communicate  with  a  view  to  establishing  the
      familial relationship.  Third, the obligation to take charge  did  not
      arise until the applicants had established a familial link with SH and
      until that relationship had  been  established  it  was  open  to  the
      respondent to maintain that transfer to the United Kingdom is  not  in
      the best interests of the children.  However, once the applicants  had
      established the familial relationship and the respondent was satisfied
      that that fundamental requirement was met, in the absence of  evidence
      establishing that it is not in the best interests of the applicants to
      be united with SH, the failure to agree the transfer of the applicants
      to the United Kingdom amounted to a disproportionate interference with
      the Article 8 rights of the applicants.


 132. It follows that in our judgement, the respondent's failure  to  accept
      transfer of the applicants to the UK as of 13th September 2019 was  in
      breach of  Article  8  ECHR  and  Article  7  of  the  EU  Charter  of
      Fundamental Rights.


 133. In light of our findings and conclusions set out in this decision, the
      matter will now be listed for a resumed hearing for  the  Tribunal  to
      determine the issue of damages.


 134. We invite the parties to agree an order reflecting our  decision.   We
      are minded to make a declaration that  the  respondent's  decision  to
      refuse the transfer of the applicants to the UK since  13th  September
      2019 has been in breach of Dublin III and  Article  8  ECHR,  and,  is
      unlawful. The parties should seek to agree any  consequential  orders.
      In the absence of an agreed order within 7  days,  the  Tribunal  will
      determine the appropriate order when this decision is handed down.  In
      default of an agreed order, the parties are directed  to  provide  the
      Tribunal with a draft of the order they invite the Tribunal  to  make,
      no less than 48 hours before the hearing, together with their  written
      submissions in support.


Postscript


 135.  In  responding  to  the  embargoed  version  of  this  judgment,  the
      respondent sought to raise the case of Abbas v SSHD [2017]  EWCA  Civ,
      in connection with the Tribunal's findings on Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
      The respondent wished to rely upon this  case  as  authority  for  the
      proposition that entry clearance cases that turn on  private  life  do
      not engage Article 8. Abbas, however,  did  not  concern  a  situation
      where the United  Kingdom's  international  obligations  required  the
      government to take charge of individuals outside the  United  Kingdom,
      and where the failure to  comply  with  those  obligations  threatened
      their moral and physical integrity.





