
                                    [pic]

IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Claim Number: JR/5147/2019

IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


|Heard at Field House                         |
|On 5 and 6 March 2020                        |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH

                                   Between

                    The Queen (on the application of AN)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     And

                        HARROW LONDON BOROUGH COUNCIL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr A. Suterwalla, instructed by Sinclairs Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J. Holbrook, instructed by Harrow Legal Services

                                  JUDGMENT

Covid-19: this judgment was handed  down  remotely  by  circulation  to  the
parties' representatives by email, release  to  BAILII  and  publication  on
https://tribunalsdecisions.service.gov.uk/utiac.   The  date  and  time  for
hand-down is deemed to be 2.00PM on 24 April 2020.


 1. The applicant is a citizen of Sudan.  He claims that he was born on  25
    October 2001 which, if correct, would mean that  upon  his  arrival  in
    this country on 3 September 2018, he would have been 16 years old.  His
    claimed date of birth is rejected by the respondent council.  In an age
    assessment dated 12 April 2019, the respondent assessed  the  applicant
    to be over 18.  The applicant challenges that assessment.  The  purpose
    of these proceedings is to determine the applicant's age.


Procedural background


 2. The claim for judicial review was issued in the High Court on  12  July
    2019. Permission was granted by a deputy judge of the High Court  on  6
    August 2019. On 11 September 2019, interim relief  was  granted  by  Mr
    Justice Freedman, namely that the respondent be ordered  to  treat  the
    applicant as though he is a "looked after" child.  Mr Justice  Freedman
    also made an order for anonymity, which I maintain.


 3. The matter was transferred to this tribunal for a fact-finding  hearing
    to take place.


 4. The applicant was originally represented by his Litigation Friend,  the
    Official Solicitor.  As it is now common ground that  he  has  attained
    the age of majority, and there being no other  capacity  concerns,  the
    Official Solicitor is no longer acting on that or any other capacity on
    behalf of the applicant.  To the extent necessary for me to  do  so,  I
    discharge the Official Solicitor from the role of Litigation Friend  of
    the applicant.


Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010


 5. A significant feature of this case is the considerable vulnerability of
    the applicant. In a report dated 20 January 2020, Dr Glorianne Said,  a
    clinical psychologist, concluded that the  applicant  experiences  PTSD
    and a Major  Depressive  Disorder.  The  applicant's  presentation  was
    entirely consistent with someone who had suffered the traumatic  events
    the applicant claims to have experienced before arriving here (some  of
    which are outlined below), she wrote.


 6. Ms Said confirmed that the applicant  was  fit  to  give  evidence  but
    recommended that  he  should  not  be  subject  to  adversarial  cross-
    examination in relation to the traumatic aspects of his claimed journey
    to the United Kingdom, to avoid re-traumatisation.  Ms Said recommended
    that the Tribunal take a number of positive  steps  to  facilitate  the
    applicant's participation in the process,  which  were  adopted  to  Mr
    Suterwalla's  satisfaction  at  the  hearing.    These   included   the
    initiation of regular breaks, whether requested  by  the  applicant  or
    not, and questioning with the bare minimum of people in attendance.   I
    directed Mr  Holbrook  to  avoid  adversarial  cross-examination,  and,
    following a lengthy period of questioning, brought cross-examination to
    a close in order to keep to  the  hearing  timetable  and  prevent  the
    applicant from becoming overwhelmed.  Although  no  formal  application
    was made for the tribunal to sit in private, I asked those present, who
    included Grace Gattu and  Warren  Steventon,  two  of  the  applicant's
    social workers who were later to  give  evidence,  and  two  additional
    social workers from the council, to step out of the hearing room  while
    the applicant gave evidence.  At a case management hearing on 8 January
    2020, the applicant's then counsel  was  informed  that  the  applicant
    would be able to attend the hearing centre in advance of the hearing in
    order to familiarise himself with the hearing room in which he would be
    giving evidence.  I understand steps  were  taken  to  facilitate  this
    ahead of the hearing before me.


 7. I took the above steps pursuant to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note
    No. 2 of 2010.  In  addition,  I  confirm  that  I  will  calibrate  my
    assessment   of   the   applicant's   evidence   to   accommodate   his
    vulnerabilities.


The hearing


 8. The applicant gave evidence and participated in the hearing  in  Arabic
    through  an  interpreter.   At  the  outset,  I  established  that  the
    applicant and interpreter could understand one another and  communicate
    through each other.


 9. The applicant gave evidence and adopted his first (signed but  undated)
    statement ("the undated age assessment statement") at page C6A  of  the
    bundle; and adopted his second, third and fourth statements,  dated  18
    November 2019, 12 February and 5 March 2020 respectively.


10. On behalf of the respondent, Grace Gattu and Warren  Steventon  adopted
    their statements and were cross-examined.


Factual background


11. The applicant arrived in the United Kingdom as a putative unaccompanied
    asylum-seeking child on 3 September 2018.


12. The applicant claims that his father told him his age when  he  was  11
    years old.  He needed to know in order to register with  school,  which
    started that year, and also because he was curious.  He grew up as  the
    youngest of three children, with an older brother and sister.


13. The applicant's claimed age  is  set  against  the  background  of  his
    account of fleeing Sudan.  Although it is not within the scope of these
    proceedings to make findings on the applicant's  claimed  circumstances
    of departure from Sudan, his claimed journey through Libya, or what may
    await him upon his return, it will be helpful briefly to  outline  some
    of what the applicant claims to have taken place.


14. The applicant claims that he was arrested by militia in a vale not  far
    from his home in Darfur, along with his Islamic teacher, in 2014.   The
    militia had visited his home shortly before this incident, and attacked
    his mother, who later died.  When the militia came for him,  he  claims
    to have been beaten, detained for three days and questioned  about  his
    family.  The applicant would have been 12 years old at this  stage,  on
    his case.  His teacher had been arrested at the same  time  and  helped
    the applicant to escape.  They boarded  a  lorry  to  Libya  but  later
    became separated.  The applicant was forced to work on a farm for three
    years, and later in a brick factory.  He was then taken one night to  a
    boat which would take him to Italy.  The applicant thinks  his  teacher
    is dead.


15. In Italy, the applicant was housed briefly in a  camp.   It  is  common
    ground that he was fingerprinted by the authorities three  times,  each
    time giving a date  of  birth  in  January  1999.   In  his  statements
    prepared for these proceedings, the applicant claims that he gave false
    dates of birth to give the impression that he was an adult  and  not  a
    child, for he feared that children would be sent back to their  country
    of origin.  He caught a train to Paris, where he claims to have  stayed
    for 10 months, and on to Calais, before travelling clandestinely to the
    United Kingdom on a lorry, either above the axle in the  undercarriage,
    or in the luggage compartment.


16. On 20 December 2018, the Competent Authority concluded that  there  are
    reasonable grounds to suspect the applicant is a victim of trafficking.
     A conclusive grounds decision is  awaited.   The  applicant  has  also
    claimed asylum.  His  substantive  interview  is  yet  to  take  place,
    although the preliminary stages of the process are well under way.   In
    particular, he has completed a "Statement of Evidence" form  with  some
    details of the basis of  his  claim  and  his  journey  to  the  United
    Kingdom, which I consider below.


17. The respondent's age assessment concluded that the applicant was not  a
    child for the following reasons.


        a. The applicant's account had been that he only knew his  date  of
           birth in the Gregorian calendar,  rather  than  the  Hijiri,  or
           Islamic, calendar.  The respondent considered that the applicant
           could not explain why his father would only  know  his  date  of
           birth in the Gregorian calendar but not his own.


        b. The respondent did not consider that it was  credible  that  the
           applicant would rather run away from  Sudan  with  his  teacher,
           than return to his parents.


        c. The respondent also considered that the  account  the  applicant
           had provided of the ages at which he was at school in Sudan  was
           inconsistent with objective materials concerning  term dates and
           schooling in Sudan.


        d. Other aspects of the applicant's account lacked credibility; the
           applicant both claimed to have lost  contact  with  the  teacher
           with whom he was captured, and also claimed that the teacher was
           dead. The respondent was concerned that it would not  have  been
           possible for the applicant to have known that  his  teacher  was
           dead if he had simply lost contact with him.


        e. There were discrepancies in the chronology  of  the  applicant's
           account; he claimed not to have arrived in  Italy  until  August
           2017, whereas his fingerprints were taken in June 2017,  meaning
           he must have arrived earlier than he claimed.


        f. The respondent did not consider the applicant's claim  that  the
           entire journey cost him nothing to be credible. While in  Italy,
           in Ventimiglia, the applicant was housed  in  a  camp  for  men,
           rather than being treated as a child.


        g.  The  account  the  applicant  provided   of   travelling   from
           Ventimiglia to Paris, namely  using  a  single  train,  was  not
           credible; there are no direct trains for that journey.


        h. The applicant's account of hanging onto the underside of  a  bus
           in order  clandestinely  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  lacked
           credibility, in the view of the respondent.


        i. The applicant informed the Italian authorities that  he  was  an
           adult.


18. The social workers initially assigned to the applicant considered  that
    his behaviour and demeanour were more consistent with that  of  someone
    older than a  child.  For  example,  the  applicant  is  said  to  have
    demonstrated a degree of assertiveness and determination in relation to
    certain decisions concerning everyday life; he rejected the advice from
    the social workers to economise when buying clothing, preferring to buy
    branded footwear rather than a pair of value trainers. In the  eyes  of
    the assessing social workers, such behaviour is indicative  of  someone
    who is older, rather than younger; in  their  experience,  they  write,
    unaccompanied asylum seeking children would always take the  advice  of
    their social workers, in such circumstances.


The law


19. The relevant legal principles are not  in  dispute  and  are  helpfully
    summarised in Mr Suterwalla's skeleton argument at paragraphs 37 to 53.
     In summary, in an age assessment judicial review application, the role
    of the Upper Tribunal is to arrive at an assessment of the  applicant's
    age by reference to all material and evidence in the case, applying the
    balance of probabilities standard of proof. In contrast to conventional
    judicial review proceedings, the  focus  of  my  consideration  is  not
    whether the respondent reached a decision which was unlawful on  public
    law grounds, but rather  to  find,  as  a  matter  of  fact,  what  the
    applicant's age is.


Discussion


20. I have reached the following findings in light of my  consideration  of
    the entirety of the evidence in the case, in the round, to the  balance
    of probabilities standard.

21. At the outset of my analysis, it is necessary to recall once again that
    this is a case in which the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.  2  of
    2010 is engaged.  The applicant is a vulnerable individual who has,  on
    any view, endured a journey to the United Kingdom, which is  likely  to
    have been highly stressful, if not traumatic.  I direct myself that  it
    may be necessary to calibrate my assessment of the applicant's evidence
    by reference to his potential vulnerabilities, and the  impact  of  his
    mental health conditions on his ability to  recall  details  of  events
    which go to the issues upon which I need to make findings.

22. Ms Said's report primarily concerns the impact of the traumatic  events
    during the applicant's childhood and claimed journey to this country on
    his mental health, and the  corresponding  impact  on  his  ability  to
    recall details of those events.  She was not  asked  to  opine  on  his
    likely age, and nor does she purport to  do  so.   Her  report  is  not
    relied upon by the applicant as a means to support his claimed  age  as
    such, but rather in order to underline some of  the  factors  I  should
    take into account when assessing his evidence.


23. The applicant's clinical score on the Routine  Evaluation-10  (CORE-10)
    scale was 33, out of  a  possible  range  of  0-40,  suggesting  severe
    psychological distress [33].  He bears  the  symptoms  for  PTSD  [41],
    [68].  He finds discussing traumatic and violent episodes from his past
    very difficult, and there were some matters he found too distressing to
    discuss during the consultation with Ms Said,  particularly  what  took
    place in Libya.   He  is  vulnerable  to  suicide  [74].   The  current
    uncertainty over his  immigration  status  and  associated  uncertainty
    about  the  future  is  a  "most  significant"  factor   [79].    These
    considerations  combine  to  impact  the  quality  and  depth  of   the
    applicant's evidence.  His condition means that he is currently  unable
    to recall exact dates or specific  routes  travelled.   His  recall  is
    likely to be affected.  See, for example, [88], [89], [90], [91], [94].
      I  take  these  considerations  into  account  when   assessing   the
    applicant's evidence.


24. I  permitted  Mr  Suterwalla  to  put  some  additional,  clarificatory
    questions to  the  applicant  during  his  evidence  in  chief.   As  I
    explained at the time, the purpose of enabling Mr Suterwalla to  depart
    from the normal practice in this jurisdiction was partly to enable  the
    applicant to answer questions from a familiar questioner, before  being
    cross examined on points of possible controversy.  As  I  will  outline
    below,  the  applicant's  answers  to  the  additional   questions   Mr
    Suterwalla put to the applicant have had a  significant  impact  on  my
    findings.


25. There is no dispute over the applicant's account of how he was told his
    date of birth by his father.  Although the account did not  feature  in
    detail in any of his witness statements, or in the details he  provided
    in his age assessment interviews, the applicant provided details  under
    cross-examination.  He claims he had been discussing with friends  what
    their ages were, and it occurred to him that he did not  know  his.  He
    asked his father, who told him he was 11 years old at that  stage,  and
    from that point he knew. It was discussed with the  whole  family.   He
    also needed the information  to  register  at  school,  which  he  also
    started aged 11.  I accept this aspect of his account.


26. The real dispute, and the focus for my findings, is not the fact of the
    conversation the applicant claims to have had his father about his age,
    but either what his father told him, or how long ago  the  conversation
    took place. It is, of course, entirely possible for  the  applicant  to
    provide an accurate account of being told his date of birth, yet simply
    provide an inaccurate figure for his age at the time, the date that  he
    was given by his father, or point in time  at  which  the  conversation
    took place.


27. There are some features of the  respondent's  reasoning  which  provide
    little  assistance  to  the  findings  I  must  reach.   I  accept  the
    submissions made  on  the  applicant's  behalf  that  the  respondent's
    analysis of the  likely  term  dates  in  Sudan  do  not  preclude  the
    applicant's claimed date of birth from being accurate.  On his  claimed
    narrative, it would have been entirely possible for him to have started
    school aged 11 and to have left part way through his second year.


28. The evidence of the social workers is neutral.  Miss  Gattu's  evidence
    was that  young  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  children  would  always
    accept her advice when it came to life decisions; she  explained  that,
    in her experience, those who have arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  as
    children  would  have  an  attitude  and  demeanour  which  was  easily
    susceptible to  external  pressure  or  influence.  The  applicant,  by
    contrast, was often firmly of his  own  mind,  and  sometimes  rejected
    advice. He developed mature budgeting skills and was able to manage the
    allowance he was provided with well, but defied  advice  given  to  him
    only to purchase less expensive goods.


29. Miss Gattu formed these views during the early stages  of  her  contact
    with the applicant,  shortly  after  his  arrival  and  placement  with
    Harrow.  While I do not question the sincerity with  which  Miss  Gattu
    holds those views, nor the general experience she has of  working  with
    unaccompanied asylum seeking  children,  the  reality  is  that  it  is
    difficult  to  ascribe  determinative  weight  to  a  small  number  of
    interactions she had with the applicant, over a short period  of  time,
    given her assessment of the proximity of the applicant's true  age  (on
    her view) to the age of a child.  Her evidence was that she thought the
    applicant was 19 or 20 upon his arrival, which, although older than his
    claimed age, hovers on the threshold of the age of  majority.   Indeed,
    on the most positive (to the applicant) view of Miss Gattu's  evidence,
    upon his arrival the applicant was only a year over the age of 18.


30. Mr Steventon's written evidence was that the applicant could have  been
    18 to 20.  This is even closer to the applicant's claimed age, and,  in
    isolation, would be capable  of  admitting  the  possibility  that  the
    applicant was a child upon arrival, albeit  not  as  young  as  he  now
    claims he was.


31. It is, of course, necessary to recall at this stage in my analysis that
    evidence concerning demeanour and appearance,  especially  from  social
    workers who will have had limited and  relatively  formal  interactions
    with an applicant, will necessarily be of limited weight.  See R (AM) v
    Solihull MBC [2012] UKUT 00118 (IAC).   At  [15],  the  Vice  President
    said:


         "...almost all evidence of physical characteristics is likely to be
         of very limited value. That is because, as pointed out  by  Kenneth
         Parker J in R (R) v Croydon [2011] EWHC 1473 (Admin)  there  is  no
         clear relationship between chronological age and physical  maturity
         in respect of most measurable aspects of such maturity."


32. Other concerns raised by  the  respondent  do  not  take  matters  much
    further.  The  respondent's  concerns  about  the  credibility  of  the
    applicant's claimed departure from Sudan, and travel through Libya, and
    crossing to Italy are of little assistance.  These proceedings are  not
    to assess any asylum claim  the  applicant  may  have.   Save  for  his
    claimed age at the time, what the applicant claims took place in  Sudan
    and Libya - whether I accept his narrative  or  not  -  are  of  little
    relevance to the assessment I must perform.


33. As I indicated at the hearing in light of  Mr  Suterwalla's  additional
    questions to the applicant, I consider the key issue in the applicant's
    case to  be  what  he  told  to  the  Italian  authorities  upon  being
    fingerprinted  there.   Mr   Suterwalla's   helpful   written   closing
    submissions put the matter in these terms: "The sole issue for  the  UT
    is whether AN's account - of why he gave a false d.o.b. - has the  ring
    of truth about it..."  I agree.  The age assessment, oral evidence, and
    submissions featured consideration of other matters which I do not deal
    with in this judgment, such as the applicant's claimed reliance on  the
    Gregorian  calendar,  whether  a  single  train  may  be  caught   from
    Ventimiglia to Paris, the credibility of his account of  sitting  above
    the axle underneath the bus for his travel to the United  Kingdom,  the
    claimed age of his friends in this country, and the written evidence of
    DB, the applicant's personal college tutor, who did not attend to  give
    oral evidence.  Those matters fall away when considered in light of the
    account the applicant gave to the Italian authorities of his  age  and,
    significantly, his subsequent oral evidence on the point.


34. The applicant gave three similar  dates  of  birth,  initially  to  the
    Italian authorities upon being fingerprinted in Italy in June 2017, and
    during a subsequent identification check at an unspecified later point.
     Those dates of birth were 5 January 1999  and  1  January  1999.   The
    applicant gave three names, two of  which  appear  to  be  phonetically
    similar to his accepted name, AN, and one which was  different.   Those
    dates of birth would have meant the applicant was an  adult  in  Italy,
    and, if the month and year were correct, would be determinative of  the
    applicant's true date of birth in these proceedings.


35. In his first statement, the applicant said that he gave false dates  of
    birth to the Italian authorities because he  had  been  told  that  the
    policy in Italy was to send children back to their countries of origin.
    As such, he writes that he claimed to have been older than he  was,  in
    order to avoid those consequences. At [18], the applicant wrote:


         "I was advised by those who I travelled  with  that  I  should  not
         disclose my real age because minors are segregated from adults with
         the possibility of being returned back home.  So,  I  intentionally
         told the people from the Red Cross who were running the camp that I
         was older than 17 to avoid being segregated.  I  was  fingerprinted
         several times in Italy [,] I  do  not  exactly  remember  how  many
         times. I do not remember giving my date of birth to anyone in Italy
         apart from the Red Cross."


36. It is  certainly  the  case  that  one  must  exercise  caution  before
    ascribing significance to different dates of  birth  an  applicant  has
    provided in other contexts.  Mr Suterwalla handed up the Home  Office's
    Age Assessment guidance, 23 May 2019.  He relied on the  following,  at
    page 40:


         "The Eurodac system [which facilitated the provision of the Italian
         records] records the fingerprints and the biographic and  encounter
         details of asylum claimants and irregular migrants in the  European
         Union (EU), Norway, Iceland and Switzerland. It may, in some cases,
         be a further source of  evidence  relevant  to  identity  and  age.
         However, caution must  be  exercised  as  an  individual  may  have
         provided an incorrect date of birth in  another  European  country.
         Also, age and name checks in other EU countries may not  have  been
         conducted with the requisite safeguards, such as  interpreters  (if
         required), resulting in an incorrect date of birth being recorded."
         (Emphasis added)


    I have emphasised the particular sentence Mr  Suterwalla  relied  upon.
    Mr Suterwalla also relied on the following guidance from  the  European
    Asylum Support  Office's  Practice  Guide  on  age  assessment,  Second
    Edition, at page 17:


         "Doubts may arise not only when the applicant is claiming to  be  a
         child but also when he or she claims to be an  adult.  Children  on
         the move may pretend to be adults in order to avoid the  protective
         measures of  the  authorities.  This  may  be  done  for  different
         reasons; for example, they may wish to continue  migrating  to  the
         intended destination and so want to avoid supervised  accommodation
         with, in some cases, limited freedom  of  movement  or  where  they
         would be separated from accompanying adults.  Often,  children  may
         claim to be adults to be allowed to work, to marry or because  they
         consider themselves to be adults responsible for the well-being  of
         the family left behind. However, in  other  cases,  children  could
         just be following instructions given by smugglers  or  traffickers.
         In such cases, smugglers or traffickers try to  keep  children  off
         the radar so that they remain unprotected, making  them  easy  prey
         for later exploitation. Awareness of this phenomenon can facilitate
         early identification  of  a  victim,  or  a  potential  victim,  of
         trafficking  in  human  beings  (THB)  and  break  the   chain   of
         exploitation." (Emphasis added)


37. I agree that it is necessary to exercise caution when  considering  the
    impact, if any, of the dates of birth the  applicant  provided  to  the
    Italian authorities.   Although  Mr  Holbrook  submitted  that  it  was
    objectively incorrect for the applicant to have feared the  possibility
    of being sent back if he were a  child,  there  is,  in  principle,  no
    reason why the applicant would have had any knowledge  of  the  Italian
    processes, especially if he were a child at the time.  It  is  possible
    for someone in the applicant's position to have deliberately sought  to
    mislead the Italian authorities as to his true age, were  it  the  case
    that he - as a child - feared adverse consequences upon  revealing  his
    true age.


38. The question for my consideration is,  upon  directing  myself  of  the
    caution with which I should approach the issue of the Italian dates  of
    birth, and bearing in mind his vulnerabilities, whether I  believe  the
    applicant.  The remainder of the respondent's case  for  the  applicant
    being an adult is largely neutral.  On one analysis of the evidence  of
    Miss Gattu and Ms Steventon, the applicant could  have  (just)  been  a
    child on his arrival, even if not as young as his claimed October  1999
    date of birth.


39. Mr Suterwalla  chose  to  invite  the  applicant  to  expand  upon  his
    statement in evidence in chief concerning the issue of what he told the
    Italian authorities and why.  He  drew  the  applicant's  attention  to
    paragraph 18  of  his  undated  age  assessment  statement  (quoted  at
    paragraph 35, above) and read it out to him.  Mr Suterwalla then  asked
    the applicant, "...is there anything that you would like to comment on,
    say something about?", to which the applicant replied "no".   I  sensed
    some unease in the applicant at this point and asked him if  he  wanted
    to take a break.  He did not.  Mr Suterwalla repeated the question.  My
    note is as follows:


         Mr Suterwalla     I just want to read  one  sentence  back  to  you
                           again, listen carefully, I know you are  nervous,
                           but if you can try and listen to what I ask,  OK,
                           so this is what you have said,  "I  intentionally
                           told the people  from  the  Red  Cross  who  were
                           running the camp that I  was  older  than  17  to
                           avoid being segregated", now  is  there  anything
                           about that sentence that I have read back to  you
                           that you would like to say something about?


         The Applicant I said that I am older than my age because I had been
                           advised by people that if I told them my real age
                           that I would be segregated from them  so  I  told
                           them that I am older than my actual age

         Mr Suterwalla          And is it incorrect that you said you were
    older than 17?


         Applicant              Yes.     I told them that I am older than
    17, over 18


         Mr Suterwalla          So which one is it, 17 or over 18?

         Applicant         So I told them that I am old because if I say my
                           age they would be, they would take me they would
                           separate me

         Mr Suterwalla     But I asked you about the number, if you were
                           over 17 and you said 18 that was your evidence


         Applicant         So the man told me to say that I am old I did not
                           specify any number but I had been advised to
                           pretend that I am older than my actual age in
                           order to avoid separation


         Mr Suterwalla          So is it incorrect then in the statement
                           when you said you were older than 17

         Applicant              Yes



40. As can be seen from the above  extract  (and  as  Mr  Suterwalla  later
    accepted), some of the questions that were put to  the  applicant  were
    leading.


41. Upon it being clear that the  applicant  considered  his  statement  to
    feature an error, I invited Mr Suterwalla to ask the applicant  how  he
    wanted to correct his written  evidence.   That  process  led  to  some
    confusion in the applicant's replies, so I sought  to  put  some  open,
    clarificatory questions to the applicant myself.


42. I am grateful to both counsel for producing the following  agreed  note
    of what then followed:

         Judge             What did you tell them?


         Applicant         At the time I was not familiar with ages in
                           Europe, the guy told me below 18 is a child and
                           above is an adult, so he told me you shouldn't
                           say your actual age as they will regard you as an
                           adult.


         Judge             What age did you tell them?


         Applicant         He gave me an adult age and told me to say this
                           age as they will treat you as an adult age.


         Mr Holbrook       Can I check a sentence that's been noted, he was
                           told don't say your actual age [because they will
                           regard you as an adult, I think that is an
                           important point*]


         Mr Suterwalla     Are you saying that your actual age when you were
                           in Italy was an age where you were an adult [Are
                           you saying your actual age was an adult when you
                           were in Italy, your actual age, not the age that
                           you gave*]?


         Applicant              Yes, he told me this not to be separated.



         *The words in square brackets are additional  detail  from  my  own
         note and did not feature in the agreed note.  I  verified  my  note
         against the audio recording of the hearing during  the  preparation
         of  this  judgment,  and  the  additional  words  in  brackets  are
         accurate.


43. At this point, I decided the applicant needed a break.  I  offered  him
    the opportunity to leave the hearing room, which  he  did,  alone,  for
    just under ten minutes.  He spent the time in a vacant conference  room
    outside the court room.  Upon his return, the following  exchange  took
    place.  It does not feature in the agreed note, which  was  limited  to
    the extract in the previous paragraph, but I have had  the  benefit  of
    verifying my note against the official recording.


         Mr Suterwalla     I am going to try this in a different, [A -  name
                           of the applicant], way just  to  make  sure  your
                           evidence is clear, OK? OK, your evidence is  that
                           when you were in Italy you did not tell the truth
                           about your real age, your age


         Applicant              Yes


         Mr Suterwalla     I want to just ask you some questions about  that
                           if I can, first of all, if you  can  put  to  one
                           side what you told the authorities in Italy,  and
                           just concentrate on the truth about how  old  you
                           actually were, your real age  when  you  were  in
                           Italy.  OK, can I ask you A,  when  you  were  in
                           Italy were you a child or were you an adult?


         Applicant              I was young.  My age was young


         Mr Suterwalla     Were you under 18 or over 18?


         Applicant              Under 18


         Mr Suterwalla     Now I want to ask you about what you said to  the
                           authorities.  Did you say you were older than  17
                           or did you say something else?


         Applicant         I told them that I was over 17 but that the point
                           is that I was not familiar with the ages and they
                           told me that it is better to say that I am  older
                           than my actual age


         Mr Suterwalla     Do you know what your actual  age  was  when  you
                           were in Italy can you remember?


         Applicant         The people with whom I worked, when they asked me
                           about my age I told them I was 16


         Mr Suterwalla     And were you telling the  truth,  when  you  were
                           talking to these people?


         Applicant         I told them that I was young but I didn't know my
                           date of birth but from  the  description  I  told
                           them they told me that I was young


         Judge         We are straying towards the boundaries of appropriate
                           clarifications for evidence in chief


         Mr Suterwalla     I agree


44. There is clearly a degree of confusion in the applicant's  evidence  in
    the above extract, which I have quoted at length as it is necessary  to
    provide the full picture of the relevant exchanges.   Again,  I  remind
    myself of the medical evidence about the difficulties the applicant has
    in recalling the claimed traumatic events in his  history  (although  I
    note that the experiences in Italy do not feature among those which the
    applicant identifies as the most traumatic, in contrast to his accounts
    of forced labour in Libya, or the death of his mother).  The  applicant
    was clearly unwilling to talk about giving his date(s) of birth to  the
    Italian authorities, as  demonstrated  by  his  initial  reluctance  to
    expand upon his  written  evidence.   Ms  Said  did  not  identify  the
    fingerprinting process as a trigger of re-traumatisation.  In light  of
    the  conclusions  I  reach  below,  I  consider  that  the  applicant's
    unwillingness to talk about this aspect of his case is because  it  was
    damning to his claimed age.  I accept that some of what  the  applicant
    said is consistent with his written evidence ("I had  been  advised  by
    people that if I told them my real age that I would be segregated  from
    them").  The difficulty with his evidence in chief  answers  that  were
    broadly consistent with his written case is that many were in  response
    to leading, increasingly closed, questions,  where  Mr  Suterwalla  had
    suggested the answers he was looking for in the course of  putting  the
    question to the witness ("is it correct that you said  you  were  older
    than 17?", "so which one is it, 17 or over 18?", "But I asked you about
    the number, if you were  over  17  and  you  said  18,  that  was  your
    evidence...", "so is it incorrect then in the statement when  you  said
    you were older than 17..."), and when the applicant eventually did give
    an answer, it was, at best, vague and imprecise: "the man told me  that
    I am old I did not specify any number".  That answer was at  odds  with
    his written evidence, which was that he gave a  deliberately  specific,
    and false, date of birth which made him an adult.


45. The applicant most significantly undermined his written evidence when I
    asked him what he told the Italians.  In part of his answer,  he  said,
    "he [the person coaching him in Italy] told me you shouldn't  say  your
    actual age as they will regard you as an adult..."  As may be seen from
    the agreed note of the exchange at paragraph 42,  the  significance  of
    this answer did not escape Mr Holbrook, who asked for the point  to  be
    clarified.  This Mr Suterwalla did, and, as may be seen, the  applicant
    accepted that in Italy his "actual age" was that  of  an  adult.   This
    exchange,  and  what  followed,  clearly  presents  an  additional  and
    significant dimension to the evidence of the applicant.


46. In cross-examination, the applicant sought  to  maintain  his  position
    that he had been coached to give these answers, by a man called  Jakub.
    Jakub was not mentioned in his statements, which implied he was told by
    a number of individuals  what  to  say  ("I  was  advised  by  those  I
    travelled with...").  I deal with this difference below.


47. The applicant described  several  other  occasions,  which  are  of  no
    significance for my findings, when he was required to give his  age  to
    the police. He said that, during those exchanges, there was no official
    interpreter provided, and he sought to  communicate  with  the  Italian
    police through sign language. These incidents were  distinct  from  the
    formal process when the applicant was fingerprinted and gave  his  date
    of birth.  He was able to describe in detail what took  place  when  he
    provided his fingerprints, motioning the way in which  he  applied  his
    finger to the ink pad, and relaying  the  instructions  that  had  been
    given to him by those taking his fingerprints.


48.  The  applicant  could  not  initially   recall   about   having   been
    fingerprinted in his age assessment  interviews.   In  the  second  age
    assessment interview, on 22 March 2019,  he  claimed  not  to  remember
    being fingerprinted in Italy, and said that he was not asked  his  date
    of birth when he "got" to Italy (see  pages  E12,  E17).   This  is  in
    contrast to the information he gave to the Home Office when  completing
    his Statement of Evidence  form  on  5  November  2018;  in  answer  to
    question A5:12, the applicant said that he had  been  fingerprinted  in
    Italy in August 2017, but that he did not know why.  There is force  in
    Mr Holbrook's submission that the applicant must have known that he had
    given his fingerprints in Italy at the first age  assessment  interview
    but chose not to say so.  In cross-examination, the applicant explained
    that when he attended the Home Office's asylum unit, he  was  asked  to
    give fingerprints, so he was familiar with the process and it was fresh
    in his mind.  In  fairness  to  the  applicant,  in  a  subsequent  age
    assessment interview, he did confirm that he had previously  given  his
    fingerprints, but he did not seek  to  correct  his  earlier  incorrect
    assertion that he had not provided a date of birth.  When the applicant
    admitted being fingerprinted in Italy, the assessing social workers did
    not ask him for a second time whether he gave a date of birth in Italy.
     I accept that that may have been a valid follow up question but  given
    the respondent had already put that question to  the  applicant  in  an
    earlier interview, it was equally valid for the question not to be  re-
    put.  The applicant was clearly vulnerable, and it  was  not  necessary
    repeatedly to ask him the same questions.  As demonstrated  below,  the
    applicant's account of the  age  assessment  questions  concerning  his
    fingerprints in Italy is at odds with the record of the  interviews  in
    any event; Mr Suterwalla did not  attempt  to  contend  that  that  the
    interviews had been mis-recorded in the notes.


49. What is more significant is that in  cross-examination,  the  applicant
    introduced a new strand to his narrative,  namely  that  the  assessing
    social workers had told him that he had been fingerprinted  in  a  town
    other than  Ventimiglia  on  a  different  date.   He  maintained  this
    position, stressing that the questions by the assessing social  workers
    related to a different town.  There is no support for this new  element
    of the applicant's case in the notes of  the  age  assessment.   It  is
    clear  that  when  the  age  assessment  interviews  took  place,   the
    respondent did not know that the applicant had  been  fingerprinted  in
    Italy, nor that he had confirmed to the Home Office that that  was  the
    position.  Still less did they suggest  to  him  that  there  had  been
    different towns in which  the  fingerprinting  took  place.   There  is
    simply no support for that proposition in the notes.


50. In closing submissions, Mr Suterwalla accepted that the  applicant  had
    "said  some  very  odd  things"  during  his  evidence  in  chief,  and
    realistically  noted  that  his  evidence  was  not  satisfactory.   He
    submitted that the applicant's evidence had the "ring of truth"; it was
    not credible that the applicant  would  attend  the  tribunal  to  give
    evidence that completely undermined his case,  he  submitted.   A  more
    benevolent construction of the applicant's evidence  was  required,  in
    his  submission.   A  possible   explanation   is   proffered   in   Mr
    Sutterwalla's written closing note in these terms:


         "A possible explanation for AN's answer is that he was saying  that
         he told these people he did know his d.o.b.  (because  he  did  not
         want them to know it) and that he was not saying that, as a  matter
         of fact, he did not know it." (Emphasis original).


51.  I  disagree.   This  is  pure  speculation  and  unsupported  by   the
    applicant's own evidence.


52. Having considered the entirety of the applicant's case, in  the  round,
    taking due account of his vulnerabilities and his health conditions,  I
    find that the applicant has not given a truthful account of his age  to
    me.  I find that he gave his correct month and year  of  birth  to  the
    Italian authorities, namely January 1999.  He knew from the  outset  of
    his engagement with the respondent that the information he had provided
    to the Italian authorities was problematic for him, and it was for that
    reason that he declined Mr Suterwalla's initial  invitation  to  expand
    upon the reasoning in his statement which sought to explain the reasons
    he gave an older date of birth in  Italy.   Under  further  questioning
    from his own barrister (I stress,  not  under  cross-examination),  the
    applicant was unable to give a consistent account of why he gave a year
    of birth of 1999 to the Italian authorities.


53. The applicant  went  so  far  as  to  say  that  he  gave  the  Italian
    authorities his "actual age", confirming that he was an  adult  at  the
    time.  He was reluctant to ascribe a figure to his  age  at  the  time,
    even when asked in clear, open terms to give his age at  the  time  ("I
    was young").  Under cross-examination, he introduced what  Mr  Holbrook
    described as a "new fiction", namely that the respondent  had  directed
    its questions concerning being fingerprinted in Italy towards a  second
    town other than Ventimiglia,  a  proposition  for  which  there  is  no
    support  in  the  age  assessment  interviews,  or  elsewhere  in   the
    applicant's case.  Under cross-examination, he said that a  man  called
    Jakub had coached him to pretend to be older than he  was.   Jakub  did
    not  feature  in  any  of  the  accounts  the  applicant  had  provided
    elsewhere, for example his written evidence, which referred  in  plural
    terms to "those who I travelled with".  Jakub did not  feature  in  the
    answers the applicant gave to the assessing social workers  during  the
    age assessment interviews.


54. Mr Suterwalla's submission that the applicant's evidence has the  "ring
    of truth" to it is not a submission I can accept.  I agree that  it  is
    surprising that the applicant undermined his own case in this way  upon
    being questioned by Mr Suterwalla, but it is for that reason that  oral
    evidence is invited from  applicants  in  cases  such  as  this.   Even
    allowing for the applicant's vulnerability as  a  potential  victim  of
    trafficking, and taking full account of his mental health conditions, I
    find that the applicant has given an untruthful account of his  claimed
    age to the respondent and to this tribunal.  I accept that many of  the
    criticisms  levied  by  the  respondent  fall  away.   The   remarkable
    developments in the applicant's evidence lead me to the conclusion that
    he was an adult when he arrived, having given  an  accurate  month  and
    year of birth to the Italian authorities when giving the names [AN] and
    [AN]: January 1999.


55. Having considered all the evidence in the  round,  to  the  balance  of
    probabilities standard, doing the best I can, I find that the applicant
    was born on 5 January 1999.   That is the date of birth he gave on  two
    occasions to the Italian authorities with a name which bears a phonetic
    resemblance to the name he participates under in these proceedings.   I
    find that that is a more accurate date of birth than that of 1  January
    1999 that he gave under the alias [NF], which bears little  resemblance
    to his given name.


SUMMARY OF DECISION


56. It is determined that the applicant's date of birth is 5  January  1999
    so that on arrival in the United Kingdom on 3 September 2018, he was 19
    years of age.





    Signed                                  Date


    Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith




