
                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                JR/5305/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                          14-16 January 2019

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                    K A A
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                        THE LONDON BOROUGH OF HARROW

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr Phil Haywood of Counsel, instructed by Bhatia Best  Solicitors,  appeared
on behalf of
the Applicant.

Ms Kuljit Bhogal of Counsel appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE GLEESON :  The applicant has  been  granted  permission  for  judicial
review of  the  respondent's  age  assessment  decision  on  28  March  2018
assessing his date of birth as 25 December 1996.

    2. The applicant asserts that his date of birth is 25 December 2000 and
       that he was a minor until 25 December 2018.

    3. This application was lodged in the Administrative Court on 25  April
       2018.  On 13 June 2018, Pushpinder Saini QC,  sitting  as  a  Deputy
       High Court  Judge  in  the  Administrative  Court,  transferred  the
       application to the Upper Tribunal pursuant  to  section  19  of  the
       Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  Accordingly,  the  Upper
       Tribunal has jurisdiction to determine  the  applicant's  age  as  a
       question  of  fact,  having  regard  to  the  credibility   of   the
       applicant's account and all the evidence before it.

    4. The applicant is now an adult, both on  his  own  asserted  date  of
       birth (25.12.2000) and on that assigned to  him  by  the  respondent
       (25.12.1996).  However, his  date  of  birth  remains  relevant  and
       material, as under the Children Act 1989 the respondent's duties  to
       former 'looked after' children do not end at the age of majority:  a
       previously 'looked after'  child  remains  entitled  to  advice  and
       assistance from the respondent until the  age  of  21,  pursuant  to
       section 24(1B) of the Act.

    5. The respondent has further obligations under  sections  23A-23C  and
       Schedule 2 of that Act, to prepare and maintain a Pathway  Plan  and
       appoint a personal advisor for former looked  after  children  under
       the 'leaving care' regime applicable up  to  the  age  of  25.   The
       applicant as a care leaver might also be entitled to benefits  under
       the Housing Act 1996 by virtue of the  Homelessness  (Priority  Need
       for Accommodation) Order 2002.  On 25 April 2018, Mr Justice Butcher
       made an interim  order  that  the  respondent  provide  support  and
       accommodation for the  applicant  as  a  child,  pending  the  Upper
       Tribunal's decision on this application or further order.

    6. The applicant was assisted from 18 April 2018 to 29 November 2018 by
       a litigation next friend, Francesco Jeff of the Refugee Council.  By
       an order dated 29 November 2018,  Mr  Francesco  ceased  to  be  the
       applicant's litigation next friend.   The  applicant  therefore  now
       conducts these proceedings in his own right, as he is  no  longer  a
       minor.

Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

    7. I heard oral evidence from the applicant, and from  three  witnesses
       on his behalf: his friends Mr Gailan [H] and Mr  Adib  [S],  and  Ms
       Anna Branthwaite, a social worker.  The applicant also relies  on  a
       medical report from Dr Brock Chisholm, a psychologist, who  was  not
       called to give evidence. There is a witness statement from Mr Martin
       Bridger, then a  solicitor  with  Bhatia  Best,  who  represent  the
       applicant.  He explained that several of Bhatia Best's letters about
       the applicant erroneously gave a date of birth for the applicant  of
       20 December 2000, not 25 December 2000, but that this was  simply  a
       typographical error, never having formed  part  of  the  applicant's
       instructions to his  solicitors.   For  the  respondent,  Ms  Bhogal
       accepted that nothing turned on that difference.  Mr Bridger was not
       called.

    8. For the respondent, I heard oral evidence from  Mr  Rashid  Kato,  a
       social worker who had responsibility for the applicant from November
       2017, and have before me witness statements from Ms Mary  Brown,  Ms
       Yvonne Neequaye and Mr Jason Clarke  (who  conducted  the  withdrawn
       February 2018 age assessment) and from Mr Ian Poole  and  Mr  Gerald
       Buckley, who conducted the March 2018 age assessment  against  which
       this challenge is brought.

    9. In addition, I  have  had  regard  to  the  substantial  bundles  of
       contemporaneous  medical  and  social  work  records,  the  parties'
       written and oral arguments, and the decided cases in the authorities
       bundle to which I was referred during the  hearing.  In  considering
       the applicant's evidence in  this  judgment,  I  have  excluded  the
       evidence given through the first interpreter at the  hearing  on  14
       January 2018, as I discharged that interpreter and  the  applicant's
       evidence began again on 15 January 2018.

   10. I have also excluded from  negative  consideration  the  applicant's
       evidence about his journey to the United Kingdom; whilst there  were
       serious concerns about his reticence in relation  to  that  journey,
       this is not an asylum appeal  and  it  is  the  credibility  of  the
       applicant's account of his age which is relevant today.

   11. Both parties are aware of the evidence, both written and oral,  that
       was considered by the Tribunal. This evidence is, in  any  event,  a
       matter of record. I shall only refer to this evidence so far  as  it
       is necessary for me  lawfully  to  determine  the  applicant's  age,
       including the credibility of his  account  thereof.    The  parties'
       submissions are also a matter of record and I  will  refer  only  to
       those matters which are relevant to my analysis.

   12. The legislative framework within which I reach my decision  is  well
       established and there is no  disagreement  between  the  parties  on
       this.  The disagreement arises on the credibility of and the  weight
       to be given to various elements of the evidence.  My  primary  focus
       is age, not the credibility of the account in general.  There is  no
       burden of proof and no formal benefit of the doubt principle.

   13. I have had regard to all of the evidence and submissions  before  me
       and I have particularly taken account of the fact that whatever  his
       age, this applicant is young.

Procedural matters

   14. On 21 November 2018, the applicant's solicitors Bhatia Best wrote to
       the Tribunal, seeking permission to adduce a  supplementary  witness
       statement from the  applicant,  to  be  served  2  days  before  the
       advocates' meeting.  Leave  was  not  given,  nor  was  any  updated
       witness statement disclosed before the advocates' meeting.   On  the
       morning of the hearing on 14 January 2019,  Mr  Haywood  applied  to
       admit  a  bundle  of  supplementary  evidence  including  previously
       undisclosed witness statements, all bearing January 2019 dates and a
       quantity of further documents.  The witness statements were from  Ms
       Katerina Zurkova, a trainee solicitor  with  Bhatia  Best,  who  has
       conduct of this application; an updated witness statement  from  the
       applicant himself;  and  witness  statements  from  the  applicant's
       friends Mr Gailan [H] and Mr Adib [S].

   15. For the respondent, Ms Bhogal objected to  the  admission  of  these
       documents without advance  notice,  in  particular  to  that  of  Ms
       Zurkova, which concerned conversations in  December  2018  with  the
       respondent's witness Ms Mary Brown, who  was  on  annual  leave  and
       could  not  be  reached  for  instructions  thereon.  Ms  Brown  was
       unavailable for the  hearing  but  her  evidence  was  uncontentious
       (although the interpretation to be placed thereon was the subject of
       submissions by both parties).

   16.  After  hearing  submissions  from  both  parties,  I  admitted  the
       applicant's updated witness statement and those of  Mr  [H]  and  Mr
       [S], who were called as witnesses.   I also admitted the applicant's
       supplementary bundle, with the exception of the witness statement of
       Ms Zurkova, which merely produces the emails from Ms  Brown  in  the
       supplementary  bundle.     I  have  a  properly  disclosed   witness
       statement from Ms Brown, supported by contemporaneous emails in  the
       supplementary bundle and I have had regard to those.  Mr Haywood and
       Ms Bhogal agreed that Ms Brown's view of the applicant was  set  out
       in those emails and the witness statement and that they  could  deal
       with her evidence in submissions.

Interpreter issues

   17. The Upper Tribunal provided a Kurdish  Sorani  interpreter  for  the
       hearing.   The  applicant's  solicitors  had  also   instructed   an
       interpreter who took notes and spoke quietly to  Ms  Zurkova  during
       the morning of the first day, presumably letting  her  know  of  any
       concerns he had about the Court interpreter.  Neither Ms Zurkova nor
       Mr Haywood raised any concerns with me, but just  before  the  short
       adjournment on the first day,  the  interpreter  said  that  he  was
       unwilling to continue  as  he  was  being  distracted  by  continual
       muttering between the applicant's solicitor and interpreter.

   18. In fact, there had  been  a  number  of  moments  when  I  had  been
       concerned by the interpretation of the applicant's  evidence  during
       the first morning of the  hearing:  he  often  seemed  to  answer  a
       different question from that which Counsel or the Judge  had  asked,
       and translated responses were sometimes noticeably shorter or longer
       in English than they were in Sorani.   I adjourned the  question  of
       the adequacy of the interpreter for  consideration  over  the  short
       adjournment, and  when  we  resumed  at  2  p.m.,  I  discussed  the
       interpretation issue with the parties.  Ms Bhogal also had  concerns
       but was worried that if the hearing  restarted  the  next  day,  the
       applicant would have had a 'dress rehearsal'  of  his  evidence.   I
       indicated that I was not satisfied that the  interpretation  was  of
       the standard required and I discharged the Court interpreter.

   19. Ms Bhogal also mentioned that the applicant and his main witness, Mr
       [H], had been seen speaking and lunching together and was  concerned
       that they might discuss their evidence overnight.  I warned all  the
       witnesses: given the discrepancies in the  evidence  they  gave,  if
       there was any attempt at concert  in  their  evidence,  it  was  not
       successful.

Background

   20. The applicant is an Iraqi citizen of  Kurdish  ethnicity,  from  Tuz
       Khurmatu. He claims to be an only child. The  applicant's  knowledge
       of his age and date of birth is said to come from  what  his  mother
       told him in Iraq in 2013 or  2014  while  she  was  cooking  in  the
       kitchen.   He says he was at home because he  had  ceased  attending
       school after only 4 years of primary education.

   21. On 16 October 2017, when the applicant on his own account was almost
       17 years old, fierce  clashes  erupted  in  his  home  town  of  Tuz
       Khurmatu between government  forces  and  the  Peshmerga.   Tens  of
       thousands of people lost their homes through indiscriminate burning,
       looting and demolition of their properties, mainly  in  the  Kurdish
       areas.  The respondent does not dispute that this  event,  which  is
       well documented in reliable international sources, occurred  in  Tuz
       Khurmatu on that date.

   22. The applicant and his family fled the fighting in Tuz Khurmatu on 16
       October 2017. He became separated  from  his  parents  during  their
       escape and has not seen nor heard from them  since.   The  applicant
       has sought to trace his parents through the Red Cross but they had a
       long waiting list for consideration of tracing: the  Red  Cross  had
       only just begun to seek  to  trace  his  family  members  when  this
       application was heard.

   23. The applicant left Iraq and has not  returned  there  since.   After
       leaving Tuz Khurmatu,  the  applicant's  account  is  that  he  then
       travelled alone across Europe for almost a month, mainly in the back
       of lorries, and cannot or will not give  details  of  the  countries
       through which he passed, nor any reliable details of his journey.  I
       accept that there may be reasons for his reluctance, connected  with
       the agent or agents who arranged the journey, and  I  remind  myself
       that this is not the asylum appeal.  I do not treat the  applicant's
       reticence about the journey as relevant to whether he  has  given  a
       credible account of his age.

   24.  The Birkenhead interview.  The  applicant  arrived  in  the  United
       Kingdom when he reached Belfast.  He was helped to take a ferry from
       Belfast to Liverpool, was discovered on arrival, on 13 November 2017
       and apprehended.  On his asserted date of birth, his  17th  birthday
       was just over a month away.  The applicant accepts that when he  was
       apprehended and interviewed, he told the  authorities  that  he  was
       both 17 and 16 years old on different occasions.

   25. The applicant claimed  asylum  and  had  a  screening  interview  at
       Birkenhead,  but  without  an  appropriate  adult  present,  as  his
       asserted age required.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the  Birkenhead
       interview was not Merton-compliant.  The respondent has treated  it,
       not as an age assessment, but as a social work assessment only.  The
       applicant was then taken into the care of the respondent and  placed
       in  foster  care  until  a  full  lawful  age  assessment  could  be
       completed.

   26. The February 2018 age assessment.  There followed  an  abortive  age
       assessment  made  between  December  2017  and  February  2018:   Ms
       Neequaye and Mr Clarke  interviewed  the  applicant  on  15  and  19
       December 2017, but both interviews had to  be  stopped  because  the
       applicant was experiencing cold and a numb sensation  in  his  legs.
       He was taken to accident and emergency,  who  referred  the  problem
       back to his general medical practitioner.  On 15  January  2018,  Ms
       Neequaye and Mr Clarke interviewed the applicant  again,  concluding
       their assessment on 8 February 2018.

   27. The outcome of the February 2018 assessment was that the  respondent
       concluded that the applicant was an adult, and he was  dispersed  to
       adult Home Office accommodation in Derby on 14 February 2014.

   28.  The  applicant's  solicitors  challenged  the  February  2018   age
       assessment and following that challenge, the respondent withdrew the
       February 2018 age assessment and agreed  to  remake  the  assessment
       afresh: the respondent then took the applicant back  into  its  care
       until that fresh decision could be made.  I place no weight  on  the
       February 2018 age assessment or the evidence the applicant  gave  in
       those interviews.

   29. The March 2018 age assessment.  Further  age  assessment  interviews
       were held by Mr Poole and Mr Buckley on 15, 22 and  28  March  2018,
       leading to the decision under challenge.  On  28  March  2018,  they
       informed the applicant of their concerns about  the  credibility  of
       his account and in their decision, maintained  the  earlier  finding
       that the applicant's correct date of birth was 25 December 1996  and
       that he was then considered to be 21 years old.

   30. The respondent withdrew accommodation and  support.   The  applicant
       was placed by the Home Office in  shared  adult  accommodation  with
       adult asylum seekers not known to him.  He no  longer  received  the
       support which his representatives claim is appropriate  to  his  age
       (then) of 17 years old.

   31. In reaching their assessment decision, Mr Poole and Mr  Buckley  had
       express regard to the contents  of  both  the  Birkenhead  interview
       without an appropriate adult, and the withdrawn  February  2018  age
       assessment.  Ms Bhogal accepts that in consequence, the  March  2018
       age assessment is also not Merton-compliant.

   32. The asylum claim.  The applicant's  asylum  claim  remains  pending:
       after treating it as withdrawn in May 2018 for non-attendance at his
       asylum interview, the Secretary of State for the Home Department  in
       January 2019 accepted that  the  appointment  letter  had  not  been
       served at the correct address  (the  Home  Office  sent  it  to  the
       applicant's NASS address but he had been returned to the care of the
       respondent).  The asylum claim has been reinstated and an  interview
       date is to be sent out shortly.

Grounds for review


   33. The applicant's grounds for review  challenge  the  March  2018  age
       assessment decision, both on the basis that it was  unlawfully  made
       because the assessors took into account the Birkenhead interview and
       the withdrawn February 2018 assessment, and because he says that the
       age assigned to him is factually incorrect.  The applicant  contends
       that in consequence, very little weight can be placed on this latest
       age assessment, and that greater weight should be placed on his  own
       evidence.

   34. The applicant seeks declarations by the  Upper  Tribunal  confirming
       his claimed age, or such other age as the  Tribunal  may  determine,
       and quashing the March 2018 age assessment, together with his  costs
       and such other orders or directions as the Tribunal may think fit.

   35. The applicant gave oral evidence, with the assistance of  a  Kurdish
       Sorani interpreter, adopting  his  three  witness  statements  of  2
       October 2018, 19 October 2018, and  10  January  2019,  as  well  as
       relying on the 4 June 2018 witness statement in  his  asylum  claim.
       Each of the applicant's witness statements was certified  as  having
       been translated from English to Kurdish.   The  applicant  told  the
       Tribunal that he could not read English so had been unable  to  read
       his statements, but had signed and agreed to them  after  they  were
       read over to him in Kurdish Sorani.


   36. There  was  no  challenge  to  the  professionalism  of  the  second
       interpreter who assisted the Upper Tribunal on  Tuesday  15  January
       2019.  The matters put to the applicant in his abortive evidence  on
       Monday 14 January 2019 were revisited with the fresh interpreter, so
       the applicant had what Ms Bhogal described as  a  'dress  rehearsal'
       for his evidence on the second day and every opportunity, therefore,
       to give a coherent, truthful and consistent account  on  15  January
       when he gave the evidence again.


   37. For the reasons I now explain, I did not find the applicant to be  a
       truthful or credible witness, either generally or on the core  issue
       of his age.  His evidence, and that of the  other  witnesses,  is  a
       matter of record and  will  not  be  set  out  in  extenso  in  this
       judgment.

Mr Haywood's submissions
   38. For the applicant, Mr  Haywood  argued  that  the  Upper  Tribunal's
       approach to his physical appearance should follow  the  guidance  of
       UTIAC Vice-President Ockelton in  R  on  the  application  of  AM  v
       Solihull Metropolitan Borough Council [2012] UKUT00118 (IAC) at [15]-
       [16]).  Mr Haywood argued that the respondent had  not  shown  sound
       reasons for disbelieving the applicant's claimed age on the basis of
       his demeanour, which is a notoriously unreliable means of  assessing
       age, particularly during a short  interview  or  interviews  with  a
       social worker who does not know the applicant on a daily basis.

   39. Mr Haywood argued that the disputed age  assessment  in  March  2018
       took no account of the trauma of the applicant's terrifying  journey
       to the United Kingdom, the distressing  loss  of  contact  with  his
       parents, nor the effect of those factors on his ability  to  give  a
       clear and consistent account of his history.  Mr Haywood reminded me
       that the applicant bears no burden of proof in the assessment of his
       age (Merton at [38], R ota of CJ v Cardiff City Council [2011]  EWCA
       Civ 1590 at [21]).

   40. The respondent's March 2018 assessment was based  primarily  on  the
       applicant's  physical  appearance,  his  demeanour,   his   accepted
       inconsistent statements in the Birkenhead interview as to  his  age,
       and his alleged inability to give consistent or clear details of his
       home life in Iraq or his journey to the United Kingdom.  Mr  Haywood
       contended that none of these factors would bear the weight given  to
       them or provide credible reasons for disbelieving his  claimed  age.
       Mr Haywood made submissions which it  is  not  necessary  to  recite
       here, as to the Merton compliance of the March 2018 age  assessment:
       as Ms Bhogal accepted that it was not Merton  compliant,  the  March
       2018 assessment must be quashed.

   41. On the question of the applicant's age, Mr Haywood  reminded  me  of
       the guidance given by Mr Justice Picken in MVN v London  Borough  of
       Greenwich [2015] EWHC 1942 (Admin) at [27], that it is  possible  to
       have regard to general credibility, but that particular  focus  must
       always be on the credibility of what an  applicant  says  about  his
       age.

   42. Mr Haywood argued that the applicant had  shown  himself  to  be  an
       honest witness and that none of the reasons given by the  respondent
       for disputing his age would stand scrutiny.  The  applicant  in  his
       evidence had been adamant that he had no  contact  with  his  family
       still in Iraq.  The evidence was that he missed his mother very much
       and had treated Ms Branthwaite as a  surrogate  mother  figure.  The
       applicant had tried to contact his family members  through  the  Red
       Cross, without success, which was not suggestive of any  attempt  to
       conceal his background from the respondent.

   43. Mr Haywood invited me to find that the respondent's allegation  that
       the applicant was prone to exaggeration  and  manipulative  was  not
       borne out by  the  evidence.   He  had  experienced  serious  health
       problems (one seizure, nose bleeds and mental ill health) for  which
       no cause had been established.  Mr  Haywood  reminded  me  that  the
       applicant's demeanour  during  his  evidence  had  been  disengaged,
       looking down, picking at his nails; his evidence had been  that  his
       mother used to cut his nails for him.

   44. The applicant had made a credible suicide  attempt,  taking  tablets
       and threatening to throw himself out of a second-floor  window.   He
       had been angry that an ambulance and the police were called, and had
       to be persuaded to go to hospital. He was on medication,  which  had
       been increased, which was not the hallmark of a person using alleged
       mental health problems to get his own way.

   45. Mr Haywood reminded me of the applicant's evidence that in  Iraq  he
       was obsessed with car and football PlayStation games and  he  argued
       that the applicant's insistence in the United Kingdom that he should
       be provided with a PlayStation in the United Kingdom was  consistent
       with that obsession and should  be  regarded  as  the  action  of  a
       'bolshy' teenager, not an adult.

   46. Mr Haywood reminded me of the evidence of Ms  Branthwaite,  who  had
       known the applicant for a month or so when he first arrived.  I  was
       invited to regard her as a thoughtful and compelling  witness,  with
       particular reference to the evidence about the  applicant's  cooking
       skills and playful behaviour.

   47. In contrast, the respondent's only live witness, the  social  worker
       Mr Kato, did not know the applicant well, having seen  him  normally
       for an hour every 6-8 weeks.  Mr Kato was a  busy,  newly  qualified
       social worker and his evidence could not be treated as determinative
       of the applicant's stage of maturity.

   48. Ms Brown had not given evidence and  was  of  all  the  respondent's
       witnesses the one with the  most  career  experience.   She  was  on
       annual leave and unavailable.

   49. The applicant's account of his age was consistent and  credible:  he
       said the same to everyone who asked him when he  was  born,  or  his
       age.    The limited information about his date of birth provided  by
       the applicant did not mean he was not 17 years old when he gave  it.
       Taking all of the applicant's evidence together, Mr Haywood  invited
       me to find that the applicant's age should be accepted as stated and
       the March 2018 age assessment quashed as  not  Merton-compliant  and
       unfair.

Respondent's submissions

   50. For the respondent, Ms Bhogal relied on her skeleton  argument.   Ms
       Bhogal referred to the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  KA
       (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]
       EWCA Civ 1420 at [35] in the judgment of Lord  Justice  Davis,  with
       whom Lord Justice Longmore and Lord  Justice  Lewison  agreed,  that
       'credibility often does have a very  significant  part  to  play  in
       resolving an age assessment  dispute'  and   acknowledged  that  the
       applicant's age is a question of fact for the Upper Tribunal.   Even
       on his own case, the applicant was now an adult.

   51. There were two major pieces of evidence about the  applicant's  age,
       his divergent statements in Birkenhead as to his age (16 or 17)  and
       the evidence about his conversation with his mother in Iraq.

   52. The applicant had been an unimpressive witness,  repeatedly  finding
       simple questions difficult to answer and giving  the  impression  of
       being evasive, answering questions he had not been asked, even  with
       the second interpreter.  Ms  Bhogal  submitted  that  this  was  not
       caused  by  a  lack  of  understanding  but  rather  was  deliberate
       obfuscation on the applicant's behalf.   The  evidence  of  his  two
       claimed friends was inconsistent with that of  the  applicant  in  a
       number of major areas (particularly about his mobile  telephone  and
       after school activities).

   53. The applicant clearly understood more English than he was willing to
       admit, having taken lessons in English at college  for  16  hours  a
       week for a  year.   The  NHS  and  social  worker  records  were  of
       interaction without any interpreter present.

   54. Ms Bhogal accepted that the evidence of  the  disputed  'man  and  a
       small child' telephone call in Kurdish was not supported by  a  full
       recording of the conversation or a proper transcript,  being  merely
       recorded part way through and reported in an email from the  support
       worker to her superiors.  However, the applicant did not  deny  that
       such a conversation had occurred and it was  evidence  that  he  had
       more of a support network in London than he  had  been  prepared  to
       admit to the respondent.

   55. Ms Bhogal invited me to place little weight on the  evidence  of  Ms
       Branthwaite.  Ms Branthwaite was inexperienced, both  as  a  support
       worker and in age assessment.  Ms Branthwaite had  carried  out  age
       assessments, albeit without training, but her evidence was that  she
       had never assessed a young person to  be  over  18.   She  had  only
       received  a  single  day  of  unaccompanied   asylum-seeking   child
       training,  to  prepare  her  to  be  an  appropriate  adult  in  age
       assessment interviews.

   56. Ms Branthwaite's contact with the  applicant  was  very  limited  in
       duration and time:  she provided 5  hours'  support  a  week  for  a
       period of just 23 working days.  Ms Branthwaite's  evidence  on  the
       applicant's age covered a spectrum:  at first,  she  said  that  she
       assessed him as being 16-17 years old, then  'closer  to  16',  then
       'late 16, early 17'.  As regards the evidence that  other  residents
       in Paiwand had taken him under their wing, it was not clear  whether
       they were also age disputed.

   57. The evidence of Ms Mary Brown, a  very  experienced  social  worker,
       should be given significant weight.  Little  Acorns  was  a  24-hour
       placement and she had more opportunity to get to know the applicant.
       Although Ms Brown's evidence, and that of Ms Branthwaite,  was  that
       the applicant missed his mother, that was not a reaction confined to
       youths under 18 years old.

   58. Ms Bhogal suggested that although Mr Kato was newly  qualified,  and
       his contact with the applicant was brief, his  evidence  would  bear
       weight.  Mr Kato had seen the applicant regularly for over  a  year,
       every 6-8 weeks for an hour or so, during which  the  applicant  was
       mainly complaining that his social workers were not doing enough for
       him.

   59. Ms Bhogal reminded me of evidence that hospital staff  had  assisted
       the applicant to contact his parents. The applicant's  evidence  had
       been that he asked the hospital staff for the  WiFi  code  and  they
       overheard a telephone call which they understood was with his family
       in Iraq. The applicant's physical and mental  health  problems  were
       not of themselves determinative.

   60. I reserved my judgment, which I now give.

Dr Chisholm's evidence

   61. Dr Brock Chisholm BSc (Hons), MSc, DClin (Psych),  CPsychol,  AFBPsS
       is a consultant clinical psychologist, and is clinical lead  of  the
       UK Psychological Trauma Society and a trustee  of  Survivors  UK,  a
       charity working with survivors of sexual abuse.  He is  Director  of
       Criterion A Psychology Services, which provides training for general
       medical practitioners on the  assessment  of  post-traumatic  stress
       disorder and survivors of traumatic events, also on  the  assessment
       of mood, drama and anxiety disorders.

   62. Dr Chisholm prepared a medico-legal report  on  the  applicant.   Dr
       Chisholm's opinion is based  on  a  lengthy  assessment  meeting  on
       August 30 2018, lasting several  hours,  which  took  place  at  the
       applicant's supported residence.  He had all relevant documents  and
       had spoken to the other professionals involved  in  the  applicant's
       care.  The applicant gave as few details as  possible:  Dr  Chisholm
       regarded  this  as  avoidant  behaviour  indicative  of  trauma.  Dr
       Chisholm was unable to use any clinical assessment tools because the
       applicant became unresponsive in the second part of the  assessment;
       however, he noted that the clinical tools normally  used  relied  on
       self-reporting and were therefore open to malingering if used  in  a
       legal setting.

   63. Dr Chisholm considered that the applicant should  be  treated  as  a
       vulnerable witness  but  that  he  was  fit  both  to  instruct  his
       representatives and give evidence to the Tribunal, unless he  became
       unresponsive or significantly less responsive due to sudden onset of
       low mood.  Dr Chisholm advised that  the  applicant  should  not  be
       asked questions about his  separation  from  his  parents  or  their
       possible death to avoid any such  reaction.   Fortunately,  no  such
       reaction occurred during  the  applicant's  evidence  to  the  Upper
       Tribunal: he remained alert and responsive throughout.

   64.  The applicant had a diagnosis of mild  Major  Depressive  Disorder.
       He had an extremely low appetite,  consistent  with  malnourishment,
       and expressed a wish to die and be with his mother.   He  had  sleep
       difficulties and low mood, crying every night.  The  applicant's  GP
       had documented the applicant's  malnutrition.   He  was  now  taking
       vitamins to address that situation.  The applicant wanted  to  trace
       his parents through the Red Cross but had not received help from his
       social worker to do so.

   65. The applicant had made two suicide  attempts,  one  with  pills  (he
       claimed to have taken all his medication at once) and one  the  next
       day, by trying to jump out of  a  second-floor  window.   After  the
       alleged overdose, he was admitted to hospital but discharged himself
       before a full evaluation could be completed.

   66. Dr Chisholm's opinion was that the applicant met the DSM-V  criteria
       for  both  major  depressive  disorder  and  post-traumatic   stress
       disorder.   He  applied  criteria  for  malingering,   feigning   or
       exaggerating, but was satisfied that the applicant was  unlikely  to
       be malingering,  and  was  minimising  his  distress  until  it  was
       triggered by post-traumatic  stress  disorder  symptoms.   The  past
       attempts at suicide should be regarded as a warning sign for  future
       completed suicide.

   67. The applicant had been  able  to  give  a  coherent  account  to  Dr
       Chisholm until his post-traumatic  stress  disorder  was  triggered:
       after that, he was unable to say anything, except that he wanted  to
       die.  Dr Chisholm did not think that was an act: whatever  his  age,
       the applicant was a vulnerable witness with an avoidant style.

   68. On 29 October 2018, Dr Chisholm provided additional  information  in
       response to questions posed to him as an expert on 16  October  2018
       by Ms Catherine Dineen, Social Care lawyer for the respondent.   For
       the most part, the responses simply indicated where  in  the  report
       the matters relied upon were already fully explained.  Two areas  in
       the responses are of interest:  at question 3, Ms Dineen stated that
       as far as the respondent was aware, the applicant was not taking his
       prescribed medication, and asked  to  indicate  what  would  be  the
       consequences of that omission.

   69. Dr Chisholm responded that he was not a  prescribing  clinician  but
       that Sertraline and Mirtazapine, which had been  prescribed  to  the
       applicant, were not first line antidepressants  but  were  known  to
       have some benefits for symptom reduction  in  post-traumatic  stress
       disorder, where no evidence-based  psychological  treatment  was  in
       place, or to support 'what we know from research  works  best'.   Dr
       Chisholm  expressed  doubt   that   this   medication   would   help
       significantly, or that not taking it would have much of  a  negative
       impact on the applicant.  The medication prescribed would not 'cure'
       the applicant. However, different people reacted differently, and Dr
       Chisholm  recommended  that  the  applicant  continue   taking   the
       medication, to see whether it was effective.

   70. Dr Chisholm considered that, whether the applicant was 18 or 21,  he
       would have poor impulse control which made him a very  high  suicide
       risk. The applicant had no close family members to restrain him  and
       although he was  a  religious  person,  that  had  not  stopped  him
       considering death,  or  trying  to  commit  suicide,  in  the  past.
       Regarding the  seizure  which  the  applicant  had  experienced,  Dr
       Chisholm was asked by Ms Dineen to confirm all possible explanations
       as to why the applicant might suffer this problem.   His response to
       that question was as follows:

         "27. To make a firm diagnosis  all  possible  physical/neurological
         abnormalities must be ruled out.  Based on  the  documents  I  have
         seen this appears to be  the  case,  but  I  cannot  be  absolutely
         certain that it has.  It may be that there are other investigations
         that should be carried out.  I am not a neurologist and  any  clear
         opinion should be expressed by  one,  which  is  why  I  wrote  the
         following in [paragraph] 98: Further  investigations  are  required
         before I can definitively diagnose this.  It is probable that  [the
         applicant] meets criteria for non-epileptic seizures.

         28.  As stated in my [medico-legal report, the  applicant]  stopped
         responding to my questions, so I was unable to conduct as  thorough
         an assessment as I would have liked."

   71. Dr Chisholm relied on  Ms  Branthwaite's  email  of  27  June  2018,
       reproduced in  his  response  to  the  applicant's  solicitors,  and
       considered that the applicant was  malnourished.   Ms  Branthwaite's
       email said this:

       "This afternoon, I had an  A&E  doctor,  Dr  Waleed  Chaudhry,  from
       Northwick Park Hospital telephone  me.   [The  applicant]  has  been
       admitted to A&E today and the doctor found him to  be  suicidal  and
       has been malnourished for a period  of  time.   ...Dr  Chaudhry  was
       enquiring about the age assessment and was fairly disgusted  at  the
       state in which he  found  [the  applicant].  ...To  reiterate,  [the
       applicant] had been admitted to hospital last week for four  nights,
       was  discharged  on  Friday   and   came   to   one   of   Paiwand's
       accommodations. ... He  went  into  hospital  on  Saturday  and  was
       discharged the same day."

   72. The remaining questions and answers in Dr  Chisholm's  response  add
       nothing to his main report.

The applicant's evidence

   73. With that report in mind, the applicant was treated as a  vulnerable
       witness at the hearing.  However, even making  every  allowance  for
       his mental state, the applicant was an unimpressive witness. He  was
       strikingly reticent about his journey to the United  Kingdom:  I  do
       not consider that he has been frank  about  the  journey.   However,
       that may well have been on the instructions of the agent  or  agents
       who arranged his travel and I do not place any  particular  negative
       weight on such reticence.

   74. The applicant claimed that a man called Hakaan befriended him in the
       Jungle and gave him a mobile phone to play on, and that Hakaan  rang
       him while he was in the lorry on the way to the United  Kingdom,  on
       that phone.  The applicant agrees that when discovered,  he  snapped
       the SIM card in half to avoid getting Hakaan into trouble, and  that
       he then deleted Hakaan's  telephone  number.   I  consider  it  more
       likely than not that Hakaan was the final link in a chain of  agents
       who helped the applicant reach the United Kingdom.

   75. The applicant's account of his age changed in his oral evidence.  In
       all his written statements, the applicant said that his mother  told
       him the date in the Kurdish calendar, and  that  Hakaan  helped  him
       convert it once he reached  the  Jungle.  In  his  evidence  to  the
       Tribunal, however, the applicant said his mother had  told  him  the
       date in the Gregorian calendar format, and  confirmed  that  as  his
       evidence when Counsel repeated the question.  That makes nonsense of
       his account that Hakaan helped him convert it later.  The  applicant
       also spoke of knowing he was a year older  at  each  New  Year  (his
       asserted birth  date  being  25  December):  the  Kurdish  new  year
       (Newroz) is not in December but on March 21. I  place  some  weight,
       also, on his having given two different  ages  when  he  arrived  at
       Birkenhead.

   76. In his various accommodations, the applicant behaved like  a  person
       who had previously had a rather good standard of living and  perhaps
       also servants:  he complained of lack of cleanliness in  the  common
       parts of his accommodation, telling the staff and other residents to
       clean the  bathroom  before  he  used  it.   After  some  time,  the
       applicant learned to keep himself  and  his  clothes  clean,  having
       struggled with the concept of washing his own  clothes,  until  they
       and he were very smelly, which he did not like.   The  applicant  at
       times refused to eat, perhaps as a protest against  the  refusal  of
       the respondent to provide him with a PlayStation, a larger  room,  a
       bigger television, gym membership, and a computer and smart phone.

   77. The applicant's limited ability to cook, taken  in  isolation,  does
       not bear much weight given his cultural  background;  it  is  likely
       that in Iraq cooking is a skill which is culturally regarded as  for
       women, not young men.  In time, the applicant did learn to cook  one
       or two dishes, tending to use the kitchen when he was hungry,  often
       after the kitchen curfew of 9.30 p.m.  Other residents avoided using
       the kitchen when he was there.

   78. The applicant's evidence was that in Iraq, neither he nor any of his
       family or friends spoke English, nor did they learn  it  at  school,
       but that is difficult to reconcile with his evidence that his father
       bought him a 'cheap PlayStation' when he was  8  years  old  and  he
       played on it, alone and with friends, in English, until he left  for
       the United Kingdom when he was 16 years old.  It beggars belief that
       the applicant learned no English by playing games written in English
       for 8 years.  He was notably reluctant to name the games he  played.
       It is also surprising, given the asserted poverty of the applicant's
       family, that even a cheap  PlayStation  and  three  games  could  be
       afforded.

   79. The applicant's evidence about his mobile phones  was  inconsistent.
       He said Hakaan let him have a spare one to  play  games  on  in  the
       Jungle.  The applicant acquired a smart phone, an iPhone  5  Orange,
       very soon after arriving in the United Kingdom.   His  evidence  was
       that he used it only on WiFi at his accommodation, and had no mobile
       phone contract or Facebook account.  The evidence of Mr Saleh and Mr
       [H] contradicts that element of his account.

The applicant's witnesses

   80. It is unfortunate in this application  that  there  is  no  evidence
       based on normal day-to-day interactions over a long period of  time,
       from any  of  the  witnesses  whose  evidence  is  before  me.   The
       applicant seems not to have made lasting or close friendships in any
       of the accommodations where he stayed.  I look  in  vain  among  the
       applicant's evidence for the type of witness that AM tells me  would
       help me most.  There is no evidence from teachers, team leaders,  or
       other residents in the various homes in which the applicant lived.

   81.  The applicant in his oral evidence claimed to have been close to  a
       Kurdish man at his accommodation in Derby, who may or may  not  have
       been an Afghan called Gulaab, and he also had a friend  called  Adib
       in Derby.  He listed two large groups of college  friends  from  the
       two years that he attended Harrow  College:   the  first  group  was
       Mukhtar, age 18, Mujib who was 17, Sheikh and Habibi  were  16;  the
       second group, identified  in  cross-examination  were  Shapoor  (who
       lived in the same accommodation), an  Afghan  boy  called  Omed,  an
       Albanian called Daniel, a Kuwaiti called  Sultan,  and  another  man
       named Mahmoud.  The applicant said he had made friends with  a  man,
       Harem, who lived at an adult hostel in Croydon, who  may  have  been
       the man with a child to whom he was heard  speaking  on  his  mobile
       phone.   Unfortunately, there is no oral or  written  evidence  from
       any of these people, nor from his friend Mr Haras, who he said  used
       to live in the Gayton accommodation,  and  to  whom  he  spoke  from
       hospital, on his account.  The applicant was eventually given a  gym
       membership, but there is no evidence from anyone at the gym.

   82. The evidence of the two witnesses who attended  as  the  applicant's
       friends  was  unsatisfactory  and  directly  contradicted  his   own
       evidence on a number of points.  Both of them claimed to know him at
       Harrow College, but both asserted that they had never met each other
       before the Upper Tribunal hearing and were  not  friends  at  Harrow
       College. Both asserted that  they  'had  no  reason  to  doubt'  the
       applicant's age and that he  is  a  truthful  person.   Mr  [H]  has
       experience  of  the  process  of  challenging  an  age   assessment,
       successfully in his case.

   83. Both Mr [S] and Mr [H] in their evidence asserted that  they  had  a
       group of personal friends, which did not include the applicant, with
       whom they regularly played football during and  after  college,  and
       that they had considered, but never got around to  inviting  him  to
       play football with their friends.  Mr [H] said that he was known for
       his football skills and identified the applicant as one of his  600-
       odd Facebook friends.

   84. Both of them claimed to spend time with the  applicant  about  three
       times a week after college, playing football just the two  of  them,
       or going into town to eat and explore.  There were  only  4  college
       days in total each week, and  it  would  not  be  possible  for  the
       applicant to spend 3 of those four days, one-to-one, alone with  two
       different people, without them meeting.

   85. Both Mr [H] and Mr [S] said that the applicant had a  normal  mobile
       phone contract, and  telephoned  both  friends  and  social  workers
       outside the house using his mobile phone credit.  Mr [S]  also  said
       that the applicant had an EE answerphone  message  so  must  have  a
       mobile phone contract with EE.   This evidence, while it did not  go
       directly to the applicant's age, was evidence either that he was not
       truthful, or that his claimed friends did not  know  anything  about
       his mobile phone habits.

   86.  Mr  [S]  said  he  met  the  applicant  in  August  2018  and  that
       (inaccurately, as he had arrived in November  2017),  the  applicant
       said  he  was  new  in  the  United  Kingdom.   They  did  not  play
       PlayStation together.  Mr [H] could not remember  when  he  met  the
       applicant; whether it was in May/June 2018,  or  earlier,  in  about
       January 2018.  He said he had spent time with the applicant  at  the
       beginning of term, that is to say, from September to  some  time  in
       October 2018, after which he was too busy  with  his  own  life  and
       problems.  Between October and December  2018,  they  had  met  only
       three times, the last time in a rush, in December 2018, on the  last
       day of term.  In effect, this again  seems  to  have  been  a  brief
       friendship which ended quickly.

   87. Mr [H]'s evidence about the applicant staying out without permission
       on the night of August 7/8 2017 was unsatisfactory.  He  thought  it
       happened 'after September 2018' and he asserted that he had told the
       member  of  staff  (who  recorded  his  name  as  Gaican)  that  the
       applicant's ARCard said he was an adult.   The  card  does  not  say
       that: it says that his age is disputed and gives a date of birth  of
       25 December 1998.  I am not satisfied that Mr Gailan [H] was in fact
       the 'Gaican' with whom the applicant stayed out overnight in August.



Respondent's witnesses

   88. I consider the respondent's  witness  evidence.   It  is  more  than
       usually unhelpful in this application.  Mr Kato is a  social  worker
       and a stranger, who saw the applicant only briefly.  He  is  exactly
       the type of witness that the Tribunal in  AM  (Solihull)  considered
       was unlikely to be able  to  help  me  very  much.   Ms  Branthwaite
       interacted with the applicant for 5 hours a week, for  less  than  a
       month (I accept  that  she  had  some  telephone  contact  with  the
       applicant thereafter).  She was inexperienced and I  have  concluded
       that I can place very little weight on her evidence.

   89. Ms Brown, from whom I have a witness statement but no oral evidence,
       is by far the most experienced and qualified  care  worker  who  has
       given evidence about the applicant.  She has worked for 23 years  in
       the caring sector, with young people from multicultural backgrounds,
       and varied needs.  She is highly qualified,  with  QCF  Level  5  in
       Leadership and Management in Health and Social Care, Advanced  Level
       5 Counselling and Psychology, Level 4  Social  Work  Management  and
       Level 3 Child and Adult Social Care.  Ms Brown was  responsible  for
       the applicant in the accommodation (Tudor Gardens) which she managed
       for Above and Beyond Care from 31 August 2018  until  at  least  the
       date of her statement,  19  October  2018.   Her  evidence  was  not
       controversial,  though  each  party  sought  to  place  a  different
       interpretation on parts of her statement.

   90. Ms Brown did not attend for cross-examination  because  she  was  on
       annual leave.  Her evidence was not tested, but  in  any  event,  it
       would not have assisted the applicant: she considered that  although
       he missed his mother, and could be playful and silly (and  sometimes
       annoyingly so) he was older than he said he was, as set out  in  her
       email to Mr Poole of 11 October 2018, following a  request  from  Mr
       Poole for her to comment on his age and maturity.  Mr Poole's  email
       to Ms Brown noted that Ms Brown thought he was an adult but did  not
       want to put that on record.  Following a  reminder  that  the  local
       authority had a responsibility not to place adults with children, Ms
       Brown emailed in return, setting out her views:

    "...I explained to [Mr Kato] that although  I  think  he  is  more  age
    advanced, he continuously displays a childish behaviour, which  I  have
    also mentioned in one of the questions' response, that he comes  across
    as a child trapped in a young person's  body,  maybe  to  distract  the
    attention around his overall experience.

    Such behaviours can range from sitting on  the  floor,  and  at  times,
    curled up with head in his hands, and crying out 'I  want  my  mum'  to
    other times when he would just demonstrate an overall giggling  nature,
    as if nothing is taken seriously.


    ...Please refer to our previous young person (KF) who was of  the  same
    situation, and I was totally in agreement with  his  age  dispute,  and
    likewise this young person in question which I can totally say  is  not
    the given age.  And yes, it is  clear  to  see  that  he  is  more  age
    advanced than he is making out. ...Kind regards, Mary Brown"

   91. That is the evidence on which the Upper Tribunal is required to make
       a finding  of  fact  as  to  this  applicant's  age.   The  multiple
       discrepancies which I have identified above are  not  explicable  by
       the applicant's mental health difficulties: I ask myself  therefore,
       why he would lie if his age is as stated, in  particular  about  the
       mobile phone, the PlayStation, and about his friendships with Mr [S]
       and Mr Gailan.

   92. I can find no reason  for  the  applicant  to  give  untruthful  and
       contradictory evidence, other than to give the impression that he is
       younger. Taking all the evidence before me into  account  and  doing
       the best I can with that evidence I am satisfied that this applicant
       is older than he claims, but not as old as the respondent  considers
       him to be.  I find that he was born in the Gregorian  calendar  year
       of 1999 and is now over 20 years old.

Decision

   93. The respondent's assessment of the applicant's age, dated  28  March
       2018, is hereby quashed.

   94. I declare that the applicant's date of birth is 25 December 1999.

Costs

   95. Costs are to be determined on the following basis:


    a) Within 14 days of the sealing of this  Order,  the  applicant  shall
       file and serve written submissions on costs, limited to 2 A4 pages.



    b)  Within  14  days  of  the  service  of  the   applicant's   written
       submissions, the respondent shall file and serve written submissions
       on costs, limited to 2 A4 pages.


    c) Within 7 days of service of the  respondent's  written  submissions,
       the applicant may if so advised serve a response thereto, limited to
       1 A4 page.


    d) There shall be legal aid  assessment  of  the  applicant's  publicly
       funded costs.

Costs

   96. There was no application by either party for permission to appeal to
       the Court of Appeal.  The decision was handed down in the absence of
       both representatives, at their request.

   97. I have considered for myself whether I should  grant  permission  to
       appeal, as I am required to do by paragraph 44(4B) of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 [as amended].

   98. I refuse permission because I am not satisfied  that  there  is  any
       arguable error of law in the judgment I have given today.

