

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/5653/2019


                                     Heard at Field House on 3 December 2019


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                                   BEFORE

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL NORTON-TAYLOR




        The Queen on the application of Ziad A A MUNTASER and Others
                                                                  Applicants
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                                  JUDGMENT


Representation:
For the applicants:    Mr J Middleton, of Counsel,  instructed  by  Kingsley
                 Napley LLP Solicitors
For  the  Respondent:     Mr  B  Seifert,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  the
                 Government Legal Department


Introduction

   1. The first applicant is the husband of the second. The first and second
      applicants are the parents of the  third  and  fourth.  It  is  common
      ground that the success of the second, third,  and  fourth  applicants
      depends entirely upon that of  the  first  applicant.  Thus,  for  the
      purposes of my decision, I shall refer to the first applicant as  "the
      applicant".


   2. By an application for judicial review made on  7  November  2019,  the
      applicant seeks to challenge the respondent's ongoing failure to  make
      a decision on his application for indefinite leave to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom as a Tier 1 Investor ("the ILR application"), made on 4
      October 2016, with his immediate family members as dependents.

   3. Accompanying the judicial review application was  an  application  for
      expedition. The matter initially came before me on 7 November 2019 for
      urgent consideration. I directed, on an exceptional  basis,  that  the
      judicial  review  application  be  dealt  with  at  what  is  commonly
      described  as  a  "rolled-up"  hearing  in  which  the  questions   of
      permission and, if that were to be granted,  the  substantive  merits,
      would be addressed on the same occasion. The respondent  was  directed
      to file and serve an Acknowledgement of Service  within  a  restricted
      timeframe. This has been complied with.

Background

   4. A detailed presentation of the relevant  factual  background  to  this
      case is set out in paras 13-66 of the Statement of Facts  and  Grounds
      and Chronology attached to the judicial review  application  form.  In
      terms of the underlying factual accuracy contained therein, there  is,
      as confirmed by Mr Seifert at the hearing, no material dispute between
      the parties. In light of this,  I  do  not  propose  to  set  out  the
      background in great detail. What follows is by way  of  a  summary  of
      relevant circumstances and events.


   5. The applicant and his family members are  all  Libyan  nationals.  The
      applicant is now aged 74 and his wife is 64. They have resided in  the
      United Kingdom lawfully since their arrival  in  2011.  The  applicant
      entered this country as a Tier 1 Investor pursuant to para  245EB  and
      Appendix A of the Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules").  The  third  and
      fourth applicants were already in the United Kingdom as  students.  In
      2015, the applicant and his wife  were  granted  extensions  of  their
      initial leave in accordance with the Rules on Tier  1  Investors.  The
      third and fourth applicants were granted limited leave to remain on an
      exceptional basis.

   6. On 4 October 2016, the  ILR  application  was  made  using  the  Super
      Premium service. The basis of this was  the  5-year  lawful  residence
      accrued by the applicant in this country  since  his  entry  in  2011.
      Biometric  enrolment  followed  three  days  later.  The   applicant's
      solicitors then began what has transpired  to  be  a  very  protracted
      correspondence exercise with the respondent as to the  progression  of
      the ILR application. On 19  October  2016,  the  respondent  requested
      additional information from the applicant  as  to  his  background  in
      Libya. This aspect of the applicant's history requires some expansion.

   7. The applicant spent most of his working life in Libya in the field  of
      engineering and construction. A maternal uncle of his  had  served  as
      Prime Minister in the 1950s and 1960s. Following the 1969 coup led  by
      Colonel Gaddafi, that uncle was detained and killed. Having spent some
      time studying in the United Kingdom, the applicant returned to  Libya.
      As result of his familial connections, the applicant was  detained  by
      the Revolutionary Guard  and  tortured.  Following  his  release,  the
      applicant became the Chairman and General Manager of  the  Arab  Union
      Contracting Company ("AUCC") and ran it as a  successful  construction
      business. In 2006, and as a result of the desire  of  one  of  Colonel
      Gaddafi's sons to take over the company, the  applicant  resigned  his
      post and was appointed to the role of the Libyan Ambassador to Turkey.
      He held this position until 2011, when the Gaddafi regime fell.  Prior
      to this, the applicant had expressed support for the overthrow of  the
      regime. He had never undertaken any political role within the  regime.
      The  Turkish  authorities  had  no  concerns  about  the   applicant's
      activities and the entire family was granted residency in  Turkey.  In
      2012, the applicant was temporarily placed on an asset seizure list by
      the National Transitional Council in  Libya.  Having  petitioned  this
      body, his name was removed from the list in October 2013. All  of  the
      applicant's circumstances relating to his career in Libya and his role
      as the Ambassador, were set out in a detailed note  submitted  to  the
      respondent in response to a request.


   8. There then followed a period of regular  chasing  by  the  applicant's
      solicitors, with a number of responses to  the  effect  that  the  ILR
      application would be decided shortly. On 21  December  2016  an  email
      from  the  Super  Premium  service  team  acknowledged  that  the  ILR
      application was taking longer to process than anticipated. It was said
      that, "in cases of a complex nature it is  necessary  to  undertake  a
      thorough investigation of the facts. In some instances, these have  to
      be pursued at length... I can assure you  the  case  is  under  active
      consideration...". In January 2017 the applicant was informed that  no
      further information or documentation was required from him.  Over  the
      next six months or so, there was a series of failures  to  respond  to
      chasing emails from the applicant's  solicitors.  In  June  2017,  the
      solicitors were informed that there was an intention  to  contact  the
      applicant "within the next six weeks". At this stage,  the  suggestion
      was made  by  the  solicitors  that  the  applicant  should  meet  the
      respondent's representatives. In  August  2017,  the  solicitors  were
      informed by the respondent that there was a "resource issue" which was
      continuing to cause delay. Further chasing correspondence followed. In
      early March 2018, the respondent indicated that the applicant would be
      called for an interview "as soon as is possible". A  couple  of  weeks
      later, and in the absence of any interview date being provided, a Pre-
      Action Protocol letter was sent  to  the  respondent.  A  second  such
      letter was issued in June 2018. Eventually, an interview was conducted
      on 12 September 2018. On 12 December 2018, the  particular  caseworker
      with conduct of the applicants ILR application confirmed the intention
      to make a decision no later than 31 January 2019. A  day  before  that
      deadline, the caseworker responded to an  email  from  the  solicitors
      confirming that he would be unable to reach a decision on time. No new
      timeframe was provided. On 2 April 2019, the applicant made his  first
      judicial review application (JR/1818/2019). An application to expedite
      those proceedings was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on 2  April
      2019. Before a decision on permission was made, the respondent offered
      to compromise the proceedings by way of a consent order.  That  order,
      sealed by the Upper Tribunal on 28 May 2019, read as follows:


           "UPON  the  Respondent  agreeing  to  make  a  decision  on  the
           Applicants indefinite  leave  to  remain  application  within  4
           months from the date of the sealed  consent  order,  absent  any
           special circumstances;


           BY CONSENT, it is ordered that:-
                    1. The Applicant do have leave to  withdraw  the  above-
                       numbered claim for judicial review.
                    2. There be no order as to costs."

   9. The judicial review application was duly withdrawn. In the  event,  no
      decision was made within the  four-month  timeframe  set  out  in  the
      consent order. On 7 October 2019, the applicant's  solicitors  sent  a
      Pre-Action Protocol letter,  giving  notice  that  a  second  judicial
      review application would be made within 28 days unless a  decision  on
      the ILR application had been made.  The  response  to  the  Pre-Action
      Protocol letter included the following passages:


           "Firstly, please accept our apologies for the failure to make  a
           decision by 28 September 2019, as  agreed  by  a  consent  order
           following previous litigation.
           Consideration of your client's case  has  continued  during  the
           period from May 2019 to date and the SSHD  continues  to  gather
           and evaluate information in order to assess whether your  client
           meets the requirements to be granted ILR as set out in paragraph
           245EF.
           Therefore, active  consideration  will  continue  and  when  all
           enquiries have been  completed,  we  will  make  a  decision  as
           quickly as possible thereafter."

  10. No decision was made within the relevant period and so the application
      for judicial review now under consideration was made.

The applicant's written case

  11. In summary, the applicant's case can be stated as follows. As  to  the
      underlying facts, it is asserted that the applicant  has  been  wholly
      transparent about all relevant matters concerning his  time  in  Libya
      and the United Kingdom. He has engaged proactively with the  decision-
      making process throughout. The respondent has been provided  with  all
      relevant material There is nothing in his  case  to  suggest  any  bad
      character or other considerations which might lead to a refusal of the
      ILR application (with particular reference to Part 9  of  the  Rules).
      The applicant has been led to believe that his case was to  have  been
      decided relatively speedily  (or  at  least  without  any  significant
      delay) at various stages over the last  three  years.  Any  suggestion
      that the applicant's case is so complex  as  to  justify  the  ongoing
      delay is misplaced: there is nothing complex  about  the  application,
      or, even if there was, it should not have taken this long  to  resolve
      in any event.

  12. As to the legal basis for the judicial review challenge, the applicant
      puts forward four grounds:

              i. That the respondent has acted unlawfully by failing to make
                 a decision on the ILR application within a reasonable time;
             ii. That the respondent has failed to comply with her policy on
                 deciding ILR applications;
            iii. That the delay and mishandling of the ILR application
                 amounts to an abuse of power;
             iv. That the delay resulted in a violation of the applicant's
                 rights under Article 8 ECHR.

  13. In terms of relief sought, the applicant asks for a  declaration  that
      the respondent's failure to make a decision on the ILR application  is
      unlawful, and that there be a mandatory order requiring the respondent
      to make a decision on the application within 28 days.

The respondent's written case

  14. The Acknowledgement of Service is relatively brief and to  the  point.
      There is an assertion in the first paragraph that:

           "The delay has been caused by the complexity of the case,  which
           a specialist team is handling due to  the  Applicant's  previous
           career in Libya."

  15. The second paragraph goes on to state:

            "Despite this, the  Respondent  has  decided  she  will  aim  to
           provide a decision within three months from the date  of  filing
           of this AOS (absent special circumstances)."


  16. In light of the above, it is then asserted that this  application  for
      judicial review  has  been  rendered  "entirely  academic",  and  that
      permission should be refused. Three cases are cited in support of  the
      contention  that  applicant's  case  should   not   be   substantively
      considered. The first is R v SSHD, ex parte Salem [1999] 1 AC 450,  at
      457A:

           "The discretion to hear disputes, even in  the  area  of  public
           law, must, however, be exercised with caution and appeals  which
           are academic between the parties  should  not  be  heard  unless
           there is a good reason in the public interest for doing  so,  as
           for example (but only by way of example) when a  discrete  point
           of statutory construction arises which does not involve detailed
           consideration of facts and where a large number of similar cases
           exist or are anticipated so that the issue will most likely need
           to be resolved in the near future."

  17. The second is R (Zoolife International Ltd.) v SSEFRA [2007] EWHC 2995
      (Admin), with particular reference to paras 13 and 36. Para 13 states:

           "These points are particularly potent at present time where  the
           administrative court is  completely  overrun  with  immigration,
           asylum and other cases and where it would  be  contrary  to  the
           overriding objectives of the CPR for  an  academic  case  to  be
           pursued, after  all,  one  of  those  overriding  objectives  is
           'dealing  with  a  case  justly  [which]  includes  so  far   as
           practicable allotting to it an appropriate share of  the  courts
           resources while taking into account the need to allot  resources
           to other cases.'"

  18. The third case relied upon is R v BBC ex parte Quintavelle  (1998)  10
      Admin LR 425. It is said that this supports the respondent's view that
      the aim to make a decision in the present  case  within  three  months
      means that there is no relief which the Upper Tribunal can grant  that
      would hold any value for the applicant.

Oral submissions

  19. I hope I do no disservice to Counsel  by  not  setting  out  the  oral
      submissions at length here. I will deal with relevant aspects of  what
      each had to say when setting out my conclusions and reasons, below.

  20. Suffice it to say that Mr Middleton relied on his  skeleton  argument,
      which itself reflected what is set out in the statement of  facts  and
      grounds of challenge. Having criticised the respondent's argument that
      this claim is now academic, Mr  Middleton  took  me  through  relevant
      aspects of the factual  history  of  the  case  contained  within  the
      statement of  facts  and  the  helpful  chronology  contained  in  the
      applicant's bundle. The core thrust of his submissions  was  that,  in
      light of the accepted  factual  history  (described  in  the  skeleton
      argument as being "forlorn"), the respondent's failure to have made  a
      decision on the  ILR  application  was  so  flagrantly  unfair  as  to
      constitute a public law error. The  respondent  had  failed  over  the
      course of time to comply with timeframes  she  herself  had  set;  had
      failed to provide any substantial updates as to the progression of the
      ILR application; had failed to adduce any evidence in support  of  the
      contention that the case was complex; and had compounded  the  already
      significant delay by then failing to comply with the agreed  timeframe
      contained in the consent order of 28 May 2019.

  21. Whilst all grounds of challenge were relied on, Mr Middleton  accepted
      that if the first ground was made out, this would  be  sufficient  for
      the applicant to be entitled to the relief sought. Ultimately, all the
      applicant wanted was to have a decision on the ILR application.

  22. Mr Seifert relied on the Acknowledgement of Service. He  accepted  the
      applicable  legal  framework  set  out  applicant's  grounds  and   Mr
      Middleton's skeleton argument. As mentioned earlier in my decision, he
      also accepted the underlying factual basis as set out in the statement
      of facts and chronology.

  23. It  was  submitted  that  the  applicant's  case  involved  what  were
      described as "exceptional circumstances", requiring the  gathering  of
      evidence. The respondent  had  acted  with  every  good  intention  to
      provide a decision within a reasonable time.

  24. During the course of  the  hearing,  Mr  Seifert  had  sought  further
      instructions as to a possible  compromise  of  these  proceedings.  He
      confirmed that the respondent was now willing to agree that she  would
      "agree" to make a decision on the ILR application within 3 months from
      14 November 2019. However, she was unwilling to give an undertaking to
      that effect  (apparently,  no  such  undertakings  are  now  given  in
      proceedings).

  25. Having given Mr Middleton the opportunity to take further instructions
      on this development, he confirmed that this "offer"  was  unacceptable
      to the applicant, given the history of this  case  and  in  particular
      what had occurred in respect of the previous consent order.

  26. Mr Seifert maintained the respondent's position that in light of  what
      is said in the Acknowledgement of Service and given the  latest  offer
      of an agreement to make a decision within a  fixed  time  period,  the
      applicant's case was academic.

Is this judicial review application academic?

  27. It is sensible to deal with the  question  of  whether  this  judicial
      review application is academic first. For the reasons set out below, I
      conclude that it is not, and that the respondent's  position  on  this
      issue is misconceived.

  28. The central basis of the applicant's challenge is that there has  been
      a  failure  to  make  an  actual  decision  on  his  ILR  application,
      notwithstanding previous assertions by  the  respondent  that  such  a
      decision was to have been made within  various  timeframes,  the  most
      recent of these being 4 months from the sealing of the  consent  order
      on  28  May  2019.  Thus,  the  respondent's   confirmation   in   the
      Acknowledgement of Service that she "aims" to make a decision within a
      new timeframe (absent special circumstances) clearly did not have  the
      result that the applicant has achieved all that  he  could  hope  for.
      This is not a case in which, for example, the  reconsideration  of  an
      existing decision is the ultimate goal. The applicant  is  challenging
      the failure to make a decision, and that central contention is  in  no
      way remedied by the respondent's confirmation.

  29. The proposed agreement (as opposed to an "aim")  put  forward  by  the
      respondent at the hearing in no way detracts from the  appropriateness
      of  considering  the  substance  of  the  applicant's   case.   Whilst
      "agreement" carries greater value than merely an "aim", it is  clearly
      some distance short of an undertaking. This, in conjunction  with  the
      history of the  case,  makes  the  applicant's  refusal  to  accept  a
      compromise at this stage entirely reasonable.

  30. To put it in the words of Lord Slynn in Salem, there is very  much  an
      existing matter of controversy between  the  parties.  Therefore,  the
      issue of  whether  any  exceptional  circumstances  exist  to  justify
      proceeding to hear the applicant's case simply does not arise here.

  31. Finally, the relief sought by the applicant in this case  retains  its
      value. A declaration  as  to  the  unlawfulness  of  the  respondent's
      failure to make a decision may still be appropriate in light  of  that
      ongoing failure. In addition, and more importantly, a mandatory  order
      would, on the applicant's case, be of central importance to his desire
      to extract a decision from the respondent. Such a decision  is,  after
      all, all that the applicant asks for.

Ground 1: is the respondent's ongoing failure to have  made  a  decision  on
the ILR application unlawful?

  32. The basic legal framework relating to the issue of unlawful  delay  is
      uncontroversial. The respondent is  obliged  to  decide  validly  made
      applications within a "reasonable time" (see, for example, R  (FH  and
      Others) v SSHD [2007]  EWHC  1571  (Admin),  at  para  6,  and  R  (AC
      (Algeria) [2019] EWHC 188 (Admin), at para  61).  What  constitutes  a
      "reasonable  time"  will  depend  very  much   upon   the   particular
      circumstances of any given case (AC (Algeria), at para  61).  Relevant
      factors  may  include:  applicable  policies;  other  calls   on   the
      respondent's resources; the extent to which the applicant is compliant
      with the decision-making process; the complexity of the case; and  the
      nature of any information required and how readily this may  be  done.
      Importantly, in order to cross the line from mere ineptitude  or  poor
      standards of service to that of unlawfulness, the applicant must  show
      that the respondent's failure is Wednesbury unreasonable in the  sense
      that it is irrational. It will no doubt  be  a  very  unusual  case  -
      indeed, an  exceptional  one  -  which  will  be  able  to  meet  that
      threshold.

  33. The first point to make is the actual period of time with which  I  am
      concerned: a day short of 38 months.  That  is  an  inordinate  delay.
      Having said that, the simple fact of the delay is insufficient to make
      out the unlawfulness challenge. It  is  the  particular  circumstances
      relating to the delay that are all-important.

  34. It is manifestly the case that the applicant has not simply cooperated
      with the decision-making process, but has been proactive in  providing
      the respondent with relevant information (with  evidence  in  support)
      from the very beginning of his immigration history. His former role as
      the  Libyan  Ambassador  to  Turkey  was  acknowledged  in  the  entry
      clearance application made in September 2011. Having presumably  given
      careful consideration to that application, entry  clearance  was  duly
      granted. All relevant information was then set out  in  the  extension
      application made in 2015. This application  was  also  granted.  Thus,
      when it came to the ILR application in October 2016, the applicant was
      already well-known to the respondent. This is relevant to the question
      of  delay  because,  unlike  in  an  asylum  case,  for  example,  the
      respondent was not considering  the  applicant's  application  from  a
      position of complete (or near complete) ignorance of the  individual's
      circumstances. In this regard, the fact that  cases  such  as  FH  and
      Others  and  AC  (Algeria)  concerned  delays   in   deciding   asylum
      applications does  not  undermine  the  strength  of  the  applicant's
      challenge; indeed, if anything, it places the adverse  nature  of  the
      respondent's delay in sharper relief.

  35. When it came to the ILR application, full  and  frank  disclosure  was
      made  once  more.  When,  some  two  weeks  after  having   made   the
      application, the respondent requested the applicant to provide further
      information about his career  and  activities  in  Libya,  a  detailed
      background note was provided two days later. On any  view,  that  note
      can only be described as exceptionally thorough.

  36. In light of the above, it is quite clear that the applicant has at all
      times placed  his  metaphorical  cards  face  up  on  the  table,  for
      consideration by the respondent.

  37. Both before and soon after  the  background  note  was  provided,  the
      applicant had been given clear indications by the respondent  that  is
      application would be decided shortly. These of  course  proved  to  be
      wholly inaccurate, a state of affairs which is something of a theme in
      this case.

  38. The issue of complexity is relied upon  by  the  respondent  in  these
      proceedings as the sole explanation for the ongoing delay. There are a
      number of serious difficulties with the respondent's position.  First,
      there is no evidence before  me  from  the  respondent  whatsoever  in
      support of the bare  assertion  set  out  in  the  Acknowledgement  of
      Service. For example, there is nothing by way of a statement of  truth
      from a relevant caseworker, setting out at least an indication of  the
      claimed complexity. Second, as far as I can see, there has never  been
      any  evidence  provided  to  the  applicant  concerning  the  possible
      complexity of his application. Third, whilst it  is  not  my  role  to
      examine the merits of the ILR application itself, there is strength in
      Mr Middleton's submission that, at least on the face of  the  evidence
      provided by the applicant over the course of time, it is difficult  to
      detect any particular complexity in what he has had  to  say.  Fourth,
      the question of complexity was alluded to by the  respondent  as  long
      ago as late December 2016. Yet, save for passing mentions  in  letters
      to the applicant's solicitors dated 3 April 2018 and 29 May 2018,  the
      issue  does  not  appear  to  have  been  raised   again   until   the
      Acknowledgement  of  Service.  There  has  been  no  attempt   at   an
      explanation as to whether either: a)  the  claimed  complexity  raised
      December 2016 has proved insurmountable  ever  since;  and/or  b)  new
      matters of complexity have come to light in the intervening period  (I
      shall return to this last point, below). Fifth, it is of note that  in
      January 2017, the respondent informed the applicant  that  no  further
      information or documentation was  required  from  him.  This  acts  to
      highlight  the  difficulties  in  the  respondent's  reliance  on  the
      complexity issue: if the respondent was of the view that she  had  all
      she required as of January 2017 at the latest, it raises the  question
      of how it can rationally be said, even now, that the complexity of the
      case justifies the delay?

  39. In any event, even if the case has  been,  and  remains,  regarded  as
      complex, there has been nothing by way of substantive explanation, now
      or during the last three years, as to the nature of  any  "exceptional
      circumstances" (a  phrase  used  by  Mr  Seifert  in  submissions)  or
      "special circumstances" arising in the case. In the context  of  other
      actions  and  inaction  by  the  respondent,  this  failure   achieves
      particular significance in terms of the lawfulness of the delay.

  40. There have been at least two relatively significant periods of may  be
      described as "radio silence" on the respondent's  part,  during  which
      the  applicant's  efforts  to  chase-up  his  application  were   left
      unanswered. Between February  2017  and  June  2017,  and  then  again
      between August 2017 through to the end  of  that  year,  the  accepted
      chronology includes repeated references  to  "no  response"  from  the
      respondent. Seen in isolation, this might not  amount  to  very  much.
      However, context is important. Prior to these periods,  the  applicant
      had already been given inaccurate timeframes for the determination  of
      his ILR application and had been told that no further information  was
      required from him. I conclude  that  the  failure  to  have  responded
      during these two periods  is  relevant  to  my  consideration  of  the
      respondent's overall conduct.

  41. Having been told in late June 2017 that progress was being made on the
      ILR application, the applicant was told that there was an intention to
      contact him within the next six weeks. As  is  abundantly  clear  from
      what followed, the concept of "progress" was misguided, as  apparently
      was the intention to make contact. In fact, the undisputed facts  show
      that it was the applicant who was then proactively seeking to  have  a
      meeting with the respondent as soon as possible.

  42. The respondent's failings  at  this  juncture  were  compounded  by  a
      response some two months later that there was a "resource issue" which
      was continuing to cause delays. I agree with Mr Middleton's submission
      that the respondent  cannot  have  it  both  ways;  on  the  one  hand
      asserting that the applicant's ILR application was "progressing" under
      "active consideration", whilst on the  other  claiming  that  resource
      problems were apparently preventing this from occurring. In  my  view,
      this is a further example  of  the  material  inconsistencies  in  the
      respondent's approach to the applicant's case over the course of time.

  43. Between the middle of September 2017  and  April  2018,  there  was  a
      failure to provide the applicant and  his  family  with  either  their
      Libyan passports or written confirmation of their continuing leave  to
      remain in the United Kingdom. There was never any explanation for this
      aspect of the delay. The passports were only returned in response to a
      Pre-Action Protocol letter, and the confirmation of  continuing  leave
      took a further two months to  arrive.  On  the  unchallenged  evidence
      before me, I am  satisfied  that  this  aspect  of  the  delay  had  a
      prejudicial impact upon the day-to-day lives of the applicant and  his
      family.

  44. I turn to the interview conducted  on  12  September  2018.  I  remind
      myself that  the  applicant  had  been  seeking  a  meeting  with  the
      respondent since June 2017. Having read the transcript for  myself,  I
      agree with Mr Middleton's  summary  of  what  the  interview  covered,
      namely the topics  of  the  applicant's  involvement  with  AUCC,  his
      response to the Libyan revolution of 2011, and his brief inclusion  on
      an assets seizure list issued by the National Transitional Council  in
      Libya. It is clear that no specific allegations relating to  character
      or past conduct were put to the applicant  at  the  interview.  I  see
      nothing arising  from  the  evidence  which  raised  any  prima  facie
      contradictions with information previously provided to the  respondent
      or any issues of particular complexity.

  45. In relation to the  assets  seizure  list,  I  note  that  documentary
      evidence showing that the applicant had been removed from it  in  2013
      had been sent to the respondent along  with  the  Pre-Action  Protocol
      letter dated 23 March 2018, some six months prior  to  the  interview.
      Further, following the interview, the applicant  submitted  additional
      documentation relating to the asset seizure list issue. At  no  stage,
      at least as far as  I  can  see,  has  the  respondent  indicated  any
      particular concern arising out of that documentation.

  46. A final point as regards the interview is this. Having apologised  for
      the applicant's case being in what was described as a "black hole" for
      some time,  the  caseworker  stated  that  there  would  not  be  "any
      blockages" and no need to refer  to  any  "external  agencies"  before
      deciding the ILR application. Any possible liaison  with  the  Foreign
      and Commonwealth Office was described as "pretty normal", and  it  was
      said that any impact  on  timeframes  would  be  communicated  to  the
      applicant should that occur. It is  apparent  that  no  communications
      were received following the  interview  to  indicate  any  new  issues
      giving rise to and/or perpetuating existing complexity.

  47. On 12 December  2018,  the  caseworker  expressly  stated  a  specific
      intention to make a decision no later than 31 January 2019.  Not  only
      was this timeframe missed, but the respondent  failed  to  proactively
      acknowledge the inability to  do  so:  once  again,  it  fell  to  the
      applicant to draw information out. This is an example of a failure  to
      meet a specific timeframe, but it is also indicative  of  the  overall
      conduct  of  the  respondent  in  respect  of  the   applicant's   ILR
      application.

  48. On 2 April 2019, the applicant made his first judicial  review  claim.
      The respondent proposed the settlement of  proceedings  by  way  of  a
      consent order. I have quoted the terms of that order earlier  in  this
      decision. Mr Middleton is correct in accepting that the failure of the
      respondent to meet the agreed timeframe set out in the recital to  the
      consent order did not amount to a breach of either an  undertaking  or
      the order itself (see R (MMK) v SSHD (consent orders - legal effect  -
      enforcement) [2017] UKUT 00198 (IAC), at [27]-[30]).  However,  in  my
      view, four relevant consequences flow from the  respondent's  failure.
      First, it provides good support for the applicant's  contention,  with
      which I have agreed, that the current proceedings  are  not  academic.
      Second, it represents a  further  example  of  an  expressed  deadline
      having been missed, without explanation, and in particular, without it
      then being asserted that  "special  circumstances"  in  fact  existed.
      Third, if  it  is  now  being  said,  retrospectively,  that  "special
      circumstances"  prevented  the  timeframe  from  being  met,  this  is
      significantly undermined by  the  absence  of  any  evidence  to  that
      effect. Fourth, it does nothing to inspire much confidence as  to  the
      respondent's current position in these proceedings (which changed from
      expressing  an  "aim"  in  the  Acknowledgement  of  Service   to   an
      "agreement" by way of instructions to Mr Seifert during the hearing).

  49. In all the circumstances, I regard the failure of  the  respondent  to
      abide by the agreed timeframe set out in the consent  order  to  be  a
      significant factor in this case.

  50. I now draw together all of the matters set out above to constitute the
      cumulative basis for my conclusion on ground 1. This unfortunate  case
      discloses, amongst other  matters:  a  litany  of  missed  timeframes;
      inaccurate assertions of progress; failures to  communicate  with  the
      applicant adequately or at all; prejudice to  the  applicant  and  his
      family; a failure to attempt to substantiate (even in  general  terms)
      any assertion of complexity; and a wholesale failure to abide  by  the
      agreement  set  out  in  a  consent  order.  None  of  the  delay   is
      attributable to the applicant. Indeed, his conduct and the efforts  of
      his solicitors have been commendable.

  51. When the relevant matters are viewed through the prism of  the  period
      of delay, this is one of the rare  cases  in  which  the  respondent's
      failure to make a decision is properly categorised as so egregious  as
      to be unlawful. It  goes  well  beyond  extremely  poor  standards  of
      service  or  maladministration.  It  is  manifestly  unreasonable  and
      irrational.

  52. Therefore, I grant permission on  ground  1,  dispense  with  relevant
      procedural requirements, conclude that the applicant succeeds on  this
      first basis of challenge,  and  grant  the  application  for  judicial
      review.

  53. This being the case,  I  do  not  regard  it  as  necessary  to  reach
      conclusions on the remaining grounds of challenge. That  is  certainly
      not to say that they are without  merit.  For  the  avoidance  of  any
      doubt, I have no hesitation in formally granting permission.  However,
      as Mr Middleton acknowledged during argument,  success  on  the  first
      ground is sufficient so far as the applicant is concerned.

  54. It follows from my conclusion on the applicant's case  that  his  wife
      and two children also succeed.

  55. I would like to state my gratitude to Mr Middleton and Mr Seifert  for
      their  assistance  in  this  matter.  In  addition,   I   express   my
      appreciation  of  the  exemplary  manner  in  which  the   applicant's
      solicitors have prepared this application for judicial review. Much is
      said in  tribunals  at  all  levels  about  poor  representation,  but
      acknowledgements of high quality work are a rarer thing. In this case,
      it is fully justified.

Summary of conclusions

  56. For the reasons set out above:

              i. The respondent's failure to make a  decision  on  the  four
                 applicants' ILR applications is unlawful;


             ii. The  four  applicants  succeed  in  their  application  for
                 judicial review.

Relief

  57. On the basis of what I have said above, the applicants are entitled to
      a declaration that the respondent's failure to make a decision on  the
      ILR applications made on 4 October 2016 is unlawful.

  58. The applicants also seek a  mandatory  order.  I  have  given  careful
      consideration to whether this is appropriate in all the circumstances.
      I conclude that  it  is,  having  regard  to  the  particular  history
      surrounding not just these proceedings but what preceded them.

  59. Whilst a timeframe of 28 days is sought, in view of the time  of  year
      at which that deadline would fall, I regard it as appropriate  to  set
      an alternative timeframe of 35 days from  the  handing  down  of  this
      judgment and the accompanying Order.



            Signed:    [pic]


                 Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor




        Dated:    5 December 2019



Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).




                                                                      UTIJR6

                                                                JR/5653/2019

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice





        The Queen on the application of Ziad A A Muntaser and Others
                                                                  Applicants
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                  Before Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


                   Application for judicial review: Order


Upon judgment being handed down on 5 December 2019

It is ordered that:

        1) The applicants' application for judicial review  is  granted  in
           accordance with the judgment handed down;

        2) The respondent's failure to make a decision on  the  applicants'
           application for Indefinite Leave to Remain, made  on  4  October
           2016, is unlawful;

        3) The respondent is to make a decision  on  the  four  applicants'
           applications for Indefinite Leave to Remain within  35  days  of
           the date of this Order, that being 5 December 2019.

Permission to appeal
Mr Siefert made an application in order  (quite  legitimately)  to  preserve
the respondent's position, given that he was unable to remain for the  whole
of the handing down hearing.

I refuse permission on the basis that there are no arguable  errors  of  law
in my judgment.

Costs

This issue is to be dealt with by way of written submissions.

        1) The applicants shall file and serve written submissions on costs
           no later than 4pm on 20 December 2019;

        2) The respondent shall file and serve a response no later than 4pm
           on 9 January 2020;

        3) The applicant, if so advised, may file and serve a reply to  the
           respondent's response no later than 4pm 16 January 2020.


Signed:          [pic]

                             Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


Dated:           5 December 2019





Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


