
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/5077/2019  |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |The Queen on the application of              |              |
|              |AZ                                           |              |
|              |(Anonymity Direction Made)                   |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |versus                                       |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |Secretary of State for the Home Department   |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |
|ORDER                                                                      |
|              |                                             |              |


BEFORE Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

HAVING considered all documents lodged and having heard Mr A Chakmakjian  of
counsel, instructed by Healy's LLP, for the applicant and Mr Z Malik Q.C  of
counsel, instructed by GLD, for the respondent at  a  hearing  on  25  March
2021

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

    1) The application for judicial review is refused for the reasons in the
       attached judgment.


    2) The applicant is to pay the respondent's costs on a  standard  basis,
       to be assessed if not agreed.


    3) Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is  refused  because  the
       Tribunal does not consider that its decision involved the  making  of
       an error of law or that there is a point of law of public  importance
       such that permission to appeal should be granted.



    4) Having had regard  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
       Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No1 of  2013:
       Anonymity Orders, it  is  appropriate  to  make  an  anonymity  order
       because to reveal the applicant's identity might place her at risk.



           Anonymity Order



           "Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
           applicant is granted anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings
           shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
           family.  This direction applies  to  amongst  others,  both  the
           appellant and  the  respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
           direction could lead to a contempt of court proceedings".



      Signed:     R J Owens


                 Upper Tribunal Judge Owens


      Dated:           21 September 2021


The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors  on  (date):
22 September 2021

Solicitors:
Ref No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).





IAC-AH-BW-V2

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                   JUDGMENT HANDED DOWN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/5077/2019

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                               25 March 2021


                                  The QUEEN
                         (ON The application OF AZ)
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr A Chakmakjian, instructed by Healys LLP appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr Z Malik Q.C, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE OWENS:  This  is  an  application  for  judicial  review  of  the
    respondent's  decision  of  24  July  2019  refusing  the   applicant's
    application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom  as  a  stateless
    person.  The decision  was  upheld  on  administrative  review  by  the
    respondent on 20 August 2019.  The issue in this  review  concerns  the
    proper interpretation of paragraph 403(c) of the Immigration  Rules  in
    respect of admissibility of a stateless  person  to  their  country  of
    former habitual residence or any other country.  The single  ground  of
    judicial review is that the respondent's definition of "admissible"  in
    the  context  of  paragraph  403(c)  is  unlawful,  irrational   and/or
    inconsistent with her own policy.

Immigration history


 2. The applicant was born in Kuwait and is stateless.

 3. The applicant entered the United Kingdom on a visit visa using a  valid
    "Article 17" travel document issued by the Kuwaiti  government.   On  9
    January 2018 she applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a
    stateless person pursuant to paragraph 403 of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The basis of her application was that she had  provided  evidence  that
    her nationality had been withdrawn and she had unsuccessfully attempted
    to obtain Kuwaiti nationality. It  had  been  problematic  for  her  to
    continue to reside in Kuwait without nationality because of the  denial
    of her civil rights such as education, healthcare and employment.   She
    does not have any form of civil identity documentation in Kuwait.   She
    claims to have used a false identity in  order  to  attend  school  and
    drive and that this has now  come  to  the  attention  of  the  Kuwaiti
    government.  Every time she travels out of Kuwait her  travel  document
    is retained and she is provided with a letter which she must use to re-
    enter Kuwait.

 5. The focus of the supporting representations  was  in  relation  to  the
    applicant's status as a stateless person in Kuwait.  The applicant  has
    not claimed asylum or lodged a human rights claim.

 6. After  she  lodged  her  application,  the  respondent  requested  more
    information in respect of the applicant's admissibility to  Kuwait.  In
    response on 17 April  2019,  the  appellant's  representative  AMZ  Law
    stated that "the question of  admissibility  is  not  relevant  to  the
    issues in our client's case because our client is a refugee because her
    situation is analogous to an undocumented Bidoon".

The Secretary of State's Decision

 7. In the decision dated 24 July 2019 it is not accepted by the respondent
    that the applicant is not admissible to Kuwait  because  the  applicant
    provided a valid Kuwaiti "Article 17" travel document that  expired  on
    20 March 2020.  The applicant has  previously  used  this  document  to
    travel to and  from  Kuwait.  She  has  failed  to  provide  sufficient
    evidence that she is no longer admissible to Kuwait.

 8. Further the respondent does not accept that the applicant is  not  able
    to return to Kuwait because she does not have  access  to  other  basic
    rights  because  she  provided  to  the   respondent   an   educational
    certificate and a document confirming her lack of  Kuwaiti  citizenship
    provided by the Kuwaiti authorities. Both documents  were  in  her  own
    name.

 9. The application also initially fell for refusal under paragraph  403(b)
    and (d), however on administrative review  these  reasons  for  refusal
    fell away because it is accepted that the applicant  is  stateless  and
    her "Article 17" travel document was accepted as genuine.

10. On review, the  respondent  reiterated  that  the  applicant  holds  an
    "Article 17" travel document which allows  the  applicant  to  re-enter
    Kuwait and referred to the Home Office Country Information and Guidance
    on Kuwait in this respect. It is said that the  applicant's  county  of
    former habitual residence is Kuwait and that she is entitled to  return
    there to take up permanent residence.

Permission to appeal

11. Permission to appeal for judicial review was granted by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kopieczek on oral renewal on 16  December  2019.   The  grant  of
    permission is in the following terms:

         "It  is  arguable  that  the   respondent's   decision   unlawfully
         interprets 'admissible' in  paragraph  403(c)  of  the  Immigration
         Rules as meaning simply 'permitted to enter' (in this case Kuwait),
         whereas  arguably  that   interpretation   is   inconsistent   with
         international instruments dealing with statelessness and  with  the
         respondent's own guidance".

Issue

12. The issue in this appeal is  the  proper  interpretation  of  the  word
    admissible in paragraph 403(c) of the Immigration Rules and whether the
    respondent  has  lawfully  applied  that  term   to   the   applicant's
    application.

13. It is submitted by the applicant that the Secretary of State's  failure
    to adopt the correct interpretation when  considering  the  applicant's
    application renders the application unlawful.   It  is  said  that  the
    respondent's interpretation is  contrary  to  the  principles  and  the
    objectives of the Convention. Further, reliance is placed on R (on  the
    application of Semeda) v  SSHD  (statelessness;  Pham  [2015]  UKSC  10
    applied)  IJR  [2015]   UKUT   00658   (IAC).    The   respondent   has
    straightforwardly failed to apply her policy  which  is  a  public  law
    error.

14. I begin by setting out the relevant provisions of the  current  version
    of the Immigration Rules HC 395 Part 14 Stateless persons. The  version
    in force at the date of the application and original decision  has  now
    been amended but this has no bearing on this application in relation to
    paragraph 403(c) which remains the same.

15. Definition of a stateless person;

         "401. For the purposes of this Part a stateless person is a  person
                who;

                (a)    satisfies the requirements of  Article  1(1)  of  the
                      1954 United Nations Convention relating to the Status
                      of  Stateless  Persons,  as  a  person  who  is   not
                      considered as a  national  by  any  state  under  the
                      operation of its law,

                (b)    is in the United Kingdom, and

                (c)    is not  excluded  from  recognition  as  a  stateless
                      person under paragraph 402".

         Requirements for limited leave to remain as a stateless person;

         "403.    The requirements for leave to remain in the United Kingdom
                as a stateless person are that the applicant:

                (a)    has made a valid  application  to  the  Secretary  of
                    State for limited leave to remain as a stateless person,

                (b)    is recognised as a stateless person by the  Secretary
                    of State in accordance with paragraph 401,

                (c)    is not admissible to their country of former habitual
                    residence or any other country, and

                (d)    has obtained and submitted all  reasonably  available
                    evidence to enable the Secretary of State  to  determine
                    whether they are stateless".

         Refusal of limited leave to a stateless person;

         "404.    An applicant will be refused leave to remain in the United
                Kingdom as a stateless person if;

                (a)    they do not meet the requirements of paragraph 403;

                (b)    there are reasonable  grounds  for  considering  that
                    they are:

                    (i)      a danger to the security of the United Kingdom,

                    (ii)     a danger to the  public  order  of  the  United
                           Kingdom, or

                (c)    their application would fall to be refused under  any
                    of the grounds set out in paragraph 322 of these Rules".

Intensity of review

16. Mr Chakmakjian for the applicant submitted that the level  of  scrutiny
    in a case involving  the  United  Kingdom's  international  obligations
    should be exacting and intense.  He referred me to paragraphs [10]  and
    [30] of R (on the application of JM) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department (Statelessness; Part 14 of HC 395)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00676
    (hereinafter known as "JM (statelessness)") in this respect. The  Upper
    Tribunal endorses the approach that it  is  appropriate  to  impose  an
    exacting and intense standard of review in  a  case  which  involved  a
    question  of  whether  the  United  Kingdom  was  complying  with   its
    international obligations.  Mr Malik agreed with this analysis  of  the
    level of scrutiny required and I  see  no  need  to  depart  from  this
    principle.

Meaning of the word "admissible"

17. Mr Chakmakjian submitted that the proper  interpretation  of  paragraph
    403(c) of the Immigration Rules  is  that  an  applicant  can  only  be
    regarded as admissible to her country of former habitual  residence  if
    she can be admitted for the purposes of lawful and permanent residence.
    His submission is that admissible does not mean "able to obtain  entry"
    but in the context of the Statelessness Convention must denote more. In
    summary, he argued that the meaning of the word  "admissible"  must  be
    informed by the objectives of the Convention and  interpreted  to  give
    effect to the Convention. He referred me to UNHCR  reports,  the  UNHCR
    Handbook on Statelessness and the applicant's own policy as set out  in
    her Asylum Policy Instructions on statelessness.

18.  The  respondent  contends  that  "admissible"  means  "lies  within  a
    claimant's power to obtain admission".

Is the meaning of the word "admissible" settled by the Court of Appeal?

19. Mr Malik submits that the meaning of admissible is settled and has been
    explained by the Court of Appeal in JM(Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ
    188 ("JM (Zimbabwe)". The Upper Tribunal is bound by this.   The  Court
    of Appeal has held that an applicant can be regarded as  admissible  to
    her  country  of  former  habitual  residence  if  "it  lies  within  a
    claimant's power to obtain admission". (See JM  (Zimbabwe)  and  Teh  v
    Secretary of State [2018] EWHC 1586)

20. Mr Chakmakjian submits that the relevance  of  the  authorities  in  JM
    (statelessness) and JM  (Zimbabwe)  relate  to  a  discrete  point  and
    ultimately the prevention of the abuse of  the  Immigration  Rules  for
    those who have an entitlement to nationality and refuse to exercise the
    right which is a separate issue to that in this review because it is in
    a completely different context.

21. JM (statelessness) and JM (Zimbabwe) related  to  the  situation  of  a
    child of Zimbabwean origin, JM,  born  in  the  UK  who  did  not  have
    Zimbabwean nationality because although he had a right  or  entitlement
    to apply to register for Zimbabwean nationality his parent  had  failed
    to apply for it and the Court of Appeal was considering  paragraph  403
    of the immigration rules in the context of abuse. The child claimed not
    to be admissible because he  would  not  be  admitted  when  presenting
    himself at the border because of a lack of  documentation  which  is  a
    practical question.  The Court of Appeal rejected  that  interpretation
    because it would encourage fraud.  The  Court  of  Appeal  went  on  to
    interpret the words "admissible" to include not only being  immediately
    able to be physically admitted but to  be  "entitled  to  be  admitted"
    because it was open to the child to  apply  for  citizenship.  In  that
    context that the child would be in fact  returning  to  Zimbabwe  as  a
    national of that country with all of the rights and  status  that  that
    nationality would confer  on  him.   The  consideration  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the Court of Appeal did not  extend  for  this  reason  to
    whether the word "admissible" included  the  right  to  enter  for  the
    purpose of lawful and permanent residence because this was implicit  in
    the fact that he was entitled to nationality.

22. In JM (statelessness) Mr  Malik  represented  the  respondent  and  his
    submission at [38] was that the proper interpretation  of  "admissible"
    is that a person is either the national of a country or entitled to  be
    a national of the country.

23. Similarly, the case of Teh v Secretary of State [2018] EWHC  1586  does
    not assist Mr Malik's argument that this issue is settled.  In Teh  the
    High Court dealt with an individual who had voluntarily  renounced  his
    Malaysian citizenship and had declined  to  seek  to  re-establish  it.
    There was no question that if he regained his Malaysian citizenship, he
    would have all the  rights  and  obligations  of  Malaysian  nationals.
    Further, it was accepted by the judge that the applicant would not only
    be able to enter Malaysia but once there, he would be  able  to  reside
    there and would have various civil rights even whilst  he  was  waiting
    for his application for nationality to be processed.  Once  again,  the
    court did not consider the issue  of  whether  the  words  "admissible"
    included entry for the  purposes  of  lawful  and  permanent  residence
    because the issue was whether it was "within the appellant's  power  to
    obtain admission" and it was accepted that once  he  had  regained  his
    citizenship, like JM, that he would have all the rights of a citizen.

24. Mr Malik drew my attention to JM (statelessness) at [12]  where  it  is
    said;

         "The use of the term 'admissible' at paragraph 403(c) was not about
         the  acquisition  of  nationality  but  whether  the   person   was
         returnable, for example if they were not a national but had a  visa
         or leave of some kind.  An example might be a Kuwaiti Bidoon who if
         documented, albeit not a national, would potentially be  returnable
         to Kuwait".

25. This was in fact a repetition of Mr Berry's submission  in  support  of
    his argument that the child was not immediately admissible  because  he
    did not have the necessary documentation and did not form part  of  the
    reasoning in the decision. This paragraph is not analogous or  relevant
    to the facts of this application.

26. Mr Malik's submission is that on  the  authorities  referred  to  above
    there  is  no  justification  for  reading  paragraph  403(c)  of   the
    Immigration Rules "restrictively" (his words) as is  suggested  by  the
    applicant.

27. I disagree with Mr Malik's submission. I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    issue of the interpretation of the rule as it applies to the  facts  of
    this case has been settled because the authorities refer to a different
    and distinct factual scenario.

The meaning of "admissible" at paragraph 403(c) of the immigration rules

28. Since I have found that the meaning of "admissible" as  it  relates  to
    this application for review has not been settled, I  turn  to  consider
    the meaning of "admissible" at  paragraph  403(c)  of  the  immigration
    rules.

29. It is settled law that  the  Immigration  Rules  are  to  be  construed
    "sensibly according to the natural and ordinary meaning  of  the  words
    used recognising that they are statements of the Secretary  of  State's
    policy." (Mahad v ECO [2009] UKSC 16 per Lord Brown at [10])  and  that
    the construction of the immigration rules "depends upon the language of
    the rule, construed against the relevant background" which "involves  a
    consideration of the rules as a whole and the function which they serve
    in the administration of immigration policy". The  words  used  in  the
    rule are what the Secretary of State must  have  intended  because  the
    rules are her rules.

30. The English language definition of "admissible" is allow  to  enter  or
    permit to enter. In my view the natural and  ordinary  meaning  of  the
    word "admissible" connotes something more than just physically entering
    a territory in the sense of arriving at the airport  and  entering.  It
    plainly means more than "gain entry" which could for  instance  include
    "illegal entry". It imports a concept  of  actively  being  allowed  or
    permitted to enter by some authority because an individual  meets  some
    kind of criteria. My view is that in  immigration  terms  admissibility
    will be determined by the  authorities  in  question  who  will  decide
    whether an individual is permitted to enter because the individual  has
    some kind of right to enter and reside in  a  territory  from  which  I
    infer  that  the  entry  and  subsequent  residence  would  be  lawful.
    Logically, if an individual is not  lawfully  permitted  to  enter  and
    reside in a territory, then the individual would not be admissible.

31. In my view the word "admissible" must mean in the context of  paragraph
    403(c) the ability to enter lawfully and reside lawfully.

32. Indeed, I do not understand the respondent's decision to mean  anything
    other than this. Were the applicant not able to enter  Kuwait  lawfully
    and  reside  in  Kuwait  with  the  permission  and  knowledge  of  the
    authorities, she would not be admissible. Her travel document gave  her
    the right  to  enter  Kuwait  lawfully  and  by  definition  to  reside
    lawfully.

Permanent residence

33. The question of the length of residence is more problematic.  The  word
    "admissible" plainly does not incorporate  the  concept  of  "permanent
    residence". The wording of the rule makes no mention of this, and  this
    is not the natural and sensible meaning of the words. Had the Secretary
    of State intended the rule to have meant this, the Secretary  of  State
    would have drafted the rule accordingly.

34. Mr Chakmakjian's argument is that what the Secretary of State meant the
    rule to mean can be found in the Secretary of State's policy  documents
    including the explanatory memorandum to the rules. He drew my attention
    to the Secretary of State's policy guidance which was in force  at  the
    date of the decision - "Asylum Policy Instructions:  Statelessness  and
    applications for leave to remain, version 2, 18  February  2016"  ("API
    2016") as well as the explanatory memorandum to the  immigration  rules
    and the UNHCR policy on statelessness.

35. Mr Malik's arguments focused around the lawful means of  interpretation
    of the immigration rules. He submitted that this issue has been settled
    in Mahad which was approved in Ahmed v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1070  which
    held that:

         "it is axiomatic that the intention of the rules is to be discerned
         objectively  from  the  language  used,  not  from   eg.   guidance
         documents".

36. His submission is that the immigration rules cannot be  interpreted  by
    the Secretary of State's policy. Mr Malik referred to me  the  case  of
    Mahmood v SSHD [2020] UKUT 00376 at [60] which states as follows:

         "We observe the Court of Appeal's confirmation in  ZH  (Bangladesh)
         v. Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  EWCA  Civ  8,
         [2009] Imm. A.R. 450, at [32], that the respondent's  instructions,
         and by analogy her guidance, are not an aid to the construction  of
         the Rules notwithstanding that their author is in law the author of
         the  Rules.  They  do  not  have,  and  cannot  be  treated  as  if
         possessing, the force of law. This is consistent with Lord  Brown's
         observation in Mahad, at [11],  that  instructions  issued  by  the
         respondent have on occasion been  issued  inconsistently  with  the
         Rules as interpreted by the courts".

37. His submission is that the content  of  the  guidance  and  explanatory
    memorandum cannot be used to construe the  Immigration  Rules  and  the
    applicant's submission is  inconsistent  with  these  authorities.  His
    position  is  that  the  applicant's  primary   contention   that   the
    interpretation of the  rules  when  set  against  the  context  of  the
    international obligations and the Secretary of State's public  guidance
    runs against the authorities  about  the  method  of  interpreting  the
    Immigration Rules.

38. In general terms it is  settled  law  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    guidance cannot be used to interpret the  meaning  of  the  immigration
    rules, unless there is genuine ambiguity  where  it  is  legitimate  to
    derive assistance the executive's formally published guidance including
    IDI's. (Lord Justice Jackson at [42] of Pokhriyal v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1568).

39. I note in this respect the postscript by Sir John Laws in JM (Zimbabwe)
    that "the true sense of paragraph 403(c)  is  not  as  apparent  as  it
    should be". Indeed, it was the ambiguity of the rule which gave rise to
    the arguments in JM (statelessness) and JM (Zimbabwe). In JM (Zimbabwe)
    the Court of Appeal read into the words more than just  an  ability  to
    physically enter a jurisdiction but the concept of "lying within  one's
    power to obtain admission". I find that there is a degree of  ambiguity
    in the word "admissible". I turn to the policy guidance itself.

40. The policy document in force at the date of decision is  silent  as  to
    the definition of "admissible". It states at 6.2:

         "Where an applicant does not meet  the  requirements  of  paragraph
         403(c) because they are  admissible  to  their  country  of  former
         habitual residence or any other country, the decision  letter  must
         clearly indicate whether they are nevertheless recognised as  being
         stateless in accordance with paragraph 401(a)  of  the  immigration
         rules"

41. It is also said that:

         "if an ETD has been secured or a passport used to arrange to remove
         the individual then this can be accepted as evidence that they  are
         re-admissible for the purposes of permanent residence."

42. Elsewhere at the section "1.3 Policy  intention"  it  states  that  the
    "underlying policy objective is to":

         "Provide a means for the consideration of those who  are  stateless
         and who have no other right to remain in the UK but who  cannot  be
         removed because they would not be admitted to another  country  for
         the purposes of residence to be allowed to stay." (my emphasis).

43. At a different part of the policy document dealing  with  children  the
    policy document refers to "permanent residence".

44. In my view the policy document in force at the date of the decision  is
    in itself ambiguous and refers  alternatively  to  "residence"  and  to
    "permanent residence". I am not  satisfied  that  the  policy  document
    provides clear,  unambiguous  guidance  on  the  interpretation  on  of
    "admissible", nor that  it  provides  a  transparent  and  sufficiently
    settled policy that is more generous than the rule itself. In  my  view
    the  policy  guidance  in  this  instance  does  not  assist  with  the
    interpretation of the immigration rule.

45. Mr Chakmakjian additionally adduced an explanatory  memorandum  of  the
    latest  changes  to  the  Immigration  Rules  dated  7  March  2019  as
    highlighting the purpose of the Rules at 7.5.5.

46. It said:

         "Changes to  statelessness  leave  provisions  -  the  Home  Office
         operates a stateless leave policy, reflected  in  Part  14  of  the
         Immigration Rules, to assist those who are  stateless  and  do  not
         have a right of residence in any other country.  Those who  qualify
         for leave on this route are currently granted  30  months'  limited
         leave can apply to extend  their  leave  and  become  eligible  for
         settlement after five years' lawful residence".

47. And at 7.5.7:

         "In addition, further changes have been made to make clear that  to
         qualify for stateless leave someone  must  show  that  they  cannot
         acquire nationality or a right to permanent  residence  in  another
         country to which they may be entitled.  These changes are  designed
         to reflect  the  policy  intention  better  and  to  deter  abusive
         applications   from   those   who   deliberately   renounce   their
         citizenship, or refuse  to  take  reasonable  steps  to  acquire  a
         nationality or right to  permanent  residence  to  which  they  can
         reasonably expect to  be  entitled  if  they  registered  with  the
         relevant national authorities".

48. He submitted that  the  explanatory  memorandum  to  the  Statement  of
    Changes  in  the  Immigration  Rules   is   a   permissible   tool   of
    interpretation which gives guidance on the contextual scene  and  casts
    light on the aims of the Rules and the construction.  He referred me to
    [64] to [67] of Mahmood [2020] UKUT 00376. His submission  is  that  if
    one steps back there is plainly a consistent line of evidence from  the
    respondent in the statements of her policy intention  as  expressed  in
    the Rules.

49. Mr Chakmakjian's submission is that the cases of Mahad and Ahmed quoted
    by Mr Malik in support of his submission that APIs cannot  be  used  to
    throw light on policy intention or the meaning  of  the  Rules  can  be
    differentiated.  Mahad referred to the  IDIs  finding  that  they  were
    inconsistent with the Rules and in  Ahmed  the  Court  of  Appeal  when
    giving guidance on long residence issue found  that  the  guidance  was
    contrary to the true construction.  Neither of these scenarios apply in
    this  case  particularly  given  the  context  of   the   international
    obligations.  His argument is that, in contrast, the  respondent  seeks
    an interpretation in the cold vacuum which is strictly literal. In  the
    absence of any support to the contrary the rule must be  understood  in
    its proper context and clear reported  statement  as  to  intent  which
    cannot be ignored.

50. His position is  that  the  applicant's  primary  contention  that  the
    interpretation of the  rules  when  set  against  the  context  of  the
    international obligations and the Secretary of State's public  guidance
    runs against the authorities  about  the  method  of  interpreting  the
    Immigration Rules.

51. I am satisfied that the explanatory  memorandum  to  the  Statement  of
    Changes in the Immigration Rules presented to parliament  does  reflect
    on the intentions of the Secretary of State in drafting the  Rules  and
    that this is relevant to an understanding of the  contextual  scene  of
    the statelessness provisions of those Rules.

52. However, the earlier part of the memorandum refers to 'residence'  only
    and the words relating to permanent residence refer to the  ability  of
    an applicant to obtain this  status  reflecting  the  reasoning  in  JM
    (statelessness) and JM (Zimbabwe) in the context of the  prevention  of
    fraud.

53. I am not satisfied that  the  wording  of  the  explanatory  memorandum
    supports the applicant's submission that the word  "admissible"  should
    be read as "admissible for the purposes of permanent residence".

54. I do not understand Mr Chakmakjian to be arguing that  the  wording  of
    the UNHCR handbook can be used to determine what the Secretary of State
    meant by "admissible" in the Immigration Rules.

55.  Having considered the policy and  explanatory  memorandum,  I  am  not
    satisfied that the Secretary of State intended paragraph 403(c) of  the
    immigration  rules  to  mean  admit  for  the  purpose  of   "permanent
    residence".

Decision not in accordance with policy

56. I am also not satisfied that the decision is not in accordance with the
    respondent's  policy   guidance   because   the   guidance   does   not
    unequivocally state that an applicant will not be  admissible  if  they
    are not going to be admitted for the purposes of permanent residence. I
    note in this respect that the  policy  document  in  October  2019  was
    updated after the date  of  the  decision  and  the  wording  has  been
    changed.

Not in accordance with international law

57. Mr Chakmakjian devoted much  of  his  grounds  arguing  that  paragraph
    403(c) was intended to give effect to the Statelessness Convention  and
    that the purpose of  the  Convention  is  to  ensure  that  individuals
    without nationality are not deprived of "core rights".

58. In order to illustrate the purpose of the statelessness convention,  Mr
    Chakmakjian pointed to the respondent's own policy in force at the date
    of  the  decision.  "Asylum  Policy  Instructions:  Statelessness   and
    applications for leave to remain, version 2, 18  February  2016"  ("API
    2016"). This confirms at the very  outset  that  an  underlying  policy
    objective is to:

         "ensure we fully comply with our  international  obligations  under
         the UN Statelessness Conventions

          - provide a means for the consideration of those who are stateless
            and who have no other right to remain in the UK but  who  cannot
            be removed because they would not be admitted to another country
            for the purpose of residence".

59. At the date of this decision the  policy  in  force  referred  only  to
    residence rather than permanent residence.

60. Mr Chakmakjian submits that his argument is further  supported  by  the
    latest API  published  in  October  2019  ("API  2019").   Although  it
    postdates the decision, the  2019  API  comments  on  the  respondent's
    intentions when the Rules were first introduced.  It states:

             "in April 2013 the UK incorporated a new procedure  under  the
             Immigration Rules to allow stateless persons  to  be  formally
             determined as stateless and granted leave to remain where they
             have no other right to remain under the Rules but cannot leave
             voluntarily or be removed from the UK  because  they  have  no
             right of  permanent  residence  in  their  country  of  former
             habitual residence or in any other country".

61. The "stated intention" section has been similarly updated to state:

         "that the Secretary of State's intention is to  fully  comply  with
         international   obligations   arising   from   the    Statelessness
         Conventions and the need to grant leave to  stateless  persons  who
         would not be admitted to another country for the purposes of lawful
         permanent residence".

62.  He  submits  that  the  respondent's   erroneous   interpretation   of
    admissibility under paragraph 403(c) is contrary to the  principles  of
    objectives of the  Convention  relating  to  the  Status  of  Stateless
    Persons 1954  (ratified  by  the  UK  in  April  1959).   The  relevant
    Immigration Rules are intended to reflect the  UK's  obligations  under
    that Convention and  (unless  otherwise  stated)  must  be  interpreted
    consistently with international law.

63. The UNHCR Handbook on Protection  of  Stateless  Persons,  Geneva  2014
    states as follows at page 7, paragraph 11;

         "11.     Stateless persons are  generally  denied  enjoyment  of  a
                range of human rights and prevented from participating fully
                in   society.    The   1954   Convention   addresses    this
                marginalisation by granting stateless persons a core set  of
                rights.  Its provisions, along with applicable standards  of
                international human rights law, establish the minimum rights
                and the obligations of stateless persons in states party  to
                the 1954 Convention.  The  status  granted  to  a  stateless
                person in a state party, that is the rights and  obligations
                of stateless persons under national law, must reflect  these
                international standards".

64. It is Mr  Chakmakjian's  submission  that  the  API  makes  clear  that
    admissibility is to be regarded as purposive rather than  literal.   It
    is insufficient to establish only that an applicant can pass through  a
    border.  The decision maker is also obliged to consider the nature  and
    conditions of the  applicant's  residence  upon  readmission.   Further
    proposition for the argument that admission relates not just to passing
    through the border but being permitted to remain is at page 10  of  the
    2016 API where it refers to an interview not being arranged  where  the
    applicant is clearly admissible to another country "for the purposes of
    permanent residence".

65. He submits that the API  places  the  issue  of  admissibility  in  the
    context of admission being for the purposes  of  lawful  and  permanent
    residence.  It is reiterated in the guidance in the context  of  family
    members applying for leave for the stateless person.

66. Finally, in the UNHCR 2014 Handbook from which the API  has  drawn  its
    guidance, the correct understanding  is  set  out  in  the  obligations
    arising under the  Convention  and  therefore  those  requirements  are
    binding upon  the  UK  and  observing  those  obligations  through  the
    Immigration Rules.  At paragraph 154, page 54 of the Handbook the UNHCR
    states:

         "In the UNHCR's view protection can only be considered available in
         another country when a stateless person;

            . is able to acquire or reacquire nationality through a simple,
              rapid, and  non-discretionary  procedure,  which  is  a  mere
              formality; or

            . enjoys permanent residence status in a  country  of  previous
              habitual residence to which immediate return is possible".

67. This is elaborated at paragraph 157, page 55;

         "As for an individual's ability to return to a country of  previous
         habitual residence, this must be accompanied by the opportunity  to
         live a life of security and dignity in conformity with  the  object
         and purpose of the 1954  Convention.   Thus,  this  exception  only
         applies to those  individuals  who  already  enjoy  the  status  of
         permanent residence in another country, or would be granted it upon
         arrival, where this is  accompanied  by  a  full  range  of  civil,
         economic,  social  and  cultural  rights,  and  where  there  is  a
         reasonable  prospect  of  obtaining  nationality  of  that   state.
         Permission to return to another country on a short-term basis would
         not suffice".

68. Mr Chakmakjian additionally adduced the explanatory memorandum which  I
    have set out above as highlighting that the purpose of the Rules was to
    reflect the UK's international obligations.

69.  He  referred  me  to  R  (on  the  application  of  Semeda)   v   SSHD
    (statelessness; Pham [2015] UKSC 19  applied)  IJR  [2015]  UKUT  00658
    (IAC) in which it is said that paragraph 403 of the  immigration  rules
    co-exists and must be given effect in tandem with  the  United  Nations
    Convention  Relating  to  the  Status  of  Stateless  Persons  and  the
    Secretary of State's policy instruction. This  is  also  recognised  at
    [24] of JM (statelessness) and [10] of JM (Zimbabwe).

70. I am agreement with the reasoning in Semeda that paragraph 403  of  the
    immigration rules must give effect to the UN Convention Relating to the
    Status of Stateless Persons. I do not find this contentious.

71. Mr Chakmakjian did not refer me to the wording or the contents  of  the
    Convention itself merely to the respondent's policy guidance, the UNHCR
    guidance and the memorandum.

72. It is trite law that the  UNHCR  handbook  is  advisory  only  and  the
    respondent's policy guidance itself  makes  it  clear  that  the  UNHCR
    guidance is not being followed in full. Further,  some  of  the  quotes
    above from the UNHCR handbook refer to a different situation to that in
    which the applicant finds herself. Most importantly the UNHCR  handbook
    refers to a "core set" of rights.

73. It is important to note that the Statelessness  Convention  establishes
    minimum standards of treatment for stateless people  in  respect  to  a
    limited number of rights. These include, but are not  limited  to,  the
    right to education,  employment  and  housing.  Importantly,  the  1954
    Convention also guarantees stateless people a right to identity, travel
    documents and administrative assistance. The Convention itself does not
    impose a requirement on contracting parties to grant  either  permanent
    residence or citizenship and the core rights protected  fall  short  of
    the full rights of citizenship.

74. I am not satisfied that the  decision  is  unlawful  because  paragraph
    403(c) is contrary to international law.

403(b) argument

75. I reject the applicant's argument that the respondent has accepted that
    the applicant does not have the right to lawful and permanent residence
    because the reasoning for accepting the applicant to be stateless under
    paragraph 403(b) was because:

         "You are not considered to have the rights and obligations  of  the
         country of your former habitual residence as [you are not a Kuwaiti
         national].

76. In my view it is manifest that  the  respondent  is  referring  to  the
    rights and obligations as a citizen and the  fact  that  the  applicant
    does not have Kuwaiti citizenship which is acknowledged, and  which  is
    one of the freestanding requirements of rule 403.

77. There are many individuals who reside lawfully  and  permanently  in  a
    country without being a citizen, for instance those  foreign  nationals
    in the UK who have indefinite leave to remain. They cannot be  said  to
    have all of the rights and obligations as a British citizen.  Similarly
    in Kuwait there are documented Bidoons who are entitled  to  reside  in
    Kuwait but without the full rights of citizens.

Did the respondent give consideration as to whether the applicant  would  be
admitted to Kuwait for the purpose of lawful and permanent residence?

78. I set out the  development  of  the  applicant's  application  in  some
    detail.

79. In her original application dated 9 January 2018 the applicant asserted
    that she had been deprived of  her  civil  rights  such  as  education,
    health care and employment and that she was using a false  identity  to
    work and drive. It was asserted that the use of the false identity  had
    come to light and if returned  the  applicant  would  be  arrested  and
    charged. Her original representations did not address  403(c)  and  the
    issue of whether she was admissible.

80. On 14 November 2018 a new representative AMZ  law  submitted  that  the
    applicant was a "stateless refugee" but she did not claim asylum.

81. It is plainly for the applicant to demonstrate that she  satisfied  the
    Immigration Rules.

82. On 28 March 2019  the  respondent  wrote  to  the  applicant  for  more
    information. The Secretary of State requested inter  alia  the  reasons
    why the applicant believed herself to be inadmissible to  Kuwait  given
    that she had a valid "Article 17" travel document. In response, AMZ Law
    stated   "admissibility   is   not   a   prerequisite   to    determine
    statelessness". It was said that every time the applicant travels,  her
    travel document is held on arrival which is discriminatory.  It was re-
    asserted by the representative that the question of  admissibility  was
    not relevant to the applicant's case.

83. Thus far, prior to the decision the applicant  had  not  addressed  the
    issue of admissibility  or  made  any  submissions  on  what  the  word
    "admissible" meant.

84. The decision letter dated  24  July  2019  summarised  the  applicant's
    claim. The respondent indicated that the decision would not address any
    protection claim and this is not challenged by the applicant. Nor  does
    the challenge relate to the failure of the respondent to  consider  the
    ECHR in the decision letter.

85. The facts as found by the respondent are that the applicant was born in
    Kuwait and had lived there for many years as a  stateless  person.  The
    applicant continued to live in Kuwait prior to coming to the UK and she
    had been able  to  travel  abroad  and  return  to  Kuwait  on  several
    occasions including on her "Article 17" travel  document.  These  facts
    are not disputed. The respondent also had evidence before her which the
    applicant submitted in support of the  original  application  that  the
    applicant had attained an  educational  certificate  in  her  own  name
    demonstrating that she had been able to study. Further  on  her  travel
    document issued in her own name was described as 'employed'. On her own
    evidence in her visa application, she had worked.  The  applicant  also
    provided documents from the Kuwaiti authorities in  her  own  identity.
    The respondent rejected the applicant's assertion that  she  was  using
    false documents to attend school and access other basic  rights.    The
    grounds do not challenge the facts as decided in the refusal letter. It
    is not submitted by Mr Chakmakjian that this is not an accurate summary
    of the applicant's claim. It is not submitted that the  respondent  has
    committed an error in failing to refer to material  evidence,  or  that
    the Secretary of State has not considered the claim as put to her.  Nor
    is there any dispute that a valid "Article 17"  travel  document  would
    allow the applicant to  gain  entry  to  Kuwait  for  the  purposes  of
    residing there.

86. The first time the applicant raised the question of the  interpretation
    of admissibility was in the application for administrative review dated
    8 August 2019. Prior to this, the applicant had  consistently  asserted
    that the question of admissibility did not arise in  her  case  because
    she was a refugee.

87. In the  administrative  review  decision  dated  20  August  2018,  the
    respondent stated:

         "as you have been issued with a valid Article  17  travel  document
         from Kuwait you are entitled to return there and take up  permanent
         residence".

88. I disagree with  Mr  Chakmakjian's  submission  that  the  question  of
    permanent residence has never been addressed by the respondent and that
    it is not for the  respondent  to  make  this  assertion  now.  At  the
    administrative  review  stage,  the  Secretary  of   State   manifestly
    considered whether the applicant was admissible in the sense  that  she
    was both entitled to reside in Kuwait and lives there permanently.

89. I  am  satisfied  that  in  the  administrative  review  decision,  the
    respondent  expressly  considered  the  interpretation  of  the   rules
    asserted to be the correct interpretation by  the  applicant  which  is
    whether the applicant had the entitlement to return to take  up  lawful
    permanent residence. This constituted more that than a consideration of
    whether it lay within the applicant's power to gain entry  and  plainly
    considered  the  quality  and  length  of  residence.   Although   this
    consideration was not in the original decision,  I  find  that  it  was
    addressed in the administrative review  decision  in  response  to  the
    grounds of review as raised by the applicant and  that  the  respondent
    was in these circumstances entitled to give new reasons  in  accordance
    with R v SSHD ex p  Turgut [2000] EWCA Civ 22.

90. I am satisfied that the respondent was rationally entitled to  conclude
    on the basis of the evidence before her that the applicant was  legally
    permitted to  enter  Kuwait  because  she  had  a  valid  "Article  17"
    residence card on which she had previously travelled out of Kuwait  and
    re-entered Kuwait like any other alien. I am also  satisfied  that  the
    Secretary of State was rationally entitled to find that  her  residence
    in Kuwait was long-term because she had lived there for many years  and
    she had produced insufficient evidence that she could not reside  there
    as she had hitherto done. She had also provided evidence that  she  had
    obtained an education in her own  identity  and  evidence  in  her  own
    identity that she was employed.

91. The applicant also does not challenge the respondent's conclusion  that
    the applicant has not provided  evidence  of  her  attempts  to  obtain
    Kuwaiti nationality or of the refusal decisions relating  to  any  such
    attempts.

92. I am satisfied that it was open to the respondent  to  form  the  view,
    particularly in the light of the appellant's ability to travel  in  and
    out of Kuwait and her length of residence there, that she did  in  fact
    have the right to reside lawfully  and  permanently  in  Kuwait  and  I
    reiterate the lack of challenge to the Secretary of State's findings.

93. If I am wrong, and the meaning of  the  word  admissible  includes  the
    right to remain in the territory permanently, I am satisfied  that  the
    respondent would have rationally found the applicant to  be  admissible
    on the applicant's own interpretation of the rule for the  reasons  set
    out above. Therefore, any error on the part of the  respondent  on  the
    meaning  of  admissible  is  not  material  to  the  outcome   of   the
    application.


