
                                    [pic]

In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                  Claim Number: JR/5881/2019

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

Heard at Field House
On 20 - 23 October 2020 and
on 24 November 2020

                                   Before
                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN

                                   Between

                                     MW
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Applicant

                                    -and-


                       CROYDON LONDON BOROUGH COUNCIL
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms.  A  Benfield,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Instalaw
Solicitors
For  the  Respondent:     Mr.  J  Swirsky,  Counsel,  instructed  by   Legal
                    Services, Croydon London Borough Council

            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Introduction

 1. By an order dated 5 November 2019 Rowena Collins Rice, then sitting  as
    a Deputy Judge of the High Court, granted the applicant  permission  to
    apply for judicial review against the respondent's decision as  to  his
    age.

Issues

 2. The applicant seeks a declaration that he  was  born  on  14  September
    2001.

 3. The primary issue for  me  to  resolve  in  these  proceedings  is  the
    appellant's age, which is in dispute between the parties. The applicant
    claims that he was born on 14 September 2001 and so was aged 17 both at
    the date of his entry into this country on 21 March  2019  and  at  the
    date of his age assessment on 2 September 2019. He asserts that  he  is
    presently aged 19. He has been consistent as to  his  claimed  date  of
    birth throughout. The respondent assessed the applicant to be aged over
    18. Though  not  proceeding  to  determine  the  applicant's  age,  the
    respondent's evidence before this Tribunal identifies a belief that the
    applicant was an adult at  the  date  of  his  age  assessment  and  is
    presently aged upwards to 25 years.

 4. There is no dispute between the parties that the applicant  is  now  an
    adult. The applicant seeks  such  declaration  to  establish  that  the
    respondent is required to continue to provide support and accommodation
    to him as a 'former relevant child' pursuant to its  duties  under  the
    Children Act 1989. In such circumstances, I am satisfied that if I were
    to grant a declaration in the terms sought, it  would  serve  a  useful
    purpose.

 5. By means of an updated statement of issues  to  be  determined  at  the
    substantive hearing, I am also asked by the parties to determine:

         a) Whether the age assessment was a short-form age  assessment  or
            not.
         b) The weight to be placed upon the  respondent's  age  assessment
            including whether the age assessment was conducted in line with
            the requirements of a lawful and procedurally  fair  assessment
            and whether it was based upon firm grounds and reasons.
         c) The weight to be placed upon third party evidence.

Anonymity

 6. An anonymity direction was issued by Andrew Baker J by an  order  dated
    11 September 2019 (CO/3563/2019) and neither representative  sought  to
    set it aside. I  confirm  the  direction  at  the  conclusion  of  this
    decision.

 7. Being mindful of rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Guidance
    Note 2013, No. 1 concerned with anonymity, I have decided to  anonymise
    the applicant's parents, 'AW' and 'IW'; his brothers, 'MW' and 'YW; his
    sisters 'SW' and 'FW'; his half-brother, 'OA';  his  half-sister,  'R';
    his cousin 'M'; and his brother-in-law; 'P', who  are  referred  to  in
    documents before me, and his cousin 'MOA', who is also referred  to  in
    documents before me and has produced a witness statement filed with the
    Tribunal. I make this  decision  because  I  am  satisfied  that  their
    identification  will  quickly  lead  to  the  identification   of   the
    applicant,  who  presently   seeks   international   protection.   Such
    interference with open justice is necessary and  proportionate  in  the
    circumstances: A v. BBC [2015] AC 588, at [29]-[30].

 8. I have decided to anonymise 'AA', a witness who  attended  the  hearing
    and gave evidence in support of the  applicant,  and  also  'BB'  whose
    witness  statement  the  applicant  relied  upon,  because   they   are
    recognised refugees and have not confirmed their willingness  to  being
    named in a judgment that will be publicly available. I am mindful  that
    they may continue to have family members living in their home country.

Litigation Friend

 9. Upon proceedings being commenced  an  application  was  made  that  Mr.
    Francesco Jeff, Senior Children's  Adviser,  Refugee  Council,  act  as
    Litigation Friend consequent to the applicant being  a  minor.  On  the
    applicant reaching the age of 18, upon his own case, Mr. Jeff ceased to
    be a Litigation Friend in this matter: CPR 21.9(1).

Background

10. The applicant is an Iraqi national and an ethnic Kurd  who  hails  from
    Iraqi Kurdistan. He has explained that his father has  four  wives  and
    that he has 15 to 20 brothers and 15 to 20  sisters.  Several  extended
    family members live close by the family home.

11. The following  relatives  were  identified  by  the  applicant  in  his
    evidence, both written and oral:


    |Name                  |Relation to the applicant|Year of birth            |
|AW                    |Father                   |1956                     |
|IW                    |Mother                   |1957                     |
|MW                    |Brother                  |Unknown                  |
|                      |                         |[Contact report 5 April  |
|                      |                         |2019 identifies him as 35|
|                      |                         |years old]               |
|FW                    |Sister (deceased)        |[Contact report 5 April  |
|                      |                         |2019 identifies year of  |
|                      |                         |birth as 1987 or 19881   |
|SW                    |Sister                   |1989                     |
|                      |                         |[Contact report 5 April  |
|                      |                         |2019 identifies ear of   |
|                      |                         |birth as 1990]           |
|YW                    |Brother                  |1991                     |
|OA                    |Half-brother             |1� to 2 years older than |
|                      |                         |the applicant            |
|R                     |Half-sister              |Unknown                  |
|M                     |Cousin                   |Unknown                  |
|MOA                   |Cousin of applicant's    |Applicant not asked      |
|                      |father                   |                         |
|P                     |Brother-in-law           |Unknown                  |
|H                     |Relative                 |Applicant not asked      |


Leaving Iraq

12. The applicant states that he left the Kurdish  Region  of  Iraq  on  20
    October 2018, travelling by bus to Istanbul and subsequently flying  to
    Europe. He is recorded as having been fingerprinted in  Denmark  on  25
    October 2018. He states that following his arrival in Denmark a  person
    who was with him made a phone call and after having exited  immigration
    control and waiting for a few hours he was driven to  the  'Jungle',  a
    refugee and migrant encampment in the vicinity of Calais, France, where
    he stayed for over 4 months  before  clandestinely  travelling  to  the
    United Kingdom in a lorry.

Arrival in United Kingdom

13. The applicant entered the United Kingdom  on  21  March  2019  and  was
    apprehended by the authorities. The Home Office disputed his age on the
    basis  that  his  physical  appearance  and  demeanour  very   strongly
    suggested that he was over the age of 18 and by a letter dated 21 March
    2019 treated him as being born on 14 September 1997. It is  appropriate
    to observe  that  such  assessment  was  undertaken  by  means  of  the
    application of a  policy  contained  at  para.  55.9.3.1  of  the  Home
    Office's Enforcement Instructions and Guidance that was later confirmed
    by the Court of Appeal in BF (Eritrea) v. Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 872,  [2020]  1  All  E.R.  396  to  be
    unlawful.  I  further  observe  that  the  Supreme  Court  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal in BF (Eritrea) on 11  February
    2020.

Referral to the respondent

14.  On 25 March 2019, the applicant was referred to the  respondent  as  a
    putative child in need seeking services under  the  Children  Act  1989
    ('the 1989 Act'). He was placed into the care of the  respondent  as  a
    looked after child on 27 March 2019 pursuant to sections 17 and  20  of
    the 1989 Act.

Age assessment

15. The respondent undertook an age assessment following  meetings  on  two
    occasions between the applicant and two social workers  -  Ms.  Gregory
    and Ms. Taylor - with an appropriate adult present. On  both  occasions
    an interpreter attended. The first meeting was  conducted  on  31  July
    2019 and ran for approximately 5� hours. A second, shorter, meeting was
    undertaken on 2 September 2019. At its  conclusion  the  applicant  was
    informed that the respondent did not accept his stated age and  he  was
    provided with the age assessment decision letter dated the same day.

16. The age assessment records, inter alia:

         'Education

         [The applicant] discussed his experience of the education system in
         Iraq. [The applicant] started school when he was 7 years of age and
         concluded his education in Iraq when he left to  come  to  the  UK.
         [The applicant] is unable to write or speak in Arabic  but  he  can
         read in Arabic. He enjoys Maths and Sports  and  that  he  attended
         school regularly. [The  applicant]  was  asked  about  his  age  in
         various classes/academic years. In class 6 he was aged 12 and  this
         was in year 2013. In class 10 he was 16, turning 17  years  of  age
         and this was in 2017.'

17. The assessment concluded, inter alia:

         'Based upon the information gathered during this short  assessment,
         alongside evidence from social media, views  of  professionals  and
         observations  made  of  [the  applicant's]   physical   appearance,
         demeanour & interaction, it was not felt that prolonged enquiry  or
         a full age assessment was required in order to come to a conclusion
         in regard to [the applicant's] age. In fact,  it  was  quite  clear
         that [the applicant] is an adult who is  significantly  older  than
         his stated age of 17 ...

         When asked  for  his  date  of  birth,  [the  applicant]  responded
         directly by saying 14.09.2001, as seen on his Kurdish ID  document,
         4-5  times  during  his  lifetime.  [The  applicant]  also  advised
         assessing social workers that he does not know  which  calendar  is
         used in Iraq. Assessing social workers felt that [the  applicant's]
         response to the question 'What is your date of birth?' was scripted
         and that there would be no reason why  [the  applicant's]  date  of
         birth would be  written  in  English  but  more  likely  to  be  in
         Mesopotamian Arabic (Iraqi Arabic) or modified Perso-Arabic (Sorani
         alphabet), as spoken by Kurds. ... [The Applicant] said that he can
         read Arabic but is unable to speak or write it.

         ...

         [The applicant's] journey to the UK was accompanied most of the way
         by a family group. He was advised by the  agent  to  say  that  the
         family's four-year old child was his son, as this would assist  him
         in completing his journey to the UK. Assessing social workers  feel
         that the agent must have viewed  [the  applicant]  to  look  mature
         enough  to  have  fathered  a  four-year-old  child  to  make  this
         suggestion and for it to work.

         When  discussing  education,  [the  applicant]  gave   inconsistent
         information about his age in relation to the class that he was  in.
         He stated that when he was in class 6, he was aged 12 and the  year
         was 2013. This information would correlate to the date of birth  of
         14.09.97[1] which [the applicant] is claiming. [The applicant] also
         stated that he thought he was 14 in 2014 or 2015.  This  would  put
         him in the region of 17-20 in 2019. [The applicant] also said  that
         in class 10 he was 16 turning 17 in  2017.  This  would  make  [the
         applicant] 18 years of age, turning 19 years of age this  year  and
         therefore he was 18 years of age at the time he claimed  asylum  on
         21.03.19.

         It seems most likely that [the applicant] either does not know  his
         true age/ date of birth or is older than what he has stated but has
         attempted to conceal this. [The  applicant's]  physical  appearance
         strongly supports the latter view, as he presents as being an adult
         who is significantly older than his claimed age.  This  is  a  view
         supported by all the professionals who have worked with him, and it
         is rare for professionals to consistently offer the view that  they
         believe a young person in their care to be  in  their  mid-20s,  or
         possibly older.

         ...

         The professional network  around  [the  applicant]:  the  allocated
         social workers, key worker and IRO are of the view that he could be
         a person significantly older  than  18  years  of  age,  with  some
         suggestion that he could be over 25 years of age. This is based  on
         their interaction with [the  applicant]  and  their  experience  of
         working with adolescents.'

18.  In  reaching  their  conclusion,  the  social  workers  addressed  the
    applicant's use of social media:

         '[The applicant] stated that he has an Instagram account  but  that
         there are no photos on that account as it was his friend  Mana  who
         set up the account. [The applicant] was shown a series  of  printed
         photographs taken from his  Instagram  account  and  confirmed  his
         identity in these photographs. [The applicant] said that whilst  he
         has Facebook and Instagram on his phone, he can only  access  these
         apps when he has a Wi-Fi signal.  [The  applicant]  had  previously
         spoken about not accessing Facebook on his mobile phone for fear of
         his  whereabouts  being  disclosed,  yet  he  uploaded  the   beach
         photograph. [The applicant] spoke about  having  contact  with  his
         family via Mana's Facebook account and yet he also said  that  Mana
         does not have a Facebook or Instagram account. The assessing social
         workers feel that the information [the applicant] has  provided  is
         contradictory in the extreme and raises serious concerns about [the
         applicant's] credibility.

         ... following  the  age  assessment,  [the  applicant's]  Instagram
         account has been checked and the account has been made private  and
         the name has been slightly changed ...'

19. I was provided  with  colour  copies  of  various  screenshots  of  the
    applicant's Instagram account, including  photographs  posted  from  14
    April 2019 to 12 July 2020  and  photographs  posted  on  his  Facebook
    account. Through consideration of this Facebook account, the respondent
    located and printed photographs originating from OA's Facebook  account
    which were filed with the Tribunal.

20. One image from OA's Instagram account is addressed in detail below.  It
    is identified as 'Image 7' in Appendix 2 to the age assessment, with  a
    date stamp 13 January 2015. A clearer version is identified  as  'Image
    8'. It shows 5  males  standing  outside  in  the  open  together.  The
    applicant accepts that he is one of the males standing in this group.

The applicant's case

21. Witnesses were called to give evidence  and  were  examined  over  four
    days, from 20 to  23  October  2020.  Whilst  noting  elements  of  the
    evidence in detail below I confirm that all of  the  oral  and  written
    evidence has been carefully considered as have counsel's submissions.

22. The applicant is presently seeking international protection and so I do
    not detail the substance of the claim in my decision, nor do I make any
    findings or observations upon the core of the claim. That is  a  matter
    to be considered by the Home  Office  by  application  of  a  different
    standard of proof to that which is to be applied in this  matter.  Such
    approach was identified to the representatives at  the  outset  of  the
    hearing and no complaint was made.

The applicant

23. Consequent to claiming  asylum  in  this  country,  the  applicant  was
    interviewed in accordance  with  an  'an  initial  contact  and  asylum
    registration questionnaire'. This interview was  subject  to  the  Home
    Office's Asylum Screening  and  Routing  Guidance  which  outlines  the
    questions which are  to  be  asked  in  all  screening  interviews.  He
    confirmed the basis of his fear of persecution and that  he  left  Iraq
    travelling to Turkey by bus. When asked whether he had any  dependents,
    he detailed that 'the smugglers told me to take a  4-year-old  boy  and
    say he was my son. There was  a  family  with  us  and  [the  smuggler]
    suggested I say he was my son to help me'. He subsequently confirmed at
    the hearing that this incident occurred when crossing into Turkey.

24. The applicant relies upon a witness statement prepared in  relation  to
    his asylum claim, dated  16  May  2019,  and  four  witness  statements
    prepared for these proceedings.

25. In his statement of May 2019, the applicant  detailed  that  whilst  in
    Iraq he lived with his parents. His eldest brother, MW, is married  and
    has three children. The applicant stated in his statement that  he  did
    not know MW's age, but the respondent has a  record  of  the  applicant
    confirming in 2019 that MW was aged 35. His elder sister, SW, lives  at
    home and the applicant observes 'I think she was  born  in  1989.'  The
    applicant confirmed that his brother YW 'was born in 1991' and 'when  I
    was in Kurdistan, he was trying to become a Peshmerga  and  he  was  in
    year 12 at school.' The applicant confirmed  that  he  attended  school
    from the age of 7 and finished 'Year 9' of school before  he  travelled
    to the United Kingdom.

26. By means of this statement the appellant provided  details  as  to  his
    fear of persecution. After his  problems  arose  a  member  of  another
    family attended the family home, asking for him. He was not present  at
    the time because he was out with a friend. His family  called  him  and
    asked him not to return home. The applicant stayed with  a  cousin  who
    spoke to the applicant's brother, MW. After four days,  MOA  secured  a
    passport which had the applicant's photograph in it. The applicant  was
    taken to the home of another relative and two days later was placed  on
    a bus travelling to Turkey. He remained in Istanbul for  two  to  three
    days before travelling to Europe by plane. An agent took  his  passport
    from him and provided another one.

27. By means of his first statement prepared for these  proceedings,  dated
    11 September 2019, the applicant confirmed that he knows  his  age  and
    date of birth because he was often told such facts by his family whilst
    growing up. He further detailed that whilst birthdays  are  not  always
    celebrated in Iraq, he celebrated his 16th birthday in 2017 because  he
    wanted a celebration. The applicant stated that he possessed a  Kurdish
    ID document in Iraq which  detailed  his  name  and  age.  He  saw  the
    document 'probably 4-5 times.' The last occasion when  he  saw  it  was
    following a request by a schoolteacher to examine it.  At  the  hearing
    the applicant confirmed that this document was his Hawiye.

28. As to his journey to the United Kingdom he confirmed that he  travelled
    part of the way with a family. On the plane a  person  who  accompanied
    them, who  I  consider  to  be  an  agent,  took  their  passports  and
    documentation. Consequently, the applicant disembarked the  plane  with
    no  documents.  The  agent  contacted  another  person  who  drove  the
    applicant to the 'Jungle', a makeshift camp situated in Calais, France,
    where he remained for four  months  before  travelling  to  the  United
    Kingdom in the back of a lorry.

29. The applicant detailed as to the age assessment meetings that the first
    lasted most of the day and he was asked 'so many questions.' The second
    meeting lasted around 15 minutes and he was not permitted the chance to
    discuss concerns that he had with the process or to explain things.  He
    observed that he took time during the first meeting to answer questions
    because he was trying his best to answer them  correctly.  Further,  he
    found the process to be a long one and struggled with answering  a  lot
    of questions that reminded him of traumatic times.

30. He explained that he did not recall saying that his friend Mana did not
    use social media and  that  he  did  use  Mana's  Facebook  account  to
    occasionally speak to his family in Iraq. As to the photographs on  his
    Instagram account  that  were  observed  by  the  social  workers,  the
    applicant named some of the people shown and confirmed that  they  were
    of similar ages though he is the youngest. As for  the  assertion  that
    certain photographs establish that he is working in a barber  shop  the
    applicant detailed that that is a place where a friend  works,  and  he
    simply hung out there because it was somewhere nice to spend  time.  He
    detailed that as he wakes  up  between  11  and  midday  he  cannot  be
    working. His aim in life is to be a teacher and not a barber.

31. The applicant's second witness statement is dated 14 October  2019.  He
    addressed photographs taken from the  Facebook  account  of  his  half-
    brother, OA:

         'I have taken many pictures in my life and I do  not  remember  the
         specific occasions that they were taken, but I think  that  in  the
         picture of [OA] and me I was in school when I was  about  13  years
         old and I think it  was  during  Kurdish  Clothes  Day.  I  do  not
         remember the details. The picture of me on  my  own  taken  in  the
         mirror was taken in June. I was 17 at the time and  already  living
         in the UK. My friend Mohammed invited me for a haircut  because  he
         was learning how to do it. He said that he could  give  me  a  free
         haircut if I agreed for him to train on my hair.  I  liked  how  my
         hair looks afterwards so I decided  to  take  a  photo  of  it.  He
         offered me to learn how to do haircuts too, and  become  a  barber,
         but I said that I did not want to learn. I want to  be  a  teacher,
         not a barber. I do not know who owns the salon or even what it  was
         called, I did not really pay much attention to things like that.

         The photo of me with a group of other boys was taken in 2015 and  I
         think I was either 13 or 14 years old, but I am not entirely  sure.
         I am the second person from the left - first person on the left  is
         my brother [OA], the person in the middle is [M], who is my cousin.
         The fourth person is [P] and he is  my  brother-in-law.  I  am  not
         entirely sure who the fifth person is as he was my cousin's  friend
         and I do not know him personally. The photo was taken in  Iraq,  it
         was about 20 minutes from my house ... I do [not] know  [the]  ages
         of anyone else other than my brother, but  I  did  not  care  about
         these things back then. I was out  with  my  family  spending  time
         together. I do not know why that means I am lying about my age.

         I am aware that the Local Authority have said that  these  pictures
         show me with facial hair, and that means I  cannot  be  my  claimed
         age. However, I started to grow facial hair when I was very  young,
         probably about 11 or 12.

         In my family this is quite normal ... I  have  between  15  and  20
         brothers. All of my brothers are also very  hairy.  In  our  family
         everyone starts puberty quite young. One of my brothers who was  12
         when I left Iraq already had quite a lot of facial hair.'

32. By means of his third witness statement, dated  20  January  2020,  the
    applicant took the opportunity to address his ID document. He confirmed
    that the document was kept by his mother  along  with  other  important
    documents. He recalled  going  to  a  nearby  town  when  he  was  aged
    approximately 16 to renew this document  and  having  his  fingerprints
    taken.  He  has  since  sought  to  secure  this  document  for   these
    proceedings but was unable to do so. A friend  of  MOA  had  agreed  to
    bring it to him but upon his arrival at an  airport  the  document  was
    confiscated and destroyed.

33. The applicant is critical of  both  the  person  with  whom  he  shares
    accommodation,  Mohammed,  and  an  employee  of  the  respondent,  Ms.
    Simpson. As to the latter he details that she delayed in  securing  him
    an optician's appointment and he suggests that she had a  part  in  his
    failure to enroll at college.

34. The applicant's fourth statement was  filed  with  the  Tribunal  on  5
    October 2020 and is accompanied by  several  documents.  The  applicant
    explained that whilst in the company of a friend he was attacked on  25
    March 2020. He stated that the assailants hailed from his home area  in
    Iraq and he holds  the  belief  that  the  assault  originated  in  the
    circumstances from which his asylum claim arises. He confirmed that  he
    is fearful that these people intend to kill him. After the  assault  he
    was attended to by police officers but he believed that they could  not
    protect him and so he did not give them details of the persons who  had
    attacked him. He informed his solicitor and social  worker  as  to  the
    assault. Some two or two and a half weeks later he was again  assaulted
    when out shopping. He stated that though he spoke to his social worker,
    he did know how to speak to the police.

35. Following discussions with MOA he decided to leave the United  Kingdom,
    initially travelling to Germany where he  was  fingerprinted.  He  gave
    false details as to his identity as he did not wish to be sent back  to
    the United Kingdom. The agent who aided him had informed  him  that  he
    should use different names to avoid being returned.  In  his  statement
    the applicant details that he made up his dates of  birth,  seeking  to
    identify himself as being older because he believed it would be  easier
    for him to return to the agent and move on. He  then  travelled  on  to
    Sweden where he was again stopped by the police. He  again  gave  false
    details as to his identity and upon his release arrangements were  made
    for him to be taken to Norway. He spent a  few  weeks  staying  with  a
    friend of a relative in Norway before he approached the authorities and
    identified himself. He was detained for  approximately  3  to  4  weeks
    before being returned to the United Kingdom under the mechanism of  the
    Dublin III Regulation (Regulation (EU) No. 604/2013).

36. By means of his witness statement the applicant accepted  that  he  was
    fingerprinted in all three countries and that he gave  different  names
    and dates of birth. At para. 12 of the fourth statement  the  applicant
    recalled two of the false names that  he  provided  to  authorities  in
    Europe. He explained that he took such course of action because he  did
    not want the authorities to identify that he had claimed asylum in  the
    United Kingdom and be returned to this country because he was  fearful,
    detailing 'I would be killed if returned to the UK'.

37. The applicant provided to the Tribunal a copy of a police report  dated
    25 March 2020  and  has  provided  photographs  of  injuries.  He  also
    provided copies of GCID  case  record  sheets  disclosed  by  the  Home
    Office.

38. In answer to questions from Mr. Swirsky the  applicant  confirmed  that
    his mother would inform him as to when he was approaching his birthday.
    He observed that it was not the norm in Iraqi  Kurdistan  to  celebrate
    birthdays, though he celebrated his 16th birthday because he wanted to.
    He detailed that he did not  recall  celebrating  a  birthday  for  any
    parent or sibling, though he thought he may have celebrated  a  younger
    brother's birthday. He confirmed that if any niece or nephew wished  to
    celebrate their birthday they could do, and  he  recalled  attending  a
    party for the son of one of his sisters.

39. As to personal documents, he possessed a Hawiya whilst in Iraq. This is
    a national ID card which had his name and date of birth on it.  It  was
    kept by his parents and he recalled it being provided to his school for
    a copy to be taken. He did not have time to take it when he left Iraq.

40. He confirmed that he went to school in Iraq. He was  asked  as  to  how
    many years he attended school and stated that he went until 'grade  10'
    but was not sure as to  how  many  years  he  attended.  In  answer  to
    questions from Mr. Swirsky he accepted that he commenced in  'grade  1'
    having just turned 7, and that progress through a school was one  grade
    a year. He further accepted that school commenced in September and  ran
    for 9 months. When asked if he had started school in  his  final  year,
    before leaving Iraq in October 2018,  the  applicant  said  no  because
    whilst school starts at the end of September, 'by the time things start
    to be organised, they give you textbooks, it starts in  October.'  When
    asked to explain dates given to the age assessors, he  stated  that  he
    had given 'approximate dates' as he could not recall what age he was in
    what class. He further confirmed, 'I do not know how old I was in 2015,
    2016, 2017'. He confirmed that he studied  mathematics  at  school  and
    accepted that he had informed the assessors that  it  was  one  of  his
    favourite subjects, but he informed me that he was unable to recall how
    old he was in each grade.

41. When asked by Mr.  Swirsky  as  to  his  leaving  Iraq,  the  applicant
    explained that MOA told him that he had to leave immediately  and  that
    he would help him leave. The applicant confirmed that MOA is a rich man
    and so paid for everything  to  help  him  leave  Iraq.  The  applicant
    confirmed that he travelled to another cousin's home but was unable  to
    recall how long he stayed there: 'one day, two days,  three  days,  not
    sure. ' He further confirmed that MOA secured a passport to enable  him
    to travel out of Iraq. When asked whether  the  passport  detailed  the
    correct date of birth, the applicant  stated,  'I  did  not  look'.  He
    confirmed that the photograph used was the same as that used for his ID
    card.

42. The applicant informed Mr. Swirsky that he went to Erbil with a  friend
    and not with MOA, as stated in his May 2019 statement. He asserted that
    his statement was wrong on this issue. In response to  the  observation
    that he had signed the statement as true,  the  applicant  informed  me
    that the statement had not been read back to him.

43. When asked by Mr. Swirsky as to  whether  the  agent  thought  him  old
    enough to be able to persuade immigration officers in Turkey that the 4-
    year-old child was his son, the applicant asserted that he was asked to
    take the child 'to help the family'.

44. The applicant stated that he remained in Istanbul for  'three  to  four
    days' before flying out of the  country.  He  could  not  identify  the
    passport given to him by the agent and he did not look to see if it had
    his photograph in it. He held it only for some 40 minutes before it was
    taken away. Upon arrival, the applicant informed me that did not  claim
    asylum and did not ask to stay in the country,  which  he  acknowledges
    was Denmark. Having arrived without a passport, his name was  taken  by
    officials and after 20 minutes he was permitted to  leave  the  airport
    and was subsequently taken in a van to the Jungle camp near Calais. The
    applicant confirmed that he had given the Danish  authorities  a  false
    name and age on the advice of the agent.

45. At the hearing, the applicant stated that he was unable to provide  the
    age or date of birth of any sibling. Mr. Swirsky reminded the applicant
    that in a statement accompanying his asylum claim he had  detailed  his
    father as being born in 1956, his mother in 1957, SW in 1989 and YW  in
    1991. The applicant explained that these  were  approximate  dates  and
    that he thought his father was born in 1956 and his mother  is  a  year
    younger. He explained that before he arrived in this  country,  YW  had
    informed him as to the year when YW was born and the years his  sisters
    were born.

46. The applicant detailed  that  he  initially  kept  in  touch  with  one
    brother, YW, when he arrived in this country, via Facebook, but he  was
    informed that because the family  were  being  watched  he  should  not
    continue contact with his family because if those hostile to  him  were
    aware of such contact, they would kill his family in  Iraq.  He  stated
    that the other family had placed guards around the family home.

47. As to the extent of his contact with family members other than YW since
    arriving in this country the applicant  stated  that  he  was  only  in
    contact with a cousin, MOA, by WhatsApp. It was his  cousin  who  aided
    him to travel to Norway. He subsequently informed Mr. Swirsky  that  he
    'may have had' one contact with OA.

48. As to the first attack  upon  him  on  25  March  2020,  the  applicant
    confirmed that there was another man present with him, known as 'Shera'
    or 'Lion'. The police attended and the two men were kept apart  as  the
    police questioned them.

49. In answer to a question from Mr. Swirsky that he  did  not  inform  the
    police as to the first attack, but  he  did  inform  Ms.  Simpson,  the
    applicant stated his belief that it was unlikely the  police  would  do
    anything because of the pandemic.  He  could  not  recall  if  he  told
    friends about the attack, though he might have mentioned it. He did not
    go to see a doctor.

50. Consequent to the  second  attack,  the  applicant  contacted  MOA  who
    arranged for him to leave the United Kingdom clandestinely in a  lorry.
    The applicant did not have a passport for this journey. He accepts that
    he provided false details to the German authorities, on the  advice  of
    the agent to avoid being returned to the United Kingdom. He  could  not
    recall how long he stayed in Germany but accepted that he was  provided
    with accommodation. He then travelled onto Sweden. He was in a car that
    was stopped by police. He could not  recall  if  he  gave  his  correct
    personal details, 'I don't know if I did or did not. I don't recall  as
    in different countries I gave different names and different  ages.'  He
    was told that he would be provided with accommodation  but  left  after
    one or two hours as MOA arranged for someone to pick him up. He  denied
    claiming asylum in either Germany or Sweden, simply being  required  to
    provide fingerprints. The applicant was reminded that the  Home  Office
    had noted in its GCID case records  that  he  was  recorded  as  having
    claimed asylum in both Germany and Sweden.[2]

51. The applicant travelled onto Norway, where he was taken to a friend  of
    his cousin. It was his intention to remain in Norway and not return  to
    the United Kingdom. He stayed for one or two weeks before  going  to  a
    police station 'to say that I am here'. He did  not  give  his  correct
    name and age. He was fingerprinted and the Norwegian authorities became
    aware that he  had  claimed  asylum  in  the  United  Kingdom.  He  was
    subsequently returned to this country after two  months.  He  confirmed
    that when he returned from Norway, he informed officials  that  he  had
    left the United Kingdom because of problems that  arose  because  of  a
    sibling. He informed me that he gave this reason  because  he  did  not
    want to tell the whole story as he  assumed  that  the  police  in  the
    country were 'the same' as those in Iraq who 'would kill  him'.  Having
    been reminded by Mr. Swirsky that he had been happy to inform the  Home
    Office as to events in Iraq when he first arrived in this  country  and
    asked why he did not tell the truth about the reasons for  his  assault
    upon his return from Norway, the applicant stated that he 'did not want
    to tell my story to everyone' and  'they  did  not  do  anything  first
    time.'

52. When asked why he had refused the respondent's offer to rehouse him  in
    Brighton the applicant explained that he had  contacted  MOA  and  been
    informed that a relative of those he feared had a business there.

53. He accepted that he had set up  an  Instagram  account  whilst  in  the
    United Kingdom. After reference was made to it in the  age  assessment,
    he locked the account as his did not want people to find him easily. He
    was asked  about  a  photograph  on  his  Facebook  account,  which  he
    confirmed was the photograph of a child of his sister, F, who has died.
    He took the photograph from her account.  He  was  referred  to  family
    photographs taken in Iraq. One photo was taken in 2015 and  showed  the
    applicant with his brother OA[3]. He confirmed that OA is aged 1 1/2 to
    2 years older than him. He further confirmed that he was aged 13 or  13
    1/2 when this photograph was taken.

54. Mr. Swirsky referred the applicant  to  'Image  8'  in  Appendix  2,  a
    photograph of five  males  standing  together.[4]  The  photograph  was
    placed on OA's Facebook account on 13 January 2015, when the  applicant
    states he was aged 13. The applicant accepted that he was  the  tallest
    person in the photograph, though this was because he  was  'stretching'
    himself. Also present were OA, his cousin M and his  brother-in-law  P.
    He could not recall the fifth person, beyond that he was a friend of M.
    He could not recall when the photograph was taken.

55. In re-examination, the applicant stated that  he  knew  the  years  his
    parents and siblings were born because his father had been  interviewed
    about his role in the Kurdish struggle and his mother had provided  the
    details. The interview could be viewed on You Tube. He further detailed
    that he knew the ages of YW and his sister, S, because YW had  provided
    details as to other family members by text whilst he was in the Jungle.
    YW sent this information because MOA had said that such information was
    necessary.

56. In addition to his Hawiya, the applicant confirmed that he  was  issued
    with a 'Jinsiya', or nationality certificate, when aged 16  or  17.  He
    was required to travel to Sulaymaniyah to secure it.

57. Ms. Benfield asked the appellant as to how old  he  was  each  year  he
    attended school. The applicant replied that he  first  attended  school
    when aged 7. Ms. Benfield then asked, 'Would you not then  be  able  to
    work out how old you were in each given year?' The applicant responded,
    'Yes'. No further question was asked on this issue.

58. As to why he could not contact family members by Facebook, he  accepted
    that MW had a Facebook account, but thought it better to be in  contact
    with MOA.

59. He confirmed that he gave an adult age  when  in  Germany,  Sweden  and
    Norway to avoid being placed in the care of  a  children's  section  or
    charity.

60. Following late disclosure by the respondent of various local  authority
    contact records ('contact records') on the evening of the second day of
    the hearing, the applicant was recalled during  the  afternoon  of  the
    third day.

61. Mr. Swirsky reminded the applicant that he had previously  stated  that
    he had informed Ms. Simpson as to the attack  on  25  March  2020  soon
    after the incident. When asked when he had notified her,  he  responded
    that it was after the assault, but he could not provide a  date  as  he
    had not been well in himself for some  time.  When  informed  that  the
    contact records detailed that Ms. Simpson was  first  informed  of  the
    assault on 27 April 2020, the applicant detailed that he had called her
    more than six times to say that his life  was  at  risk  and  that  she
    informed him that she would arrange an interpreter. When informed  that
    he complained to Ms. Simpson on 9 April 2020 as to wanting to move from
    his accommodation but had not  mentioned  the  assault,  the  applicant
    stated that he had spoken to her and she failed to get an interpreter.

62. As to the second assault, some two weeks later,  the  applicant  stated
    that he informed Ms. Simpson as to both assaults at the same time.

63. The applicant was asked as to an email sent to Ms. Simpson  on  2  June
    2020, which followed three emails from Ms. Simpson sent between 29  May
    and 1 June 2020 expressing concern as to having not heard from him  and
    asking him to respond otherwise she would have no  alternative  but  to
    report him missing to the police. The applicant's response was recorded
    by the relevant contact record as being contained in an  email  subject
    line and stating, 're: hello I went to swansea [sic] for eid [sic]  and
    im [sic] with my friend he is looking after me'.'

64. The applicant explained that he did not write this email. A friend with
    whom he lived, called Mohammed, wrote it down for him. He  stated  that
    he had tried to phone Ms. Simpson and  she  had  not  replied.  He  was
    scared and wanted to hide so was living with  his  friend  Shera  in  a
    property elsewhere in London. He could not recall how long  he  resided
    with Shera. When asked why he stayed with Shera, he replied that he had
    informed Ms. Simpson that people were trying to kill him. He asked that
    she change his house, and she replied that she could  not  do  anything
    for him and informed him that he was to make himself safe.

65. Mr. Swirsky asked the appellant whether he still resided with Mohammed.
    The applicant said yes. He was then asked whether  they  were  residing
    with each other when Mohammed  wrote  the  email  on  his  behalf.  The
    applicant responded, 'I don't remember whether  Mohammed  wrote  it  or
    [Shera]. I am not sure about it.' In response to a question as to where
    the email was written, he stated, 'I do not recall if I was in my house
    or in the house of Shera.'

66. He explained that upon his return from Norway, he met with Ms.  Simpson
    in a park and they discussed matters. The contact records  detail  that
    they met on 20 July 2020 and the applicant is recorded as informing Ms.
    Simpson 'that the person who wants to kill him has a problem  with  his
    brother whom [sic] lives in Iraq.' The applicant denied  that  he  said
    this to Ms. Simpson, explaining 'I told her someone is trying  to  kill
    me. That is it. I cannot communicate very well because of her  accent.'
    When reminded that he had given the  same  reason  for  his  flight  to
    officials on his  return,  the  applicant  replied,  'I  said  to  [Ms.
    Simpson] that they are trying to kill me. I have a problem.  They  want
    to kill me because of a problem with me, not with my brother.'

67. When asked by Mr. Swirsky to confirm his evidence  as  detailed  within
    his fourth witness statement, at para. 11, that  he  left  for  Germany
    'maybe a couple of days before Eid, but I cannot be sure of  the  exact
    date', the applicant responded that  he  said  'maybe'  two  days.  Mr.
    Swirsky reminded the applicant that Eid-al-Fitr in 2020 began on 23  to
    24 May and that on 2 June he sent an email to Ms. Simpson stating  that
    he had travelled to Swansea for Eid. The applicant responded by  saying
    that he was in hiding in London when the email was sent. When  reminded
    that according to his witness statement he was in Germany at this time,
    the applicant replied, 'I said I went there but  don't  know  how  many
    days before I went.' He confirmed  that  he  celebrated  Eid  in  Iraqi
    Kuridistan but observed that 'no-one celebrates it in this country'.

'AA'

68. AA attended the hearing and gave evidence on behalf of  the  applicant.
    He is a young adult who has been recognised by the  Home  Office  as  a
    refugee. He is presently in education and has part-time employment as a
    barber and in sales.

69. He relied upon a witness statement dated 20 January 2020  in  which  he
    confirmed that he met the  applicant  for  the  first  time  when  they
    attended the Refugee Council in Croydon in around September or  October
    2019. They have since become friends and see each other  regularly.  At
    the time of the statement the applicant visited two or  three  times  a
    week and they  remained  in  contact  over  the  phone.  The  applicant
    informed AA as to his age and such information is consistent  with  the
    applicant being born in 2001.

70. AA detailed that the applicant presents as younger than him due to  his
    behaviour and conduct. He behaves in a childish manner, is very playful
    and likes to play games on his phone. AA believes the applicant  to  be
    quite immature and na�ve as to his decision-making.

71. AA confirmed that the applicant has never worked  in  the  barber  shop
    with him. He detailed by means of his statement that:

         '[The applicant] only came to visit me there  once.  He  has  never
         worked at my barber shop, he would not be allowed to work here.  In
         order to work here you need to speak good English and have  a  Visa
         to work. Also, I do not believe that he knows how to cut hair.'

72. In answer to questions from Ms. Benfield,  AA  confirmed  that  he  has
    known the applicant since the summer  of  2019.  He  did  not  see  the
    applicant during lockdown, but they remained in  contact  by  telephone
    and WhatsApp. He acknowledged that the applicant could be considered to
    be older by others, 'his appearance is different  from  his  behaviour.
    His skin is not soft. He looks older. He has a  child's  attitude.'  He
    confirmed that he spent time with the applicant on  the  latter's  18th
    birthday.

73. AA confirmed to Mr. Swirsky that the applicant had not informed him  as
    to having been beaten up in March 2020 nor did he tell him that he  was
    leaving the country for Norway. As to the applicant, AA noted  that  he
    is not very good with money, lacks maturity and loses control.

Ms. Brown

74. Ms. Brown is the managing  director  of  CARAS,  a  charity  supporting
    people with a refugee and asylum-seeking background. She gave  evidence
    remotely and relied upon a witness statement dated 5 February 2020. She
    confirmed that the applicant was referred to CARAS in June 2019 by  his
    key worker to undertake English language classes and that  he  attended
    CARAS activities regularly between June and September 2019. On occasion
    Ms. Brown observed the applicant during such activities.

75. She confirmed that the applicant attended a three-day residential  trip
    in August 2019, held for young people aged under 18. The applicant  was
    required to share a room with 15 to 18-year-olds. Neither the staff  at
    CARAS nor the staff at the residential centre  had  concerns  that  the
    applicant was not being truthful as to his age.  She  further  observed
    that the applicant interacted with other young people  as  a  peer  and
    there were no concerns raised by others that he was much older than  he
    was asserting. She believes the applicant to be  the  age  that  he  is
    asserting.

76. At the hearing she confirmed that she has not had direct  contact  with
    the applicant since preparing her statement, but she continues to  have
    knowledge of him through staff. She confirmed that  the  applicant  was
    referred to CARAS as a child and it is not  the  practice  to  ask  for
    proof of age. She noted that she has an  obligation  to  protect  those
    using the organisation's support  and  services  and  so  continues  to
    assess issues such as age.

Ms. Banelyte

77. Ms. Banelyte is the head of Youth Services at CARAS. She gave  evidence
    remotely and relied upon a witness statement dated 4 February 2020. Ms.
    Banelyte detailed that the applicant regularly  attended  CARAS  events
    between  June  and  September  2019.  She  observed  that  most  people
    attending CARAS' activities are aged between 15 and 18 and hail from  a
    range of countries and nationalities, including young  Kurdish  people.
    She further observed that she is careful in decision-making and has  on
    occasion asked a participant to stop  attending  activities  for  young
    people due to their being an inappropriate age. She did not  take  that
    step with the applicant because she believes him to have been  aged  17
    years when he commenced attending CARAS activities.

78. Like Ms. Brown, Ms. Banelyte opined that the applicant integrated  well
    into youth groups and made friends. He attended a three-day residential
    trip in August 2019 that was for people aged under  18.  Staff  at  the
    residential centre, as well as CARAS staff, who have between them years
    of experience of working with young people, had no  concerns  that  the
    applicant was not being truthful as to his age.

79. Ms. Banelyte observed by her statement:

         'The applicant was interacting with other young people as  a  peer.
         In our experience, young people  themselves  are  quite  likely  to
         raise a concern if a young person in their group  is  significantly
         older than they have claimed. No such concerns have been raised  by
         any of the applicant's peers. He is very respectful  and  kind  and
         willing to engage. He joined all the activities at the  residential
         centre and spent evenings playing card  games  with  [a]  group  of
         young people from five different countries.'

80. Before me she confirmed  that  since  the  initial  lockdown,  she  has
    engaged with  the  applicant  by  means  of  telephone  check-ins.  She
    accepted that a young person accessing support and services provided by
    CARAS would be asked their date of birth  and  such  details  would  be
    accepted without questions. As to the applicant, she saw no  reason  to
    doubt his word. She provided one example of concern being raised as  to
    an adult asserting that they were a minor and he was asked to leave. He
    was subsequently identified as being  aged  24.  CARAS  supports  young
    people through age assessments. As to the applicant's attendance on the
    residential course she observed no behaviour that  raised  safeguarding
    concerns and confirmed that no safeguarding concerns had been raised as
    to an adult staying in a room with  persons  aged  under  18.  She  re-
    affirmed her belief that the applicant is the age he asserts.

Ms. Nanton

81. Ms. Nanton is an Age Dispute Adviser in the Children's Section  of  the
    Refugee Council. She gave evidence remotely and relied upon  a  witness
    statement dated 5  February  2020.  She  opined  that  the  applicant's
    physical appearance is that of a young person and  not  an  adult.  She
    asserts that consequent to her meetings, discussions, and  interactions
    with  the  applicant  and  from  her   experience   in   dealing   with
    unaccompanied asylum-seeking children, she believes the applicant to be
    his claimed age.

82. At the hearing she confirmed that the  applicant  was  brought  to  the
    Refugee Council by his keyworker and they met for a number of meetings.
    She detailed that she had no reason to doubt  that  the  applicant  was
    truthful as to his age,  though  she  acknowledged  that  she  had  not
    expressly  discussed  the  issue  with  him.  She   relied   upon   her
    observations arising from their interaction. She confirmed that she had
    not seen the applicant's engagement with social  media,  including  the
    photographs filed with the Tribunal.

MOA

83. MOA is a national of Iraq and is the applicant's paternal cousin. He is
    20 years older than the applicant and has known the applicant  for  all
    of his life. He supports the applicant as to his assertion of age.

84. By his statement dated 3 September 2020,  MOA  confirmed  that  he  has
    sought to send documents to the applicant in  this  country,  namely  a
    Jinsiya and a  Hawiya.  The  former  is  an  Iraqi  identity  document.
    However, though they were to be brought to  the  United  Kingdom  by  a
    business contact, they did not reach this country  and  so  were  never
    received by the applicant.

85. I was informed by Ms. Benfield that  efforts  had  been  undertaken  to
    contact MOA  and  ascertain  his  willingness  to  attend  the  hearing
    remotely. However, there was no  response  for  several  weeks  and  so
    reliance was placed upon the witness statement.

Mr. Ibrahim

86. The applicant relies upon a witness statement from Mr. Ibrahim, who  is
    aged 18 and is an Iraqi  national  hailing  from  Iraqi  Kurdistan.  He
    presently attends college and is in the care of the respondent.

87. By a witness statement dated 5 February 2020 Mr. Ibrahim confirmed that
    he met the applicant at the Refugee Council in Croydon in September  or
    October 2019, and they became friends.  He  stated  that  he  knew  the
    applicant in Iraqi Kurdistan as they played football for their  schools
    and he saw him on one occasion. The applicant reminded him of this when
    they first met  in  this  country  and  he  recalled  the  events.  The
    applicant has informed him as to his age,

88. Mr. Ibrahim did not attend the hearing.

BB

89. The appellant relies upon a witness statement from BB, who is a 20  and
    is a  national  of  Iran  hailing  from  Iranian  Kurdistan.  He  is  a
    recognised refugee who is studying and working part-time as a barber.

90. BB's witness statement is dated 20 January 2020. He confirmed  that  he
    met the applicant in 2019 and they are friends. They hang out  together
    in a Kurdish caf� every week or two and the applicant  sometimes  comes
    to the barber shop when he  needs  a  haircut.  BB  detailed  that  the
    applicant does not work with him in the barber shop because he  is  not
    allowed to do so and further has not been trained. BB  stated,  'We  do
    not spend a lot of time together because he is younger than me  and  my
    other friends.' He was informed by the applicant's solicitors that  the
    applicant is aged 18. Before this time, he had not thought to  ask  the
    applicant's age.

91. BB detailed that his first impression of the applicant was that he  was
    a kid and immature. He appears younger consequent to his behaviour.  He
    is always playing games and is 'sat' on his phone all the time. He does
    not talk much and appears quite shy. BB further detailed, 'He is  quite
    stroppy and if people say something that annoys him, he storms off  and
    goes home. He also doesn't like talking about girls or work and  avoids
    questions about these things when we are all talking about them.  These
    strike 'ne as the actions of a teenager who was the age of around 18.'

92. BB did not attend the hearing.

Mr. Jeff

93. Mr. Jeff previously acted as the applicant's litigation friend. He is a
    senior children's advisor at  the  Refugee  Council.  He  supports  the
    applicant's assertion as to his date of birth and age. By  a  statement
    dated 11 September 2019 he observed, inter alia:

         'From my experience of interacting with [the applicant] I find  the
         suggestion that he could be over 25 bordering  on  the  ridiculous.
         Having looked through the age assessment I see that social services
         rely upon such things as the fact that he is said  to  be  sexually
         active and has consumed alcohol. Having spoken to [the applicant] I
         am aware of the traumatic circumstances in which he was  forced  to
         leave his home country ... I am also aware that [the applicant] has
         in the past tried alcohol. I do not find either of these things  to
         be inconsistent with [the] behaviour and interests of most  healthy
         17-year-old children.'

94. Mr. Jeff attended the  hearing  but  was  not  required  to  give  oral
    evidence.

The respondent's case

95. The respondent relies upon  the  age  assessment  carried  out  by  Ms.
    Gregory and Ms. Taylor. The  conclusion  was  endorsed  by  their  team
    manager, Mr. Martin. Reliance is also placed upon three  witnesses  who
    provided oral evidence at the hearing  as  well  as  various  documents
    filed with the Tribunal, including case supervision notes, care  plans,
    placement agreements and pathway plans.

Ms. Gregory

96. Ms. Gregory has been a social worker since 2005 and is employed by  the
    respondent. By a witness statement dated 4 December 2019, she explained
    the process and procedure she adopted,  along  with  Ms.  Taylor,  when
    assessing the applicant's age. She detailed at paragraphs 7 to 9:

         '7.  It is my opinion that at the time of the  age  assessment  and
            decision meeting, which took place on 31.07.19 with a  decision
            given on 02.09.19, that [the applicant] was over  18  years  of
            age and therefore he was 18 years of age at the time he claimed
            asylum on 21.03.19, when his  age  was  disputed  by  the  Home
            Office as  significantly  over  18  years  of  age.  Given  his
            physical appearance, the images from social media and views  of
            professionals involved in his care, we did not feel that a full
            age assessment was required in order to come to the  conclusion
            that [the applicant] is an adult  who  is  significantly  older
            than his stated age.

         8. A referral to Croydon's Children's Services was  received  from
            Nasreen  Naujeer  of  the  Refugee  Council,  dated   26.03.19,
            requesting that [the applicant] be accommodated  on  the  basis
            that he stated he was a child. Nasreen based  the  referral  on
            what [the applicant] had  told  her  nothing  else.  The  local
            authority obliged with this request, pending an age assessment.

         9. In [the applicant's] case the assessment  was  carried  out  by
            myself and Roshamba Taylor. We reach the conclusion  that  [the
            applicant] is a person significantly older than 18 years of age
            for the reasons set out in the age assessment decision.'.

Ms. Taylor

97. Ms. Taylor has been a social worker since 2005 and is employed  by  the
    respondent. She relies upon a witness statement dated 3  January  2020,
    by which she explained the process and  procedure  she  adopted,  along
    with Miss Gregory, when assessing the applicant's age. She detailed  at
    paragraph 8:

         '8.  As a result  of  the  information  gathered  during  this  age
            assessment,   together   with   observations   made   of   [the
            applicant's] physical appearance, demeanour & interaction;  the
            information gathered from social media; and the  views  of  the
            other professionals, it was felt that an extended enquiry or  a
            full age assessment was not  necessary  in  order  to  reach  a
            conclusion in regards to [the applicant's] age. it became quite
            clear from an early stage that [the applicant] was an adult who
            appear to be well into his twenties. Therefore, a decision  was
            made to follow  recent  case  law  for  [the  applicant's]  age
            assessment as set out in the case of R  (K)  v.  Milton  Keynes
            Council  [2019]  where  the  judge  recognised  that  no   full
            assessment was required in clear cases and that it  was  lawful
            for  the  Local  Authority   to   proceed   in   this   manner.
            Additionally, this follows the case of R (B) v.  Merton  London
            Borough Council [2003] which states that in cases where  it  is
            very obvious that a  person  is  under  or  over  18  there  is
            normally no need for a prolonged inquiry.  Moreover,  the  ADCS
            Age  Assessment  Guidance  2015  states  that  'in  some   rare
            circumstances, it will be very clear that the individual is  an
            adult well over the age of 18, so prolonging inquiry may not be
            required.'

Mr. Williams

98. Mr. Williams was previously an advanced social worker employed  by  the
    respondent, He  gave  evidence  remotely  and  relied  upon  a  witness
    statement dated 13 January  2020.  He  was  the  applicant's  allocated
    social worker between April and July 2019,  though  for  part  of  that
    period he was not working for health reasons. He  recalls  meeting  the
    applicant on four occasions. He further recalls having  a  conversation
    with the applicant as to his telephone contact with his sister.

99. Mr. Williams detailed that the applicant's behaviour and demeanour were
    indicative of someone who is significantly older than his claimed  age,
    observing that the applicant behaves in a very assertive and  confident
    manner which is unusual for someone who is a minor. He detailed that he
    was informed by the applicant's  key  worker  that  the  applicant  was
    acting independently. Mr. Williams observed that  evidence  as  to  the
    applicant's independence included his going out in the  morning  to  go
    shopping, which is unusual in young people. He further noted  that  the
    applicant was cooking  and  budgeting,  which  are  other  examples  of
    independence. He accepted at the hearing  that  local  authority  notes
    would have noted the applicant as presenting with problematic behaviour
    if such concerns had arisen.

Mr. Martin

100. Mr. Martin is the respondent's Age Assessment Team Manager.  He  relied
    upon a witness statement dated 30 December 2019 and confirmed that  the
    evidence placed before him was compelling as to the applicant being  an
    adult who was significantly older than his stated age.

101. As to further social media evidence relied  upon  the  respondent.  Mr.
    Martin detailed, at paragraphs 9 to 11 of his statement:

         '9.  I was surprised to hear that [the applicant] had been  granted
            interim relief in regard to the age assessment as  it  appeared
            to me that evidence, particularly from social media, was  quite
            clear  in  evidencing  that  [the  applicant]   is   an   adult
            significantly older than his claimed age.

        10. After interim relief was granted, I did  a  further  search  of
            social media on 11 September 2019 myself and on  this  instance
            found  [the  applicant's]  Facebook  account,  and  the  family
            members linked to him. These images are even more compelling in
            regard to evidencing that [the applicant] is an  adult  who  is
            significantly older than his stated age.

        11. These images are from as far back as January  and  April  2015,
            when according to [the applicant's] claimed date of  birth,  he
            would have been between 13  years  old  3  and  6  months  old,
            respectively. Despite this, the  images  evidence  very  little
            difference in [the applicant's] physical appearance between the
            time the photos were taken and how he currently presents. He is
            observed to have a sculpted and groomed beard, and is  pictured
            with adults, none of whom he looks out of place alongside.'

102. Mr. Martin did not attend the hearing.

Mr. Ahmed-Idan

103. Mr. Ahmed-Idan is a social worker formerly employed by  the  respondent
    between 2017 and 2019. He gave evidence  remotely  and  relied  upon  a
    witness statement dated  24  December  2019.  He  was  the  applicant's
    allocated social worker between July and November 2019, and they met  a
    few times during such time. Mr.  Ahmed-Idan  observed  in  his  witness
    statement, '[The applicant]  did  not  engage  well  with  me.  I  have
    problems in meeting with him as he  often  ignored  social  worker  and
    independent reviewing officer's  appointments.  [The  applicant's]  key
    worker told me that he did not  have  friends  among  the  other  young
    people in the placement where he lived. The key worker stated also that
    [the applicant] treats his housemates as children and did not have  any
    dealings with them.'

104. Mr. Ahmed-Idan opined  that  the  applicant  is  much  older  than  his
    claimed age, opining that he is an adult aged 25 and above.

105. In answer to questions from Ms. Benfield, he confirmed that he was  the
    applicant's social worker from July to September 2019 and did not  meet
    him until early in August of that year. When asked why he assessed  the
    applicant as being significantly over the age of 25, he  accepted  that
    he could not be certain as to the age of any person. However, he  talks
    to a lot of young people and has children of his own, so is capable  of
    combining such experience with common  sense.  He  can  factor  in  his
    understanding that people grow up in different environments and can  be
    affected by harsh problems in life such as  poverty.  When  considering
    the applicant, Mr. Ahmed-Idan noted that  he  looked  very  mature.  He
    further observed  that  when  showing  the  applicant  around  his  new
    accommodation, the applicant conducted himself in a manner not expected
    in young people, for example looking around the premises in detail. Mr.
    Ahmed-Idan confirmed that he also drew  upon  observations  from  other
    professionals that the applicant was not  associating  with  the  young
    people he lived with.

Ms. Simpson

106. Ms. Simpson is a personal adviser with Children, Looked After and  Care
    Leavers, Turnaround Centre and is employed by the respondent. Her  role
    is to ensure that young people in the care of the local authority  have
    a smooth transition to living independently.

107. She gave evidence remotely and relied upon her witness statement  dated
    6 January 2020. She was the applicant's personal adviser. By  means  of
    her statement she  recalled  conducting  meetings  with  the  applicant
    between September and November 2019. She detailed  that  the  applicant
    was fully able to  assert  his  wishes  and  secure  responses  without
    prompting. He clearly articulated his expectations in a consistent  and
    mature manner.

108. Ms. Simpson's belief is that the applicant is a mature and  independent
    adult who has his own network of friends.  He  socialises,  travels  to
    different places on his own, keeps his home clean and  tidy,  can  cook
    and clean for himself and share accommodation with others. She  further
    observed that the applicant receives  regular  weekly  subsistence  and
    appears to be budgeting well.

109. By means of her witness  statement  she  concluded  that  she  has  not
    observed anything to question the outcome of the age assessment.

110. In answer to questions from Ms. Benfield, she confirmed  that  she  has
    supported the applicant from September 2019, though up  until  December
    2019 it was in a duty capacity before being  allocated  his  case.  She
    accepted that prior to signing her witness statement she had only  seen
    the applicant on four  occasions.  She  confirmed  that  the  applicant
    phones her regularly, more than any other young person at  the  present
    time, and if she is in a meeting with another child, she  will  contact
    him as soon she can.

111. In relation to the contact records, she was asked if she  could  recall
    her discussion with the applicant in April 2020 where he stated that he
    was scared. She confirmed that she could recall the discussion and  the
    applicant informed her that he had been attacked by a couple of men and
    they knew where he lived. He was scared that they would come  back  and
    beat him up again. She spoke about the applicant's  concerns  with  her
    line manager and  accommodation  was  subsequently  found  for  him  in
    Brighton, which he refused.

112. As to her discussion with the applicant in a  park  on  20  July  2020,
    following his return from Norway, she confirmed that no interpreter was
    present because of short notice. When asked whether she understood  the
    applicant, she replied that they did not struggle in  their  discussion
    and she understood the gist of what he was saying.  She  observed  that
    the applicant appeared more concerned about receiving a pre-paid card.

113.  Ms.  Simpson  confirmed  that  arrangements  had  been  made  for  the
    applicant to undertake work experience as a barber shop.

114. She confirmed her assessment that the applicant is independent. He  can
    be difficult because he believes that he should continue  to  have  the
    same treatment he received from a previous social worker, but he is not
    childish. He can express himself and  raises  concerns  on  everything,
    though the identified concerns are normal for someone leaving care.

The legal framework

115. The law in this area is  settled  and  is  not  in  issue  between  the
    parties. I am required to decide in this case whether the applicant, at
    the date of his asserted entry into the  United  Kingdom  on  21  March
    2019, was a person under the age of 18 and whether the applicant should
    be treated as a person who was a child at the relevant date in relation
    to section 20(1) of the  Children  Act  1989  ('the  1989  Act')  which
    details that 'Every local authority shall provide accommodation for any
    child in need within their area.'

116. There is no statutorily prescribed manner in  which  local  authorities
    are obliged to carry out age assessments. As confirmed by the Court  of
    Appeal in BF (Eritrea), at [53], the law proceeds on the basis that the
    most reliable  means  of  assessing  the  age  of  a  young  person  in
    circumstances where no documentary evidence is available is by the  so-
    called 'Merton compliant' assessment: R (B)  v  Merton  London  Borough
    Council [2003] EWHC  Admin  1689,  [2003]  4  All  ER  280  ('Merton').
    Relevant  requirements  have  been  considered  in  several  judgments,
    including VS v. Home Office [2014] EWHC  2483  QB,  and  were  recently
    summarised by Thornton J in AB v. Kent County Council [2020]  EWHC  109
    (Admin), [2020] P.T.S.R. 746, at [211.

117. Lady Hale confirmed in R (A) v. London Borough of Croydon  [2009]  UKSC
    8; [2009] 1 W.L.R. 2557, at [51], that the question whether a person is
    a child for the purposes of section 20 of the 1989 Act is a question of
    fact which must ultimately be decided by the Tribunal and  the  process
    has to be one of assessment. This involves the application of judgement
    on a variety of factors and however difficult it may be to resolve  the
    issue it admits of only one answer.

118. As it is a question of fact, ultimately the question must be  a  matter
    for  the  Tribunal.  This  requires  me  to  effectively  act   in   an
    inquisitorial  role  determining,  on  the  balance  of  probabilities,
    whether the applicant was or was not a child at the  date  of  the  age
    assessment. The approach to be taken and the  burden  of  proof  to  be
    applied were confirmed by Stanley Burnton J in Merton at [371 - [381:

         'It is apparent from the foregoing that, except in clear cases, the
         decision-maker cannot determine age solely  on  the  basis  of  the
         appearance of the applicant. In general,  the  decision-maker  must
         seek to elicit the general background of the  applicant,  including
         his family circumstances and history, his  educational  background,
         and his activities  during  the  previous  few  years.  Ethnic  and
         cultural information may also be important. If there is  reason  to
         doubt the applicant's statement as to his age,  the  decision-maker
         will have to make the assessment of his  credibility  and  he  will
         have to ask questions designed to test his credibility.

         I do not think it is helpful to apply concepts of onus of proof  to
         the assessment of age by  local  authorities.  Unlike  cases  under
         section 55 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
         there is in the present context no legislative provision placing an
         onus of proof on the applicant. The local authority must  make  its
         assessment on the material available to and obtained by  it.  There
         should be no predisposition,  divorced  from  the  information  and
         evidence available to  the  local  authority,  to  assume  that  an
         applicant is an adult, or conversely that he is a child. Of course,
         if an applicant has previously stated that  he  was  over  18,  the
         decision maker will take that previous statement into account,  and
         in the absence of an acceptable explanation it may, when considered
         with the other material available, be decisive.'

119. The Court of Appeal held in R (CJ)  v  Cardiff  County  Council  [2011]
    EWCA Civ 1590; [2012] 2 All E.R. 836, at [21] and [23], that  once  the
    court is invited to make a decision upon jurisdictional fact it can  do
    no more than apply the balance of  probability  to  the  issue  without
    resorting to the concept of discharge  of  a  burden  of  proof.  I  am
    therefore required to decide whether, on a balance of probability,  the
    applicant was or was not at the material time a child.

120. I proceed on the basis that it may  well  be  inappropriate  to  expect
    from the applicant conclusive evidence of age in circumstances in which
    he has arrived unaccompanied and without original  identity  documents.
    The nature of the evaluation of evidence depends  upon  the  particular
    facts of the case.

121. In the absence of any corroborative documentary  evidence  as  to  age,
    the starting point is the credibility of the evidence placed before the
    Tribunal, as confirmed by Aikens LJ in R  (AE)  v.  London  Borough  of
    Croydon [2012] EWCA Civ 547, at [23].

122. The Tribunal is therefore not confined to choose between the  positions
    of the parties: R (W) v. London Borough of Croydon [2012] EWHC 1130, at
    [3].  The  nature  of  my  inquiry  under  the  Children  Act  1989  is
    inquisitorial and I must decide the applicant's age on the  balance  of
    probability. I observe  that  the  purpose  of  the  assessment  is  to
    establish a person's chronological age  based  on  information  derived
    from the  young  person  and  an  assessment  of  the  credibility  and
    plausibility of that evidence.  If  the  chronological  information  is
    consistent, plausible and believable then no apparent observation about
    chance appearance and demeanour is likely to tip  the  balance  against
    the age stated by the child: R (FZ) v. London Borough of Croydon [2011]
    EWCA Civ 59; [2011] P.T.S.R. 748.

123. The application of the benefit  of  the  doubt  in  an  age  assessment
    matter is nothing more than  an  acknowledgement  that  age  assessment
    cannot be concluded with 100% accuracy, absent  definitive  documentary
    evidence, and as in the case of unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  children
    who may also have been traumatised, unlikely to be supported  by  other
    evidence. On such basis, its proper application is that  where,  having
    considered the evidence, it is concluded that  there  is  doubt  as  to
    whether an individual is over 18 or not, then in  those  circumstances,
    it should be concluded that  the  applicant  is  under  18.  Thus,  the
    benefit of the doubt is not of use where a specific date or age has  to
    be determined except insofar as it requires a sympathetic assessment of
    the evidence: R (AS) v. Kent County Council [2017] UKUT 446  (IAC),  at
    [20] - [21].

124. I am mindful as to the caution that is to be exercised  in  respect  of
    the applicant's evidence, as noted by Stanley Burnton J in  Merton,  at
    [28]:

         'Given the impossibility of any decision maker being able  to  make
         an objectively verifiable determination of the age of an  applicant
         who may be in the age range of, say, 16 to 20, it is  necessary  to
         take a history from him or her with a view to  determining  whether
         it is true. A history that is accepted as true  and  is  consistent
         with an age below 18 will enable the decision maker in such a  case
         to decide that the applicant is a child.  Conversely,  however,  an
         untrue history, while relevant, is not necessarily indicative of  a
         lie as to the age of the applicant. Lies may be  told  for  reasons
         unconnected with the applicant's case as to his age, for example to
         avoid his return to his country of  origin.  Furthermore,  physical
         appearance and behaviour cannot be isolated from  the  question  of
         the veracity  of  the  applicant:  appearance,  behaviour  and  the
         credibility of his account are all matters  that  reflect  on  each
         other.'



Vulnerability

125. The applicant seeks  to  be  considered  as  a  vulnerable  person.  He
    primarily relies  upon  a  letter  authored  by  Jassim  Laftaly,  MECS
    Counsellor, Waterloo Multi-Ethnic Counselling, dated  6  October  2020,
    which runs to two paragraphs and provides information over 7 lines:

         'This is to inform you that  [the  applicant]  has  been  receiving
         weekly  counselling  at  Waterloo   Community   Counselling   since
         28/09/2020. He will have a total of 12 sessions with me.

         During  his  assessment,  [the  applicant]  presented  with   acute
         depression, anxiety, suicidal ideation, fear of  others,  insomnia,
         nightmares, flashbacks, anger, isolation, despair, eating disorder,
         lack of confidence, low self-esteem  and  symptoms  of  PTSD.  [The
         applicant's] mental health deteriorated due to a stabbing  incident
         several months ago.'

126. In considering this document, I observe that the  applicant  has  filed
    no GP or medical notes, and no update was provided at the hearing on 24
    November 2020 as to whether counselling was continuing.

127.  Before  me  the  applicant  asserted  that  he  suffers   from   audio
    hallucinations. Ms. Benfield accepted that there  was  no  evidence  in
    relation to such concern. I observe that there is no reference  in  any
    contact report as to such concern being conveyed by  the  applicant  to
    the respondent.

128. In considering Mr. Laftaly's letter, I observe that  a  contact  report
    for 5 April 2019 confirms the  applicant  as  eating  once  a  day  and
    worrying about his family. He is recorded as having recently  lost  two
    sisters and reporting that he wakes up from nightmares. At the time  he
    was not interested in counselling. Subsequent contact reports refer  to
    investigations being  undertaken  as  to  whether  he  is  at  risk  of
    thalassemia, an inherited condition  that  affects  the  production  of
    haemoglobin. It can make a sufferer suffer shortness of breath  and  be
    very anemic, leading to tiredness. It is understood that the  applicant
    lost his sisters  to  this  illness.  The  contact  reports  also  note
    concerns as to the applicant's emotional wellbeing. I  further  observe
    that the referral form for an initial LAC health assessment  identifies
    the applicant as suffering from regular nightmares and also flashbacks.
    In the assessment he is identified as eating one meal a day  consequent
    to his journey to this country and to have become used to eating  small
    amounts of food. This is consistent with an eating disorder.

129. However, I am unable to identify the applicant previously referring  to
    suicidal ideation either to members of the respondent's  care  team  or
    health care professionals. Such concern is not  raised  at  his  asylum
    screening interview, nor is it raised in the  five  witness  statements
    before me.

130. I conclude that the applicant can properly be  treated  as  vulnerable,
    with symptoms associated  with  acute  depression  and  anxiety.  I  am
    satisfied that he is capable for the purpose of  these  proceedings.  I
    therefore have kept in mind the 'mental  ill  health'  section  of  the
    Equal Treatment Bench  Book  (March  2020),  commencing  at  page  329.
    Accordingly, I ensured that breaks were taken  whenever  the  applicant
    requested and permitted the early conclusion of evidence on day one  at
    his request upon being informed that he was feeling tired.

131. Whilst not satisfied that  there  was  sufficient  evidence  before  me
    establishing to  the  required  standard  that  the  applicant  suffers
    suicidal ideation, and Ms. Benfield did  not  rely  upon  such  concern
    before me, I ensured to keep myself  informed  as  to  the  applicant's
    welfare over the course of the hearing.

Analysis of the evidence

132. When assessing the  applicant's  credibility,  I  have  had  particular
    regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2  of  2010:  Child,
    Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance, and my assessment of
    the applicant's credibility has been considered in  the  round,  taking
    due account of the evidence presented and giving due allowance for  the
    fact that many child asylum seekers and  victims  of  trafficking  will
    have problems in  presenting  a  coherent  account  of  their  personal
    history and travel to this country. I note that memory can be  affected
    by mental health issues and by the order and manner in  which  evidence
    is given.

133. In reaching my decision, I have had the benefit of the totality of  the
    evidence upon  which  the  parties  seek  to  rely,  whether  expressly
    referred to me or not, including the oral  evidence  presented  by  the
    applicant and AA who attended in person before me and  Ms.  Brown,  Ms.
    Banelyte, Ms. Nanton, Mr. Williams, Mr. Ahmed-Idan and Ms. Simpson  who
    attended remotely. I have considered statements from witnesses who were
    not required or able to attend the hearing, namely Mr. Jeff,  MOA,  Mr.
    Ibrahim, BB, Ms. Gregory, Mr. Martin and Ms. Taylor. I  have  also  had
    the benefit of having considered copies of social care notes maintained
    by the respondent recording its interactions with, and decisions  taken
    in respect of, the applicant as well as various care and pathway plans.

134. For the avoidance of doubt, before I embark  upon  the  search  for  an
    answer  to  the  primary  question  now  to  be  addressed  as  to  the
    applicant's date of birth, I confirm that I have done  so  without  any
    'predisposition' that the applicant is or is not a child.

    Question 1: Whether the age assessment was a short-form age  assessment
    or not

135. Mr. Swirsky accepted on behalf of the respondent that a short-form  age
    assessment was undertaken. Such concession is in  accordance  with  the
    age assessment's confirmation at page 3  that  it  was  not  felt  that
    prolonged enquiry or  a  full  assessment  was  required  in  light  of
    evidence gathered from social  media,  as  well  as  the  view  of  the
    allocated social worker, and observations of the  applicant's  physical
    appearance, demeanour and interaction.

    Question  2:  The  weight  to  be  placed  upon  the  respondent's  age
    assessment including whether the age assessment was conducted  in  line
    with the requirements of a lawful and procedurally fair assessment  and
    whether it was based upon firm grounds and reasons.

136. I am mindful that a short-form age assessment  is  one  that  tends  to
    depend primarily on physical appearance and demeanour, and so may  well
    fail to adequately take into account an applicable margin of error.

137. I note Thornton J' s observation in AB v Kent County Council, at  [35],
    that there may come a point when an experienced social worker considers
    they have conducted sufficient  inquiries  to  be  confident  that  the
    person in front of them is either an adult  or  a  child  and  in  such
    circumstances, it  would  be  pointless  to  nevertheless  require  the
    continuation of the inquiry process to achieve full 'Merton' compliance
    simply for the sake of form. However, as observed by Stanley Burnton  J
    in Merton at [37], age cannot be determined  solely  on  the  basis  of
    appearance except in clear cases.

138. I am therefore mindful that a short-form age assessment may  contain  a
    higher margin of error than a full Merton-compliant age assessment.

    Question 3: The weight to be placed upon third party evidence

139. An answer to this question  was  not  pursued  with  vigour  by  either
    representative before me. Ultimately the question as to the applicant's
    age is one of fact and it is one that I am required to  answer,  taking
    into account and giving appropriate weight to the evidence before me.

140. I adopt caution against an over-reliance on any asserted  expertise  of
    social workers in age assessment matters, being mindful that weight may
    also be given to third-party evidence,  where  persons  with  close  or
    supervisory connection  with  an  applicant  can  point  to  consistent
    attitudes, and I accept that a number of supporting  instances  over  a
    considerable period of time is likely to carry weight that observations
    made in the artificial surroundings of an assessment  interview  cannot
    carry.  Consequently,  the  decision  of  a  social   worker   is   not
    determinative and is not a 'starting point'. I am required to reach  my
    own conclusions as to the applicant's age and date of birth based  upon
    all the evidence before me.

141. In considering the nature of  evidence  that  may  be  of  aid  in  the
    process, and the weight it may enjoy, I observe  the  decision  of  the
    Tribunal in R (AM) v. Solihull Metropolitan Borough Council [2012] UKUT
    00118 (IAC), at [19]-[21].

    Question 4: The applicant's date of birth.

142. I observe the contents of the age assessment.

Third party witnesses

143. My primary focus is on the  credibility  of  the  applicant's  evidence
    concerning his age, but I am permitted to have  regard  to  credibility
    more generally, provided that my primary focus is not forgotten.

144. In this matter, as explained below, I can give some weight to  evidence
    from the witnesses, who between them have either  interacted  with  the
    applicant on a professional level or as peers. However,  such  evidence
    in this matter is not determinative as to the applicant's age but  does
    help in the balancing exercise when assessing the applicant's evidence.

145. I observe that in this matter none of  the  witnesses,  save  for  MOA,
    have spent significant time with the applicant.  As  to  the  witnesses
    residing in this country, only Ms.  Simpson  has  interacted  with  the
    applicant to any depth since last summer. Such state of affairs is  not
    unusual in circumstances where an asylum seeker arrives in this country
    asserting that they  are  17  and  are  consequently  placed  in  local
    authority  care,  often  residing  in  semi-independent  accommodation,
    possibly with a college placement, developing friendships in the  local
    community and receiving support from charitable organisations.

146. As to the  applicant's  witnesses,  I  found  those  who  attended  the
    hearing to be genuine in their observations and careful to be  accurate
    in their recollections. Whilst  professional  witnesses  met  with  the
    applicant on occasion from the summer of 2019 to the beginning  of  the
    Covid-19 pandemic in March 2020, and friends more regularly, in general
    the  interaction  since  the  initial  lockdown  has  been  limited  to
    telephone, email and WhatsApp conversations.

147. I give some weight to AA's personal belief that the  applicant  is  the
    age claimed and note that over time his  opinion  has  not  changed.  I
    observe such opinion is, in part, based  upon  being  informed  by  the
    applicant as to his stated age. I am satisfied that the evidence of  AA
    can be given some weight because reactions from an  individuals'  peers
    may  be  of  assistance  because  it  is  informative  as  to  personal
    interaction, in this case  identifying  AA's  observations  as  to  the
    applicant's personal behaviour.

148. I find Ms. Brown and Ms. Banelyte to  have  been  honest  and  fair  in
    their evidence before me and take  into  account  their  experience  of
    working with asylum seeking children. Ms. Brown  was  open  as  to  her
    limited observations  of  the  applicant,  understandable  due  to  the
    constraints and pressures of her management  role  at  CARAS.  She  was
    candid in that she relied,  in  part,  upon  the  observations  of  her
    experienced staff. Such observations were detailed by Ms. Banelyte, who
    again presented genuine and honest evidence. I place some  weight  upon
    the  opinions  of  both  witnesses  as  to  their  assessment  of   the
    applicant's age. They operate on the  basis  of  taking  an  attendee's
    given age at face value, though both are alive to the fact  that  there
    is  a  constant  obligation  to  reassess  their  professional  opinion
    consequent to safeguarding requirements. I am  satisfied  that  neither
    witness has enjoyed access to the wide range of  materials  before  me,
    and so when assessing their evidence and in particular their assessment
    of the applicant's age, I must have in  mind  that  their  professional
    opinion may, or may not, be amended in light of such  evidence  because
    of their continuing safeguarding obligations.

149. The height of Ms. Brown's and  Ms.  Banelyte's  evidence  is  that  the
    applicant  attended  a  residential  course  last  year   without   any
    safeguarding concerns being raised by several professionals.

150. I found Ms. Nanton to be an open and honest witness  and  I  give  some
    weight to her evidence. I observe that she relied upon a mixture of the
    applicant's physical appearance and  her  own  professional  experience
    from their interactions when reaching her conclusion  that  he  is  his
    claimed age. I note at this juncture her candid acceptance that she had
    not observed the contents of the  applicant's  engagement  with  social
    media.

151. I have considered the evidence of BB and Mr. Jeff and have decided  not
    to lessen the weight to be applied to  their  evidence  simply  because
    they did not attend the hearing. I have read their  witness  statements
    and accept that they are honest witnesses.

152. I observe Mr.  Jeff's  evidence  that  prior  to  the  preparation  and
    signing of his witness statement he spent in excess of  7�  hours  with
    the applicant. I give some weight to his assessment of the  applicant's
    age, being mindful that he relies upon his professional experience, but
    note that he has not had access to the wide range  of  evidence  before
    me.

153. BB's evidence is based upon what the applicant has told  him  and  upon
    his personal observation of the applicant's demeanour. He accepts  that
    the applicant looks older than 18 but  is  satisfied  that  he  is  his
    claimed age. I am satisfied that this evidence can be given some weight
    because it relates to the applicant's interaction with his peers.

154. I have read the evidence of  MOA  with  care.  As  to  his  support  in
    enabling the applicant to leave this country  in  2020  and  travel  to
    mainland Europe, he states that because of his business, 'I spoke to  a
    contact of mine in Norway and I arranged for the applicant to travel to
    Norway'. This understates his role in enabling the applicant to  travel
    across  several  international  borders   without   a   passport.   The
    applicant's own evidence confirms that MOA is a man with connections to
    people traffickers, people who are part of the criminal underworld.  He
    was able to secure the services of  such  people  in  Turkey,  Denmark,
    United Kingdom, Germany, Sweden and Norway. I further observe that  the
    assertion that an effort was made to transport the  applicant's  Hawiya
    and Jinsiya to this country solely rests upon the evidence of  MOA.  It
    is said that instead of posting the documents, or  at  the  very  least
    sending copies of them, MOA arranged for a business contact of  his  to
    bring them to the United Kingdom. His  witness  statement  details,  'I
    understand that there were some complications and that they were  taken
    and therefore they were never received, and they never arrived  to  the
    UK.' There is no detail provided as to the 'business contact'  and  the
    circumstances of their sending and  confiscation  is  very  vague.  The
    applicant detailed in his third witness statement  that  MOA  rang  him
    through Facebook messenger, 'and stated that he had given  the  man  my
    ID, but that man had had the ID confiscated in the airport because they
    were not his documents. This was over three months ago. My cousin  told
    me that in the airport, they cut my [ID] into two pieces and  threw  it
    away.' Such evidence as to events is again vague.  I  observe  that  no
    detail is given as to which  airport  or  country  the  documents  were
    confiscated, nor is it explained  what  subsequently  happened  to  the
    courier. In the circumstances, I am not  satisfied,  on  balance,  that
    such events occurred. I do not find MOA to be  a  credible  witness  on
    this issue and in the circumstances give limited weight to his evidence
    on other issues.

155. The high point of Mr. Ibrahim's evidence is that he recalls playing  in
    a school football match against the applicant whilst residing in  Iraqi
    Kurdistan. On its face,  this  is  significant  corroborative  evidence
    supportive of the applicant's claimed age. As such evidence is  closely
    entwined with my consideration of the applicant's evidence  as  to  his
    claimed age, I assess it in the round with the applicant's evidence.

156. Turning  to  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the  respondent,  I  have
    considered the witness statements of Ms. Gregory and Ms. Taylor as well
    as the age assessment and observe that they place great  reliance  upon
    the applicant's physical appearance, images from social media and views
    of professionals  involved  in  his  care.  Being  mindful  as  to  the
    inadequacies that may arise in a short-form age assessment,  I  proceed
    to assess this evidence in the round with the applicant's evidence.

157. I found Mr. Williams to be engaging, helpful  and  honest  witness  who
    accepted that he had relatively limited contact with the  applicant.  I
    accept that  he  is  truthful  as  to  his  recollection  of  having  a
    conversation with the applicant as to his being  in  telephone  contact
    with a sister, as such evidence is corroborated  by  a  contact  record
    note  dated  5  April  2019  which  confirms  as  to  the   applicant's
    communication with his family, '[the applicant] has  telephone  contact
    with his family, through  his  sister.'  I  give  some  weight  to  Mr.
    William's assessment of the applicant's age in  his  professional  role
    but observe that he places reliance upon the applicant's appearance and
    demeanour.

158. Mr. Ahmed-Idan was an open and honest witness who had  limited  contact
    with the applicant. I am satisfied that I can give some weight  to  his
    assessment  of  the  applicant's  age,  based  upon  his   professional
    experience,  though  as  with  other  witnesses  relied  upon  by   the
    respondent, he places reliance  upon  the  applicant's  appearance  and
    demeanour.

159. Mr. Martin did not attend the hearing  and  for  the  reasons  detailed
    above I do not make an adverse finding  upon  his  non-attendance.  His
    evidence is particularly helpful in explaining the  identification  and
    subsequent filing of photographs posted on social media. I am satisfied
    that I can give some weight to his assessment of the applicant though I
    observe that he also relies upon appearance and demeanour  in  reaching
    his conclusion as to the applicant's age

160. Ms. Simpson has been the applicant's personal  adviser  from  September
    2019 to the present time, whether in a  duty  capacity  until  December
    2019 or in an appointed role from that time. She gave her evidence in a
    very fair and honest manner and it was consistent with relevant contact
    records.  On  occasion  she  confirmed  to  my  satisfaction  that  the
    applicant was being honest and  truthful  as  to  certain  events,  for
    example that his work experience at a barber shop was approved  by  the
    respondent and as to why she was unable to accompany the applicant to a
    police station. I am required to consider the disputes in evidence that
    arise between the applicant and Ms. Simpson and do so below.

161. Regarding the third-party evidence considered  above,  I  observe  that
    when assessing the core  elements  of  the  applicant's  account  I  am
    required to adopt a holistic approach and consider the evidence in  the
    round. I am mindful that when considering the  evidence  of  the  third
    parties, none of them  are  able  to  expressly  confirm  or  deny  the
    applicant's evidence as to his date of birth. In identifying as to  the
    majority of the third-party witnesses that I will give 'some' weight to
    their evidence, I have concluded that though their evidence  was  given
    honestly, it may be subject to unintentional  confirmation  bias.  Some
    witnesses have adopted the applicant's assertion as to his age  without
    more, with limited information being available to them to  permit  them
    to reassess their early conclusion, whilst others have formed  opinions
    based upon early assumptions as to appearance and  demeanour  and  have
    appeared resilient to amending their views  in  the  light  of  further
    information. A number of witnesses have relied upon what is said to  be
    the  applicant's  'childish'  behaviour,   including   exhibitions   of
    stroppiness, anger and crying. Others rely upon his ability to cook and
    financial acumen. Such behaviour is  not  the  preserve  of  adolescent
    children, or alternatively confirmation of  adulthood.  An  example  is
    BB's observation that the applicant 'is quite stroppy and if people say
    something that annoys him, he storms off and goes home. He also doesn't
    like talking about girls or  work  and  avoids  questions  about  these
    things when we are all talking about  them.  These  strike  me  as  the
    actions of a teenager who is the age of around 18.' Loss of temper  and
    displays of petulance are not the preserve of adolescent  children  and
    such expressions of frustration can regularly be identified in  adults,
    particularly  those  who  have  failed  to   fully   develop   socially
    appropriate methods of expressing annoyance. Shyness as  to  discussing
    personal circumstances is a trait regularly seen in adults as  well  as
    in adolescents.

Applicant's evidence

Lack of corroborative documentary evidence

162. As observed above, my primary  focus  is  on  the  credibility  of  the
    applicant's  evidence  concerning   his   age.   In   considering   his
    credibility, I remain mindful of his vulnerability. I note  that  there
    is no challenge to the fact that he is ethnic Kurd hailing from Iraq. I
    place no weight in my assessment upon the inability of the applicant to
    produce corroborative documentary evidence as to his date of  birth  as
    he is an asylum seeker who asserts that he fled his country  so  as  to
    avoid persecution and so has  good  reasons  for  not  having  relevant
    documents with him in this country.

Consistency

163. When considering the applicant's evidence, I take into account that  he
    has been consistent as to his date of birth since his arrival  in  this
    country. I also observe that he has been  consistent  in  his  evidence
    that his parents, particularly his mother, informed him as his date  of
    birth on several occasions and that he  celebrated  his  16th  birthday
    with a party. He  has  also  been  consistent  in  his  assertion  that
    birthdays are not usually celebrated in his home area. More  generally,
    the  applicant  has  been  consistent  in  his  evidence  as   to   the
    circumstances of his personal troubles in Iraq. Consistency in evidence
    is a positive factor to  be  placed  into  my  assessment  but  is  not
    determinative of the question I am required to answer.

Neutral matters

164.  On  behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr.  Swirsky  skillfully  sought  to
    establish discrepancies in the applicant's evidence as  to  his  flight
    from his  persecutors  in  Iraq.  However,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    preparation for his flight from Iraq is closely connected to his  claim
    for  international  protection  and  arose   in   circumstances   where
    expedition and confusion reigned. In  such  circumstances,  I  consider
    that the appropriate approach is to consider the  evidence  surrounding
    his decision to leave Iraq neutrally.  However,  for  reasons  detailed
    below, it is appropriate that I consider the applicant's evidence as to
    how he crossed the border from Iraq into Turkey.

165. Mr. Swirksy also sought to rely upon the applicant's use  of  deception
    when crossing European borders, in particular the use  of  false  names
    and dates of birth. I remind myself that persons seeking  asylum  often
    require the aid of human traffickers to cross borders and may be placed
    under considerable pressure not to discuss both their  agents  and  the
    means taken to  enter  and  exit  countries.  It  may  be  said  to  be
    unfortunate that the applicant  has  decided  to  continue  to  protect
    people from the criminal underworld who have aided him. The applicant's
    evidence  that  having  arrived  at  an  airport  in  Denmark  with  no
    identification documents, including no passport, he  was  permitted  to
    leave  the  premises  after  only  20  minutes  may  appropriately   be
    approached with caution. However, I accept that  the  reasons  for  not
    being truthful in circumstances  involving  human  traffickers  may  be
    complex and so as I informed the  representatives  at  the  hearing,  I
    place no adverse weight upon the applicant's evidence  in  relation  to
    his travels in Europe, up until  his  official  return  to  the  United
    Kingdom from Norway under the  Dublin  III  Regulation.  I  treat  such
    evidence neutrally.

166. The respondent  relies  upon  the  applicant's  refusal  to  accept  an
    initial placement in Leeds upon having made  his  asylum  claim  and  a
    subsequent refusal to accept  a  placement  in  Brighton  following  an
    assault in March 2020. I find that these matters are not ones that  aid
    in my assessment of the question before me and so treat them neutrally.

Schooling in Iraq

167. I observe the applicant's evidence as to his schooling in Iraq. He  has
    been consistent as to starting school in 'year 1', or 'grade 1', at the
    age of 7. He informed me that the school year officially  commences  in
    September and runs for nine months. His evidence as  to  when  he  left
    school is less consistent. In his first witness statement he  confirmed
    that he finished 'grade 10' at school but did not attend for 'grade 11'
    in October 2018. In his asylum statement he detailed that  he  finished
    primary school and attended secondary school until completing 'year  9'
    before travelling to the United Kingdom. In his evidence before  me  he
    confirmed that he attended school until 'grade 10', but then  explained
    he did  not  actually  start  school  that  year  because  whilst  term
    officially starts  in  September  by  the  time  schools  begin  to  be
    organised and hand out textbooks they start in October.

168. Before me the  applicant's  evidence  as  to  his  schooling  was  very
    unsatisfactory. He accepted that he had studied mathematics  at  school
    and that he told the  assessors  that  it  was  one  of  his  favourite
    subjects, along with sport. However, having accepted that he  commenced
    'grade 1' at the age of 7, and that each new academic year  started  in
    September, he consistently informed Mr. Swirsky that he was  unable  to
    recall, even approximately, what age he was in each academic  year.  He
    asserted to Mr. Swirsky, 'I do not know how old I was  in  2015,  2016,
    2017'.

169. During re-examination, Ms.  Benfield  sought  to  address  this  issue,
    noting the applicant's confirmation that he started school at  the  age
    of 7. She asked the applicant 'Would you not then be able to  work  out
    how old you were in each given year.' The applicant confirmed he could,
    but no detail was provided. Nor was any explanation provided as to  why
    he had informed Mr. Swirsky that he could not undertake the simple task
    of adding one additional year to his age every time he progressed to  a
    new academic year.

170. I find to the requisite standard that the  applicant  is  numerate,  as
    corroborated both by his acceptance that mathematics  was  one  of  his
    favourite subjects at school and by  his  ability  to  look  after  his
    finances in this country. I further find that he was untruthful in  his
    answers to Mr. Swirsky. Why has the applicant adopted such an approach?
    I am satisfied that he  is  aware  that  there  was  criticism  of  the
    information he provided to the age assessors as to what age he  was  in
    different grades at school, as detailed within the age assessment,  and
    decided to avoid answering the topic  before  me.  Such  approach  must
    attract some adverse weight in my assessment.

171. Further, I am satisfied  that  the  applicant  was  not  truthful  when
    seeking to assert that the  school  term  starts  in  reality,  if  not
    officially, in October. His statement  as  to  leaving  school  at  the
    conclusion of 'Year 9' in his asylum witness statement is  contradicted
    by his September 2019  witness  statement  where  he  details  that  he
    finished 'grade 10' of school but did not attend for 'grade 11'.  I  am
    satisfied  that  his  evidence  at  the  hearing  before  me   was   an
    unsophisticated means of trying to remedy the  clear  inconsistency  in
    the timeline established by his witness statement.

172. In such circumstances, I find to  the  appropriate  standard  that  the
    applicant has not been truthful as to when he attended school in  Iraq,
    nor as to how long he attended.

Birth dates of family members

173. The applicant provided years of birth or ages for some members  of  his
    family. He has also asserted on occasion that he  cannot  provide  such
    details for all members of his family, including his half-brother,  OA,
    his cousin, M, and his brother-in-law, P.

174. At the hearing, the applicant denied  knowing  the  years  his  parents
    were born and steps were taken by Mr. Swirsky  to  remind  him  of  his
    asylum witness statement where he provided these details, The applicant
    clarified his evidence by detailing that the years  of  birth  provided
    were approximate, though he subsequently informed me that he was  aware
    of the years in which his parents and some siblings were  born  because
    he had watched a recording of an interview his  parents  had  given  in
    relation to his father's involvement with the Peshmerga and  the  years
    were stated. The applicant further confirmed that the year of birth  of
    some siblings was conveyed to him by a message from YW whilst he was in
    France.

175. I find that the applicant was truthful as to the dates of birth of  his
    parents in his asylum statement and I am content, on balance, to accept
    the age provided by the applicant in relation  to  YW  in  his  witness
    statement and to MW as detailed in the contact records. The  difference
    of a year or so in the years of birth attributed to FW and SW  are  not
    matters that I am required to make a finding upon, save that  I  accept
    the applicant's evidence that they are older than him.

176. Whilst the identified years of birth or  ages  of  family  members  are
    matters to be placed into my assessment, they are not determinative  of
    the applicant's age.

177. I address the ages of OA, M and P below.

Celebration of 16th birthday

178. There was no challenge to the applicant's assertion that birthdays  are
    not regularly celebrated in Kurdish region of Iraq, nor that they could
    be celebrated if desired. I find that the applicant did  celebrate  his
    16th birthday, though this is not determinative that such birthday fell
    on 14 September 2017.

Contact with family members

179. I find that the applicant is not truthful as to his continuing  contact
    with family members beyond his contact with MOA. He  explained  in  his
    third witness statement as to why contact had ceased with close members
    of his family: 'I  had  been  occasionally  speaking  with  my  family,
    specifically my brother, through Facebook  messenger  ...  Also  he  (a
    member of the opposing family) has control over communications  and  so
    he might have been able to see who my family  were  speaking  with.  My
    brother told me on Facebook messenger that he  would  not  be  able  to
    speak to me again. I have not had  any  communication  with  him  since
    then. I still am in contact with my cousin occasionally.' Before me the
    applicant initially stated that he could not recall saying that he  had
    been in contact with  his  brother  by  Facebook  Messenger.  When  his
    attention was drawn to contact reports detailing that he had created  a
    Facebook account to keep in contact with his brother, he  replied  that
    his brother was 'not replying.' He explained that he had  not  informed
    the respondent as to his brother directing him not to continue  contact
    with the family because he 'did not want them to think that his  family
    did not want to have contact with their own child.'

180. The applicant's evidence on this issue  cannot  withstand  even  gentle
    scrutiny. He provides no coherent  explanation  as  to  how  the  other
    family could monitor any contact between him and his family  by  social
    media, including telephone calls by Facebook  Messenger.  It  is  clear
    from the evidence that members of his family  have  been  using  social
    media for several years before the applicant left Iraq and  they  would
    be aware as to the security measures  put  in  place  by  social  media
    companies, for example anti-intrusion systems as well as antivirus  and
    anti-spyware programs. I take judicial note that social media companies
    are publicly open as to the existence and application of  such  systems
    as a means of persuading people to sign up for their services. Further,
    as regards Facebook Messenger, it is a service which supports voice and
    video calling and the applicant provides no coherent evidence as to how
    he and his family believed  that  the  other  family  could  engage  in
    surveillance upon encrypted data.

181. I am satisfied, to the  requisite  standard,  that  the  applicant  has
    sought to diminish the true position as to his contact with his  family
    in Iraq, both by phone and social media, and I  am  satisfied  that  he
    remains in contact with them, hiding the fact by blocking access to his
    social media accounts. The applicant is concerned as to the poor health
    of his father and I find that there is no credible reason as to why  he
    would not continue to be in contact with his family in Iraqi Kurdistan.
    I am satisfied that Mr. Williams is correct as to his  recollection  of
    being informed by the applicant that he was in contact with his  family
    by telephone through his sister, though the  applicant  has  sought  to
    detail his limited family contact beyond that with MOA  as  only  being
    with male siblings. This is another example of the applicant not  being
    truthful. On balance I find that the applicant has asserted a  lack  of
    contact with his family a part of a  calculated  effort  to  provide  a
    reason for his purported inability to secure genuine documentation from
    Iraq establishing his true date of birth.

Assaults in London

182. I accept to the requisite standard that the applicant  is  truthful  as
    to having been assaulted on 25 March 2020. He has provided detailed and
    consistent evidence as to this incident, which is supported  by  police
    disclosure which has been filed with the Tribunal.

183. The reasons for the assault, and the applicant having been assaulted  a
    second  time  some  two  weeks  later,  are  subject   to   significant
    inconsistency. The second assault is relevant as it is said to  be  the
    basis for his deciding to leave this country and ultimately  travel  to
    Norway. The applicant is very vague as  to  the  circumstances  of  the
    second assault, save that it occurred whilst he was out shopping around
    two or two and a half weeks after the first assault. At the latest, the
    assault is said to have taken placed on or around  12  April  2020.  By
    means of his fourth witness statement he states that being  afraid  for
    his life he contacted Ms. Simpson and informed her that as his life was
    in danger, he would be going outside of London to stay with friends. On
    his version of events he accepts that he  misled  Ms.  Simpson  because
    such friends lived in London, but he explained that he was  afraid  for
    anyone to know where he was residing in case he got attacked again.  He
    remained with friends for some two or three weeks  before  leaving  the
    country with the aid of MOA. On the timescale identified, the latest he
    could have left the home of his friends was on or around 3 May 2020. He
    confirmed that he left the country a couple of days before  Eid  and  I
    observe that Eid-al-Fitr in 2020 began on 23 to 24  May.  The  date  he
    states he left this country is clearly inconsistent with  the  detailed
    timeline.

184. The contact records confirm conversations  between  the  applicant  and
    Ms. Simpson on 2, 9 and 14 April 2020. No mention  is  made  of  either
    assault. During the third conversation, the applicant confirmed that he
    had a cold, but no other reference to his health was  made  during  the
    three telephone calls. An email from Ms. Simpson to the applicant on 15
    April 2020 confirmed that a television was being delivered to his  home
    later that day. There is no record of the television  not  having  been
    delivered. On the same day, the applicant texted  Ms.  Simpson  stating
    that he has no money. They spoke again on 27 April 2020, with  much  of
    the discussion being about the applicant's phone. In reference  to  the
    television, the applicant confirmed that he was  very  happy  with  it.
    During this call, the applicant asks Ms. Simpson to  make  arrangements
    so that he can move to a new house, because he  is  scared  but  cannot
    explain.

185. The  applicant  attended  a  pathway  plan  meeting  by  telephone  the
    following day, observing that he was having trouble sleeping at  night.
    He confirmed that because of the pandemic he was not going out much. He
    informed the meeting that he had been assaulted with a  friend,  and  I
    find that this is a reference to the  assault  on  25  March  2020.  No
    mention is made of the second assault, nor does he  state  that  he  is
    living away from his home.

186.  On  the  12  May  2020,  the  contact  records  confirm  a   telephone
    conversation between the applicant and Ms. Simpson in which he confirms
    that he is not leaving the house but will do so to go shopping. This is
    the last contact between the two of them until the applicant's email of
    2 June 2020 when he informs  Ms.  Simpson  that  he  had  travelled  to
    Swansea for Eid and is with a friend.

187. The applicant's evidence differs to that of Ms. Simpson. Before  me  he
    explained that he informed her as to the first assault a few days after
    the incident. The contact records identify the first reference  by  the
    applicant to Ms. Simpson as to being scared was  over  a  month  later,
    with him proceeding to inform Ms. Simpson of the assault the  following
    day. The applicant stated that he referred to the second assault on the
    same occasion. This is not supported by the contact  records.  I  found
    Ms. Simpson to be an impressive witness, sensitive to her  professional
    obligations and I accept to the required standard  that  in  accordance
    with such professional obligations she would accurately record the  key
    elements of her conversations with the applicant. On balance, I  prefer
    her evidence to that of the applicant, for reasons detailed below.

188. The applicant's evidence before me was that  he  was  present  in  this
    country when the email of 2 June 2020 was  sent  to  Ms.  Simpson.  The
    applicant's evidence on this issue lacked coherency, changing  whenever
    discrepancies were put to him. He informed me  that  he  had  initially
    tried to phone Ms. Simpson on six occasions, and she did not  reply.  I
    accept Ms. Simpson's evidence that  if  she  missed  a  call  from  the
    applicant, she would make contact as soon as she could thereafter. This
    is consistent with her role as a personal adviser.  I  further  observe
    the contact records which establish not only that the applicant was  in
    communication with Ms. Simpson during this time but also the  means  by
    which Ms. Simpson sought over time to contact the  applicant,  both  by
    phone and email. I therefore do not  accept  the  applicant's  evidence
    that he sought to be in contact with Ms. Simpson on six  occasions  and
    received no reply from her during such time.

189. He explained to me that because he could not  contact  Ms.  Simpson  by
    phone he decided to contact her be email. He confirmed that the 2  June
    2002 email was written by Mohammed, a person with whom he lived at  his
    home in London. He confirmed that he was still in hiding at  this  time
    and was living with Shera elsewhere in London and  so  was  not  living
    with Mohammed. I note that in his witness statement dated January 2020,
    the applicant refers to speaking to Mohammed sometimes, 'but he works a
    lot' and that he did not like living at the  property.  In  a  confused
    passage of evidence before me, he confirmed that he could not  remember
    whether Mohammed or Shera wrote the email or where it was written.

190. There is a clear  discrepancy  in  the  applicant's  evidence  that  he
    remained in hiding in London, and so living  away  from  his  home,  in
    early June 2020, which is  inconsistent  not  only  with  the  timeline
    identified by his witness statements, but also with the fact that by 12
    June 2020 both Germany and Sweden  had  processed  asylum  applications
    made by him and had subsequently made requests to the United Kingdom to
    take him back under the mechanics of the Dublin III Regulation.

191. Throughout my  assessment  I  have  been  mindful  of  the  applicant's
    vulnerability. Having observed him give evidence  over  three  days,  I
    conclude that on certain issues he  was  capable  of  providing  clear,
    detailed and coherent evidence. Sometimes  he  was  recalling  historic
    facts, such as the basis of his asylum  claim,  sometimes  more  recent
    events such as the assault on  25  March  2020  and  sometimes  he  was
    recalling various linked historical events such  as  why  he  had  been
    provided with four phones over  a  relatively  short  period  of  time.
    However,  there  was  a  clear  and  noticeable  trait  of   presenting
    inconsistent  evidence  at  the  hearing   and   providing   incoherent
    explanations for such inconsistency. Even when taking into account  his
    vulnerability, there were noticeable efforts to distort events so as to
    hide previous mistruths.

192. I find that the applicant was residing at home on 15 April 2020 when  a
    television was delivered to him by the respondent. He was  residing  at
    his home when he spoke to Ms. Simpson on 27 April, 28 April and 12  May
    2020. I am satisfied that he was not  hiding  at  Shera's  home  for  a
    period of two to two-and-a-half weeks from a date close to 12 April 202
    to a date in May 2020. The applicant was unaware of the contact records
    when  seeking  to  advance  his  false  story  and  his  evidence   was
    inconsistent and incoherent when seeking to address the content of  the
    contact records when they were put to him.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    contact records, authored by  professionals  in  the  course  of  their
    employment, identify the true position.

193. I find that the applicant remained at his  home  interacting  with  Ms.
    Simpson before leaving the country at some point in time after  12  May
    2020 and prior to Eid-al-Fitr later that month. I am satisfied that  it
    was his intention to travel to Norway and not return to this country. I
    find the 2 June 2020 email was a crude attempt to placate Ms. Simpson's
    concerns and to delay her becoming aware that he had  absconded.  I  am
    satisfied that  the  email  was  sent  in  response  to  Ms.  Simpson's
    indication that she would have to contact the  police  if  he  did  not
    respond. The longer the delay in the respondent identifying  him  as  a
    missing person, the longer he had to  travel  to  a  country  where  he
    believed that his previous presence in this country would not  come  to
    light. I find that the  email  of  2  June  2020  was  written  by  the
    applicant whilst outside of this country to aid his ability  to  travel
    to Norway. I am satisfied that the applicant's efforts to explain  away
    the email at the hearing amounted to no  more  than  saying  the  first
    thing that came into his head. As Ms. Benfield candidly accepted in her
    closing submissions the applicant undertook the  journey  unaware  that
    the  authorities  in  Norway  could  access  EURODAC  and  through  his
    fingerprints identify that he had claimed asylum in the United  Kingdom
    thereby requiring this country to take him back under the provisions of
    the Dublin III Regulation.

194. I find, on balance, that the reason for his  fleeing  this  country  is
    the initial explanation he gave to the authorities upon return, and  to
    Ms. Simpson when they subsequently met in the park, namely that he  was
    targeted by an Iraqi national  who  possessed  an  animus  towards  his
    brother. I find that the applicant is not being truthful when asserting
    that men were targeting him in  relation  to  events  underpinning  his
    asylum claim. His  explanation  for  not  telling  the  United  Kingdom
    authorities the truth about the reasons for his assault upon his return
    from Norway, namely that he assumed the police  in  this  country  were
    'the same' as those in Iraq who 'would kill him', is  nonsensical.  The
    police had aided him after the assault on 25 March 2020 and  he  raised
    no concerns as to their conduct.  Further,  on  his  evidence,  he  had
    wanted to report  the  second  assault  to  the  police  and  had  been
    frustrated in carrying out such intention by Ms. Simpson.  He  provides
    no coherent explanation for his belief that the police would  kill  him
    if he informed them that he was being  targeted  in  this  country  for
    reasons connected to his asylum application.

195. I further find that the applicant is not  truthful  in  asserting  that
    Ms. Simpson is wrong in her recollection as to  their  conversation  in
    the park following his return from Norway.  I  am  satisfied  that  Ms.
    Simpson's entry on the contact record,  namely  'that  the  person  who
    wants to kill has a problem with his brother who lives in Iraq'  is  an
    accurate record of their conversation. The applicant  has  provided  no
    coherent explanation as to how Ms. Simpson  recorded  the  same  reason
    that he gave to the authorities on his return if he did not tell her. I
    am satisfied that the applicant has  subsequently  sought  to  use  his
    flight to Norway as a means of bolstering  his  asylum  application  by
    asserting that his fears arise from being targeted in this country  for
    reasons relating to his asylum claim.

196. Though not determinative of the question I am required to  consider,  I
    place  into  my  assessment  the  fact  that  the  applicant  has  been
    consistent in certain elements of his evidence and has been  untruthful
    in other respects.

Social media images

197. The respondent has filed several photographs  placed  on  social  media
    accounts operated by the applicant and OA. They have been filed in  two
    batches: Appendix 1 contains a series of photographs considered by  the
    age assessors; and Appendix 2 provides further photographs collated  by
    the respondent after the age assessment.

198. The photographs in Appendix 1 are referenced in the age assessment:

         '[The applicant] was shown  a  series  of  photographs  which  were
         printed from his Instagram account (Appendix  1).  [The  applicant]
         confirmed it was him who could be seen  in  these  photographs  and
         identified his friends Rikar and Nariman. He said the  barber  shop
         seen in the photograph belongs to a friend of his friend  Mana  and
         [the applicant] attends this barber shop to get his own  hair  cut.
         The location of this barber shop is in Sutton. [The applicant]  was
         asked about the photograph depicting a BBQ  and  bottles  of  beer.
         [The applicant] said that this was a  celebration  as  one  of  his
         friends got decision from Home Office'. [The applicant]  was  asked
         questions about the beach photo. [The applicant] said  that  whilst
         he was there, the photo was sent to him because 'I like to have the
         picture' and he posted it. [The applicant's]  friends  Mana,  Riker
         and Nariman are not on Facebook but on Instagram.  Mana  also  said
         that he can only access Facebook and Instagram on his phone when he
         has Wi-Fi. [The applicant also said that he does not like to access
         social media on his mobile ...'

199. Mr. Martin confirmed by a second witness statement, dated 18  September
    2019, that he  undertook  a  further  search  of  social  media  on  11
    September 2019 and found the  applicant's  Facebook  account.  He  then
    identified  accounts  belonging  to  the  applicant's  family  members.
    Appendix 2 presents photographs found during this search.

200. 'Image 1' of Appendix 1 identifies account information relating to  the
    applicant's Instagram account and confirms that  the  account  was  not
    locked at the point  in  time  the  screenshot  was  taken.  'Image  2'
    confirms that the account was subsequently locked, and the account name
    changed.

201. 'Image 3' is a photograph of the applicant taken  in  a  shop  in  this
    country and posted on Instagram on 14 April 2019.

202. 'Image 4' and 'Image 5' are photographs taken by the  applicant  whilst
    present in a barber shop. 'Image 4' was posted  on  25  June  2019  and
    'Image 5' on 24 June 2019. I accept the applicant's evidence  that  the
    photographs were taken on the same day but posted on different days.

203. 'Image 6' is a photograph of the applicant and another male, posted  on
    25 June 2019. The applicant is wearing the same shirt as in  'Image  4'
    and 'Image 5' but  the  presence  of  a  lit  BBQ  suggests  that  this
    photograph was taken outside.

204. 'Image 7' is a photograph of the applicant with two males  and  appears
    to be taken at the same property as 'Image 6'.  Food  and  alcohol  are
    present on the table. It was posted on 12 July 2019.

205. 'Image 8' is selfie taken by the applicant and posted on 19 June 2019.

206. 'Image 9' is a photograph of the applicant posted on 28 April 2019.

207. 'Image 10' is a photograph of a table of food and alcohol posted on  18
    June 2019.

208. 'Image 11' is a photograph of beer cans and a beach posted on 22  April
    2019. The  applicant  confirmed  that  this  photograph  was  taken  in
    Brighton.

209. 'Image 12' is a selfie of the applicant posted on 14 April 2019.

210. Appendix 2 comprises photographs taken from the  Facebook  accounts  of
    the applicant and OA.

211. 'Image 1' is a screenshot of the  applicant's  Facebook  profile  page.
    The applicant confirmed to me that the photograph shown is of a nephew,
    the son of one of his deceased sisters,  which  he  obtained  from  her
    Facebook account.

212. 'Image 2' comprises two photographs,  one  of  which  is  the  same  as
    'Image 5' of Appendix 1. This photograph is said by the  respondent  to
    be one of  several  present  on  both  the  applicant's  Instagram  and
    Facebook accounts.

213. 'Image 3' comprises 10 photographs located on  OA's  Facebook  account,
    including four photographs of  the  applicant  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

214. 'Image 4' is a photograph  of  the  applicant  present  in  the  United
    Kingdom posted on OA's Facebook account on 1 May 2019.

215. 'Image 5' is composite photograph of OA and  the  applicant  posted  on
    OA's Facebook account on 8 April 2015. 'Image 6' is a  clearer  capture
    of 'Image 5'[pic]

216. 'Image 7' is a photograph  of  five  males  standing  outside.  It  was
    posted by OA on his account in January 2015. 'Image  8'  is  a  clearer
    capture of 'Image 7'.

217. I accept the evidence of the applicant, corroborated  by  Ms.  Simpson,
    that arrangements were made for him to undertake work experience  at  a
    barber shop and so do  not  accept  the  respondent's  contention  that
    'Image 4' and 'Image 5' of Appendix 1 and 'Image 2' of Appendix 2  show
    the applicant in employment.

218. I find that photographs of the applicant in the presence of alcohol  do
    not establish that he is an adult. The  consumption  of  alcohol  in  a
    public place is not by itself an indicator of age.

219. I have carefully considered 'Image 7' and 'Image 8' of Appendix 2.  The
    applicant addressed this photograph in his second witness statement for
    these proceedings:

         'The photo of me with a group of other boys was taken in 2015 and I
         think I was either 13 or 14 years old, but I am not entirely  sure.
         I am the second person from the left, - the  first  person  on  the
         left is my brother [OA], the person in the middle is [M], who is my
         cousin, the fourth person is [P] and he is my brother-in-law. I  am
         not entirely sure who the fifth person is as  he  was  my  cousin's
         friend and I do not know him personally. The  photo  was  taken  in
         Iraq, it was  about  20  minutes  from  my  house.  If  I  remember
         correctly this was the day when we went out for a walk, we gathered
         some wood and made fire. We boiled some water on the fire and  made
         tea, and then ate sunflower seeds. I do [not] know  [the]  ages  of
         anyone else other than my brother, but I did not care  about  these
         things back then. I was out with my family spending time  together.
         I do not know why that would mean I am lying about my age.'

220. I observe that the applicant refers to P, his brother-in-law, as  being
    a 'boy'. I note that when asked OA's age at the hearing, the  applicant
    was not specific, observing that he was '1� to 2 years older than me'.

221. Standing from left to right in the photograph are  OA,  the  applicant,
    M, P and an unknown friend of M. The applicant is the tallest person in
    the photograph, though he explained  to  me  that  he  was  'stretching
    myself'. Upon looking at the photograph, I unable to see  any  evidence
    that the applicant was stretching, and I find that there was no  reason
    for him to do so in a photograph taken with several family  members.  I
    conclude that when asked the question  at  the  hearing  the  applicant
    realised that the photograph was not helpful to his case and so  sought
    to advance a reason  as  to  why  he  is  the  tallest  person  in  the
    photograph at a time when he claims to be 13 or 13� years old.

222. The applicant is either vague as to the age of a family member  present
    in the photograph, OA, or states that he does  not  know  the  ages  of
    other family members, P and M. He does accept that P is his brother-in-
    law, married to an older sister whose age is unknown to him. I find, on
    balance, that the photograph was taken  a  short  time  before  it  was
    posted on OA's Facebook account on 13 January 2015 and I  am  satisfied
    that P was an adult  at  this  time,  being  a  married  man,  and  the
    applicant's effort to persuade me that P was a 'boy' was  a  calculated
    effort to mislead. I further find, to the requisite standard, that  the
    other males in the photograph were adults at the  time  the  photograph
    was taken. They are present in a group, are well-dressed,  and  are  of
    similar height. I find that the appellant has been  deliberately  vague
    as to the ages of his  relatives,  even  his  brother-in-law,  in  this
    photograph in an effort to diminish the fact that  he  is  the  tallest
    person in a group of adults at a time when he asserts that  he  was  13
    years and 4 months old. I find that the appellant  knows  the  ages  of
    these men, deliberately denied such knowledge and is  aware  that  they
    were adults in January 2015.

223. Though observing my findings as to  the  age  of  the  other  males,  I
    proceed to consider whether there is evidence  that  aids  my  holistic
    consideration of the appellant's age.

Iraq/Turkey border crossing

224. I return  to  the  applicant's  evidence  as  to  how  he  crossed  the
    Iraq/Turkey border. In his initial interview with the Home Office,  the
    applicant confirmed at Q1.18 that 'the smugglers told me to take  a  4-
    year-old boy and say he was my son. There was a family with us  and  he
    suggested I say he was my son to help me' [Emphasis added]. In evidence
    before me, the applicant confirmed  that  he  showed  his  passport  to
    officials at the border crossing. As for being asked to say that the 4-
    year-old boy was his son, the applicant detailed, 'There was  a  family
    with us. There was a woman who had 3 or 4 children with  her.  Once  of
    the children was not hers. She had a man with her. Tie  child  belonged
    to that man ... The smuggler asked me to help  the  family.'  [Emphasis
    added]. I observe the change in emphasis as to why  the  applicant  was
    asked to claim the boy as his own. The second version provided  at  the
    hearing as  to  the  applicant  being  asked  to  help  the  family  is
    incoherent as the  child's  father  was  present  with  the  child.  On
    balance, it is much more likely than not that  the  agent  thought  the
    presence of the child would aid the applicant to cross the border  into
    Turkey. However, the striking  element  of  this  evidence,  on  either
    version, is that both the smuggler and the applicant  believed  that  a
    border official would be satisfied upon production of  the  applicant's
    passport that he was the father of a 4-year-old  child.  This  strongly
    suggests that the passport did not record the applicant as having  just
    turned 17, as he asserts, because if that  were  the  true  position  a
    border official would have to accept that the applicant became a father
    at around the age of 12.

225. I observe that the applicant is unable to confirm  as  to  whether  the
    passport used to cross the border was genuinely issued or not. I  find,
    on balance, that it was genuine as  the  intention  was  to  cross  the
    border through immigration control, rather than other  means,  and  the
    Iraqi authorities would be more likely than not  to  identify  a  false
    Iraqi passport. I observe that it is  not  the  applicant's  case  that
    officials at the Iraq/Turkey border were bribed. His evidence  is  that
    he passed through using his passport.

226. In evidence before me the applicant stated that  the  passport  was  in
    his name, that he recalled his photograph was in it but  that  he  'did
    not look' to see if the correct  date  of  birth  was  recorded.  I  am
    satisfied that the applicant is not being truthful as to his  observing
    only certain elements of the passport's identity page. I  am  satisfied
    to the requisite standard that the passport was genuine and enabled him
    to travel across both  the  Iraqi  and  Turkish  borders  via  official
    immigration posts. As a genuine passport it contained his true date  of
    birth. Importantly, both the applicant and the smuggler were  satisfied
    that the date of birth detailed in the passport permitted him  to  pass
    off the four-year-old child as being his child.  I  am  satisfied  that
    such subterfuge was primarily designed to enable the applicant to cross
    the Turkish border by hiding the fact that he was  a  single  male.  In
    making such finding, I am satisfied that the applicant was truthful  in
    his initial asylum interview following his arrival in this country when
    he stated that the boy was to be identified as his son  'to  help  me.'
    The applicant has since sought to  change  his  story  because  he  now
    realises that his original statement  as  to  the  role  of  the  child
    significantly undermines his evidence as to his age. I  find  that  the
    date of birth in the passport must have  identified  him  as  being  at
    least 20 years of age, resulting in his being 15 or 16 when  his  'son'
    was born, and I  am  satisfied  to  the  requisite  standard  that  the
    passport identified the applicant as being older than that age.

227. Returning to Images 7 and 8 of Appendix 2, I have found that the  other
    men in the photograph were adults. On balance,  having  considered  all
    the evidence in the round, I am satisfied that  the  applicant  was  an
    adult at the time the photograph was taken. It  was  posted  on  social
    media in January 2015. Being generous to the  applicant  I  proceed  by
    assessing him to be aged 18 in January 2015 and accept that he was born
    in the month of September. Consequently, he would  have  been  aged  22
    when he crossed the Iraq/Turkey border in October 2018. This is an  age
    where the applicant and a smuggler could  reasonably  believe  that  an
    immigration officer would accept that the applicant was  of  sufficient
    age to have a 4-year-old son.

Conclusion

228. I have found that the applicant was aged 18 at the date the  photograph
    identified as 'Image 7' and 'Image 8' in Appendix 2 was taken and  then
    posted on social media in January  2015.  I  therefore  find  that  the
    photograph of the applicant identified as 'Image 5' and  'Image  6'  in
    Appendix 2 which was placed by OA on a social media account on 8  April
    2015 is one taken when he was an adult.

229. In light of my findings above I find, on balance,  that  if  Ms.  Brown
    and Ms. Banelyte had been in possession of the evidence now  before  me
    at the time of the residential trip in August  2019  there  would  have
    been sufficient safeguarding concerns to result in  the  applicant  not
    being permitted to attend and share a room with persons under  the  age
    of 18.

230. I further find, to the requisite standard, that  Ms.  Nanton's  opinion
    as to the applicant's claimed age, which she accepts was  made  in  the
    absence of knowledge of the social media posts before me as well as the
    wider evidence, would be different in light of the findings made above.

231. Consequent to the  findings  of  fact  made  above,  I  find  that  the
    applicant's parents did not regularly, or at all, inform  him  that  he
    was born on 14 September 2001.

232. I find that the appellant's officially issued  Hawiye  and  Jinsiya  do
    not record his date of birth as 14 September 2001 but record  his  true
    date of birth.

233. I find that Mr. Ibrahim is  not  correct  as  to  his  recollection  of
    playing in a school football match against the applicant in Iraq. I  am
    satisfied that he has confused the applicant with someone else.

234.  Having  considered  all  of  the  evidence  in  the  round,   applying
    appropriate weight to individual evidence, I find, on balance, that the
    applicant was born on 14 September 1996.

235. The applicant was 22 years old when he crossed the  Iraq/Turkey  border
    in October 2018.

236. The applicant was aged 22 when he arrived in this country on  21  March
    2019.

237. Having entered  the  United  Kingdom  as  an  adult  I  find  that  the
    applicant was an adult when the following  photographs  were  taken  in
    this country and placed on social media accounts: 'Image 3', 'Image 4',
    Image 5', 'Image 6', Image 7', 'Image 8', 'Image 9', and 'Image 12'  of
    Appendix 1; 'Image 2', 'Image 3' and 'Image 4' of Appendix 2.

238. The applicant was aged 22 on 2 September 2019,  the  date  of  the  age
    assessment.

239. The applicant is presently aged 24.

240. In all of the circumstances, this is  a  matter  where  an  experienced
    social worker could, as in this case, be confident that the  person  in
    front of them is an adult and be permitted to conduct a short-form  age
    assessment without concern as to margin of error.

Summary of Decision

241. It is declared that the applicant's date of birth is 14 September 1996

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  Upper
Tribunal Rules 2008

242. The Tribunal confirms the anonymity direction of Andrew Baker J in  the
    following terms:

         Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report
         of these proceedings or  any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall
         directly or indirectly identify the applicant, his  family  members
         and the witnesses 'AA' and 'BB'. This direction applies to, amongst
         others, the applicant and the respondent.  Any  failure  to  comply
         with  this  direction  could  give  rise  to  contempt   of   court
         proceedings. I do so in order to avoid a likelihood of serious harm
         arising to the applicant from the contents of his protection  claim
         being publicly known.


Signed: D O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 21 December 2020


[pic]
                                                                JR/5881/2019

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                            Judicial Review Order


                                  The Queen

                            on the application of

                                     MW
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                       CROYDON LONDON BOROUGH COUNCIL
                                                                  Respondent

                   Before Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

UPON the fact-finding hearing on the Applicant's  application  for  judicial
review held on 20th - 23rd October 2020 and 24th November 2020

UPON hearing Ms. Antonia Benfield for the Applicant and Mr.  Joshua  Swirsky
for the Respondent

AND UPON judgment being handed down at Field House, London, on  21  December
2020 with no attendance by the parties.

IT IS DECLARED THAT the Applicant's date of birth is 14th September 1996

IT IS ORDERED THAT

     1) The application for judicial review is dismissed.

     2) The order for interim relief made on 11th September 2019 is  hereby
        discharged.

     3) The Applicant will pay the Respondent its  costs  of  the  judicial
        review and proceedings in the Upper Tribunal. This order is not  to
        be enforced without  the  permission  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
        subject to the costs protection provided by section 26 of the Legal
        Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.

     4) There will be a detailed assessment  of  the  Applicant's  publicly
        funded costs.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

     5) No  application  was  made  for  permission  to  appeal.  I  refuse
        permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal in any event because  I
        am satisfied that  there  is  no  arguable  error  of  law  in  the
        Tribunal's decision.

Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 21 December 2020

                                                                       [pic]

Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 21/12/2020
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
---------------------------------------------------------
Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
applicant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

-----------------------
[1] During the  course  of  the  hearing  Mr.  Swirsky  confirmed  that  the
reference to '1997' was in error and it should read '2001'.
 [2] At page 222, hearing bundle 1
[3] At pages 48 and 49, hearing bundle 2
[4] At pages 50 - 51, hearing bundle 2


