
In the Upper Tribunal  JR/5954/2019
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Judicial Review


            |                                                            |           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review         |           |
|  The Queen on the application of                           |           |
|                                                            |           |
|HUSSAIN                                                     |           |
|                                                            |Applicant  |
|  versus                                                    |           |
|                                                            |           |
|  The Secretary of State for the Home Department            |           |
|                                                            |Respondent |



                    NOTIFICATION of the Judge's decision

Having considered all documents lodged and having heard Mr Michael Biggs  of
Counsel, instructed by Lexwin Solicitors, for the  applicant  and  Mr  Colin
Thomann of counsel, instructed by GLD, for the respondent at  a  hearing  on
13 April 2021

On the application for order as to costs and following consideration of  the
documents lodged by the parties

Order by Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson:

BY CONSENT:  This application is dismissed on withdrawal by  the  applicant,
      on the terms set out in  this  Order,  the  question  of  costs  being
      reserved to the Upper Tribunal Judge.

|COSTS:    |     |I make no order for inter partes costs  |
|APPEAL:   |     |I refuse permission to appeal to the    |
|          |     |Court of Appeal.                        |



Reasons

1) The applicant has permission to challenge the  respondent's  decision  on
29 August 2019 to grant him 30 months' leave to remain under Appendix FM on
the 10-year family life route rather than the 5-year route, because at  the
date  of  hearing  the  respondent  considered  the  applicant  to  be   an
overstayer.


2) It is common ground that if placed on  the  5-year  route  the  applicant
would also have been granted 30 months' leave to remain, and that there  is
no difference in the conditions of his leave, except the length of time the
applicant will have to wait for settlement.


3) The applicant is married to a person settled in the United Kingdom and  a
British citizen child is affected by this application for leave to  remain.
The respondent's decision stated that she was granting leave because

      "...there are exceptional circumstances in your case which would
      render refusal a breach of
      Article 8.  This is because you have a British child, and  it  is  not
      considered that it would be reasonable to expect your child  to  leave
      the United Kingdom."

4) The applicant presently still has leave: his initial period of 30  months
will expire on 1 March 2022.  I find that his Article 8  ECHR  rights  have
not yet been affected since he is not required to leave the United  Kingdom
until then.


5) On 1 April 2021, the applicant produced a bundle of  over  200  documents
which the respondent had not previously been asked  to  consider  (the  new
material).  It is not appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to be the  primary
decision maker on the new material, particularly as  it  was  all  evidence
which could and should have been filed, at the latest, following the  grant
of permission in March 2020, rather than less than  two  weeks  before  the
substantive hearing.


6) The respondent relied, until the day of the hearing, on  a  decision  she
claimed to  have  made  and  served  in  October  2014,  disposing  of  the
applicant's Tier 4 application which by then had been varied to  a  private
and family life application based on his  marriage  and  the  child.    She
cannot, it seems, produce either evidence of service of that decision (said
to have been served with the section 10 decision in December 2014), nor can
she find any copy of the alleged October 2014 decision,  even  an  unserved
one.  Mr Thomann did not rely on the existence of the October 2014 decision
at the hearing today.



Relief sought



7) The applicant's challenge to the respondent's grant of leave on  the  10-
year route initially included a request that the Upper Tribunal  quash  the
respondent's decision to grant him 30 months' leave on the  10-year  route.
That has not been pursued, as Mr Biggs  confirmed,  because  to  quash  the
August 2019 decision would also quash the leave granted, which  is  not  in
the applicant's interest.


8)  In  his  amended  grounds  for  review  filed  following  the  grant  of
permission on 13 March 2020, the applicant sought the following relief:


a) A declaration that the respondent's section 10 decision made in  December
2014 was ultra vires because the respondent had impliedly accepted that  he
had not used deception.  It remained the applicant's position that  he  had
not cheated in his ETS/TOEIC test; and/or


b) A declaration that the respondent should have  placed  the  applicant  in
the position he would have been if he had not been notified of the  section
10 decision in December 2014: see Ahsan and others v Secretary of State for
the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 at [120]; and/or


c) A declaration that the respondent's decision to grant  the  applicant  30
months' leave on the 10-year  partner  route  engaged  Article  8  ECHR  in
relation to the applicant and his minor stepson and was  inconsistent  with
the Ahsan principles and historic injustice; and


d) A mandatory order requiring the respondent to grant leave  to  remain  on
the 5year route or to treat the existing grant of leave to remain as having
been made on that route, rather than on the 10-year route.


9) In Mr Biggs' skeleton argument  settled  for  this  hearing,  the  relief
sought by the applicant was reframed as follows:


1) A finding and declaration that the December 2014 section 10  decision  is
unlawful;


2) Declarations that:


a) the applicant held leave to  remain  at  the  date  of  the  decision  in
December 2014;
b) the respondent's decision unlawfully  determined  his  entitlement  to  a
grant of leave on the 5-year route, not  the  10-year  route,  pursuant  to
Appendix FM of the Rules, and
c) the respondent's decision is contrary to Article 8 ECHR; and


3) A mandatory order requiring the  respondent  to  reconsider  whether  the
applicant is entitled to leave to remain on the 5-year route.


The consent order


(10) At the hearing, the parties agreed a consent  order  in  the  following
terms:


   "UPON HEARING Counsel for the applicant and Counsel for the respondent

   AND UPON



1) The applicant proposing to advance such material as  he  wishes  to  rely
upon in order to contest the allegation that he cheated on a TOEIC  English
language test and [that] the  removal  decision  of  3  December  2014  was
accordingly incorrect and provide any further representations and  evidence
on which he wishes to rely within 28 days.


2) The respondent agreeing to review, in light  of  that  evidence,  whether
the applicant should be granted leave to remain on the five-year  route  to
settlement and  (although  without  prejudice  to  the  generality  of  the
foregoing) to consider whether the applicant has, or falls to be treated as
though has had, leave to remain from 3 December 2014.


3) The respondent waiving the requirement  for  the  use  of  the  Form  and
payment of the fee specified in  the  Immigration  Rules  for  applications
under these routes.


4) The respondent  agreeing  that  she  will  use  her  best  endeavours  to
complete her decision within three months (absent special circumstances) of
receipt of the applicant's materials.


   AND  UPON  the  parties  being  agreed  that  it  is  not  necessary  or
   appropriate in these circumstances, to determine the issues in paragraph
   14 of the applicant's skeleton argument.


   IT IS ORDERED THAT:


1. The judicial review is withdrawn.
2. Costs reserved."


Costs submissions


11) The hearing then proceeded solely on costs submissions.  The issues  and
the reasons for my decision on costs are set  out  in  the  judgment  which
accompanies this order.


12) I considered the guidance given in the judgment of  the  Master  of  the
Rolls (with whom Lady Justice Hallett DBE and Lord Justice Stanley  Burnton
agreed ) in M v London Borough  of  Croydon  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  595,  which
identifies three types of cases, applicable either  following  a  contested
hearing or pursuant to a settlement:

i) Where a claimant has been wholly successful;
ii) Where a claimant has succeeded only in part; or
iii) Where there has been  some  compromise,  which  does  not  reflect  the
claimant's claims.

13) In the first case, the costs follow the event.  In the second and  third
cases, the guidance is that the appropriate order will often be  'no  order
for costs' unless it is  'tolerably  clear'  who  would  have  won  if  the
application had proceeded to a full substantive hearing.


14) In  this  application,  the  consent  order  has  the  effect  that  the
applicant has succeeded in part, in  that  the  respondent  has  agreed  to
reconsider whether the applicant should be placed on the 5-year or the  10-
year route.  None of the declarations or mandatory orders which  he  sought
have been made, and the application is withdrawn on that basis.  I conclude
that the second Croydon category applies.


15) The Tribunal is grateful to both Counsel and those instructing them  for
agreeing, at the eleventh hour, a pragmatic and practical  compromise,  but
this is not a case where it is 'tolerably clear'  which  party  would  have
won, had the application proceeded, and applying [62] in the Croydon  case,
I find that the appropriate order is that each party bear its own costs.


Costs decision


16) I make no order for inter partes costs.



Permission to appeal


17) The proceedings having been compromised  as  reflected  in  the  consent
order, no appeal lies to  the  Court  of  Appeal  against  the  substantive
disposition of these proceedings.


18) The applicant seeks permission to  appeal  the  Upper  Tribunal's  costs
decision to the Court of  Appeal,  pursuant  to  paragraph  44(4A)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  (as  amended).   Mr  Biggs
argued:


1) That the Tribunal's decision  on  costs  is  vitiated  by  a  failure  to
consider material matters and by the consideration of  immaterial  matters,
for example (and without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing)  all
of the applicant's offers of  settlement  and  proposals  relevant  to  the
question of costs, and the respondent's responses or failure to respond  to
these; and that the applicant was entitled to file the evidence relied upon
at the time he did pursuant to an order  of  the  Tribunal;  and  that  the
applicant had provided at least some evidence in support of his  case  that
he did not cheat on a TOEIC in earlier proceedings.


2) That the Tribunal  failed  to  give  legally  adequate  reasons  for  its
decision on costs in the light of the competing arguments.


3) That in the  light  of  all  relevant  considerations  and  applying  the
correct principles the Tribunal's decision on costs was not open to in  the
light of the reasons it gave.


19) For the reasons set out more fully in my judgment, the  application  for
permission to appeal cannot succeed.   None of the grounds advanced amounts
to a certainty that the applicant would have succeeded at a  full  hearing,
nor that it is 'tolerably clear'  he  would  have  done  so.   Accordingly,
applying [62] in the Croydon judgment, it was unarguably open to me to make
the costs order which I have made.


20) I am not satisfied that there is any error of  law  in  the  judgment  I
have given today.


21) I refuse permission to appeal.


Signed:     Judith A J C Gleeson        Dated:     5 May 2021
           Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



The date on which this order was sent is given below


[pic]


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber


Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors  on  (date):
10/05/2021

Solicitors: ~
Ref No.  ~
Home Office Ref: ~

[pic]

Notification of appeal rights


There is provision  for  an  appeal  against  this  decision  of  the  Upper
Tribunal to the Court of Appeal on a point of law only. If any party  wishes
to appeal they must first apply for permission from the Upper  Tribunal.  If
the Upper Tribunal refuses permission, then the party wishing to appeal  can
apply for permission from the Court of Appeal itself.

If you wish to apply to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal  against
the Upper Tribunal decision, you must do so in writing with reasons so  that
your application is received within one (calendar) month from the date  this
decision notice is sent, unless the Upper Tribunal states a different  time:
r44(4) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

On making an application to the Upper  Tribunal  for  permission  to  appeal
against the Upper Tribunal decision, you must  also  lodge  with  the  Upper
Tribunal a further fee of �100.00 or an Application for Remission of Fee.


IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                      Case No:  JR/5954/2019

                                                                    Court 11

                                                                 Field House
                                                      15-25 Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1DZ

                                                               13 April 2021

                                   Before:

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

B E T W E E N:

                           Mohammed babul hussain
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Mr michael biggs appeared on behalf of the Applicant
Mr colin thomann appeared on behalf of the Respondent

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT

UTJ GLEESON:  The applicant has permission to challenge the decision of  the
      respondent on 29 August 2019 to grant  him  leave  to  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom for a period of 30 months on the  10-year  family  life
      route rather than the 5-year route, because at the date of application
      on 28 November 2019, the respondent considered the applicant to be  an
      overstayer.

   2. At the hearing today, Mr Biggs clarified that, contrary to the  relief
      originally sought in the grounds for review, the applicant was not now
      asking the Upper Tribunal to  quash  the  respondent's  decision,  the
      effect of which would be to remove the 30  months'  leave  granted  in
      that decision, which the applicant should have had, whichever route he
      was on.

   3. The proceedings were disposed of by a consent order agreed during  the
      hearing, with the question of costs reserved to the Upper Tribunal.  I
      am grateful to both Counsel for their  cooperation  in  reaching  this
      sensible compromise of the proceedings.

   4. The application was heard remotely by Skype  for  Business,  with  the
      consent of all parties.  A face to face hearing was not  held  because
      it was not practicable and no-one requested the same.  I am  satisfied
      that the hearing was fair, with the assistance of both Counsel.

Background

   5. The applicant came to the United Kingdom in 2009 as a Tier 4 (General)
      Student Migrant.  The respondent refused to extend  that  leave  by  a
      decision in 2013, but the  applicant  successfully  appealed  and  the
      application was treated as still outstanding before the respondent for
      a lawful decision.   On  19  August  2014,  the  respondent  told  the
      applicant's solicitors that his application was  on  hold  as  he  had
      relied on an ETS/TOEIC test allegedly  taken  at  South  Quay  College
      which was regarded as dubious.

   6. South Quay College is one of those where almost no reliable  ETS/TOEIC
      test results have been identified: the results are  considered  to  be
      either invalid or questionable (which implies a  testing  irregularity
      at the test centre, not necessarily related to a particular test).

   7. The applicant has obtained the voice recordings  from  the  test,  and
      agrees that the voice on the recordings is not  his  voice,  but  says
      that the College or ETS have made an  error  and  he  did  not  use  a
      'pilot' test taker.  In June 2014, the applicant obtained a  City  and
      Guilds English language qualification at TEFL Level B2 and in  October
      2014, he enrolled at the London School of Marketing, although he still
      had no confirmed leave to continue his studies.

   8. The respondent relied, until the day of this hearing, on  a  'phantom'
      letter disposing of the Tier 4 application, said to have  been  served
      on the applicant in October 2014.  Today,  Mr  Thomann  conceded  that
      there the respondent had been unable to find evidence  of  service  of
      that letter, nor had she been able to trace the October 2014  decision
      in her files.  Mr Thomann suggested  that  October  2014  might  be  a
      typographical error for the section 10(1)(b) decision  served  on  the
      applicant on 3 December 2014, which carried an out of country right of
      appeal which has not yet been exercised.

   9. The applicant's case is that he was still awaiting a  lawful  decision
      on his application of 25 January 2013, which had been  made  while  he
      had extant leave, and that therefore  he  benefited  from  section  3C
      leave up to 3  December  2014.   He  later  varied  that  undetermined
      application to a marriage application.

  10. The applicant  challenged  the  December  2014  decision  by  judicial
      review, but Mr Justice Blake  refused  permission  and  certified  the
      application as clearly unfounded, because at that time  the  existence
      of an out of country right of appeal was considered  to  be  a  lawful
      remedy. That would not be the position now: see Kiarie and Byndloss, R
      (on the applications of) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
      [2017] UKSC 42 (14 June 2017).

  11. In the meantime, the applicant's personal life in the  United  Kingdom
      had developed.  In September 2015, or perhaps in the summer  of  2017,
      the applicant met the woman who is now his  wife.    His  partner  had
      indefinite leave to remain based on a spouse visa issued  to  her  for
      her previous relationship on 23 February 2004.  She had been  divorced
      since 23 January 2013.  They underwent  a  religious  marriage  on  14
      August 2017 and began to live together.  In April 2018,  they  entered
      into a civil marriage.

  12. On 21 December 2017, the applicant made an application  for  leave  to
      remain on the basis of family life as a partner.  The  couple  have  a
      child, who is a British citizen. He applied for leave based on  either
      family life as a partner (10 year route), family life as a  parent  (5
      year route) or leave to remain outside  the  Rules  on  the  basis  of
      private and family life.  His application stated in a number of places
      that he last had leave to remain on 8 May 2013, but that his leave had
      been extended under section 3C.

  13. On 4 August 2017, the applicant's solicitors wrote to  the  respondent
      asking her to withdraw the section 10 decision made in  December  2014
      in the light of the decision of the Supreme Court, handed down  on  14
      June 2017, in Kiarie and  Byndloss,  R  (on  the  applications  of)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 42.  There  was
      no response.

  14. On 29 August 2019, the respondent granted  the  applicant  30  months'
      leave to remain on the  10-year  route,  without  recourse  to  public
      funds,  with  reference  to  paragraph  D-LTRP.1.2  and  GEN.1.11A  of
      Appendix FM, but refused to grant limited leave on the 5-year  partner
      route under paragraphs R-LTRP.1.1.(a),(b) and (c)  for  the  following
      reasons:

           "It is noted that your most  recent  application  for  leave  to
           remain in the United Kingdom as a student was originally refused
           on 25 March 2013 and then refused a second time  on  30  October
           2014 following a  reconsideration.  You  have  remained  in  the
           United Kingdom since this  date  without  valid  leave  and  are
           therefore considered  to  be  in  breach  of  immigration  laws.
           Paragraph 39E does not apply in your case and consequently,  you
           fail to fulfil the requirements of E-LTRP.2.2(b) of Appendix  FM
           of the Immigration Rules."       [Emphasis added]

  15. The respondent's GCID  notes,  which  have  been  disclosed,  show  an
      express decision by the Home Office caseworker  not  to  rely  on  the
      TOEIC deception element.  The respondent's decision  stated  that  she
      was granting leave because

           "... there are exceptional  circumstances  in  your  case  which
           would render refusal a breach of Article 8.  This is because you
           have a British child, and it is not considered that it would  be
           reasonable to expect your child to leave the United Kingdom."

      It is clear that the reason that leave  was  granted  relates  to  the
      applicant's child from the relationship with his settled spouse.

  16. It is common ground that the terms of the leave  granted  (30  months,
      renewable, with no access to public funds) are the same both for the 5-
      year and 10-year route, the only disadvantage to the  applicant  being
      that he will not be able to apply for indefinite leave to remain until
      10 years, rather than 5 years, have expired from  the  initial  grant.
      Almost 20 months of the initial 30 months have now elapsed.

  17. The applicant lodged judicial review proceedings on 28 November  2019.
      The applicant's case is that he did not become an  overstayer  because
      he continued to benefit from section 3C  leave  until  he  varied  his
      application for leave to remain.

  18. Mr Biggs seeks to challenge  the  2014  section  10  decision  in  the
      context of the 2019 decision, despite the  refusal  of  permission  in
      2014, and to call the applicant to give oral evidence about  what  had
      happened at his ETS test.

Permission for judicial review

  19. Permission for judicial review was granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Rintoul at an oral  hearing  on  13  March  2020,  for  the  following
      reasons:

           "It is  arguable  that  the  [respondent's  decision  that  the]
           applicant was to be granted leave to remain  under  the  10-year
           route was unlawful on the basis that this conclusion  was  based
           on the assumption that, at the time of application,  he  had  no
           leave to remain.   It  is  arguable  that  that  assumption  was
           unlawful, it being arguable that the  decision  to  curtail  his
           leave in 2014 pursuant to section 10(1)(b) of  the   Immigration
           and Asylum Act 1999 was unlawful and void  ab  initio  with  the
           result that his application for further leave  pending  at  that
           point continued by operation of section 3C  of  the  Immigration
           Act 1971, such that his application for leave to remain  on  the
           basis of his relationship with his wife was made at a time  when
           he had leave to remain."

  20. The grant of  permission  was  accompanied  by  the  Upper  Tribunal's
      standard  directions,  allowing  for  the  submission  of   additional
      evidence.  The applicant amended his grounds  for  review  and  on  29
      September 2020,  the  respondent  filed  amended  summary  grounds  of
      defence.  The applicant  recognised  that  his  original  grounds  for
      review, which sought to have the respondent's decisions quashed, would
      have resulted in quashing his 30-month leave to remain, which was  not
      what he wanted.  In the amended  grounds  for  review,  the  applicant
      contended:

   a) That the section 10 decision was ultra vires  because  the  respondent
      had impliedly accepted that he had not used  deception.   It  remained
      the applicant's position that he had  not  cheated  in  his  ETS/TOEIC
      test; and/or




   b) That the respondent should have placed the applicant in  the  position
      he would have been if he had not  been  notified  of  the  section  10
      decision: see Ahsan and others v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2009 at [120]; and/or



   c) That the respondent's decision to grant 30 months' leave  on  the  10-
      year partner route engaged Article 8 ECHR in relation to the applicant
      and his minor stepson and was inconsistent with the  Ahsan  principles
      and historic injustice.

  21. The applicant sought declarations on all three heads and  a  mandatory
      order requiring the respondent to grant leave to remain on the  5-year
      route or to treat the existing grant of leave to remain as having been
      made on that route rather than the 10-year route.

  22. The  respondent  filed  amended  detailed  grounds  of  defence.   She
      continued to assert that the application for Tier  4  leave  had  been
      determined by a refusal letter in October 2014, so  that  by  December
      2014, when the section 10(1)(b) decision was made, the  applicant  had
      no extant leave, either substantive or by reason of section 3C of  the
      Immigration Act 1971.

Substantive judicial review hearing

  23. Shortly before the hearing today, a year after the grant of permission
      and six months after the detailed grounds of defence had been amended,
       the applicant filed a hearing bundle, which included over  200  pages
      of documents  which  had  not  previously  been  disclosed  ('the  new
      material').

  24. The new material appears at  pages  203-412  of  the  judicial  review
      bundle but cannot be taken into account in these proceedings as it has
      only just been submitted  and  formed  no  part  of  the  respondent's
      decision-making process.  Mr Biggs for the applicant acknowledged that
      the new material should have been produced sooner but  was  unable  to
      provide any explanation why this had not happened.

  25. Nevertheless, the new material appeared to  me  to  be  likely  to  be
      relevant to any principled assessment of whether  the  appellant  took
      his ETS/TOEIC examinations himself and the route on which he is placed
      for settlement, whether it should be the 5-year or the 10-year  route.
      I gave Mr Thomann and Mr Biggs an  opportunity  to  take  instructions
      from their respective clients, to see whether these proceedings  could
      be disposed of by consent.

  26. Following the short adjournment, Counsel were able to confirm that all
      matters except costs had been agreed. These proceedings were therefore
      compromised, by consent, on the following terms:

        "UPON HEARING  Counsel  for  the  applicant  and  Counsel  for  the
        respondent




        AND UPON

   1) The applicant proposing to advance such material as he wishes to  rely
      upon in order to contest the allegation that he  cheated  on  a  TOEIC
      English language test and [that] the removal decision  of  3  December
      2014 was accordingly incorrect and provide any further representations
      and evidence on which he wishes to rely within 28 days.

   2) The respondent agreeing to review, in light of that evidence,  whether
      the applicant should be granted leave to remain on the five-year route
      to settlement and (although without prejudice to the generality of the
      foregoing) to consider whether the  applicant  has,  or  falls  to  be
      treated as though has had, leave to remain from 3 December 2014.

   3) The respondent waiving the requirement for the use  of  the  Form  and
      payment of the fee specified in the Immigration Rules for applications
      under these routes.

   4) The respondent agreeing that she  will  use  her  best  endeavours  to
      complete  her   decision   within   three   months   (absent   special
      circumstances) of receipt of the applicant's materials.




        AND UPON the parties being agreed  that  it  is  not  necessary  or
        appropriate in these circumstances,  to  determine  the  issues  in
        paragraph 14 of the applicant's skeleton argument.




        IT IS ORDERED THAT:




   1. The judicial review is withdrawn.

   2. Costs reserved."

Costs submissions

  27. The hearing then proceeded as a costs hearing only.

  28. Mr Biggs reminded me that the applicant had made a  number  of  offers
      and proposals.  On 5 November 2019, in a  pre-action  letter,  he  had
      asked to be placed on the 5-year route.  The respondent had relied  on
      a decision letter which she claimed to have served on the applicant in
      October 2014: it was only on the day of the hearing  that  Mr  Thomann
      accepted that the October 2014, if  it  ever  existed,  had  not  been
      served on the applicant.  Mr Thomann's position  at  the  hearing  was
      that as the respondent's Counsel, he was not  in  a  position  to  say
      whether  the  October  2014  decision  ever  existed,  unserved.   The
      respondent has been unable to trace any such document.

  29. The applicant had written again to the respondent in January 2020, but
      the respondent did not reply to that letter.  On 12  March  2020,  the
      applicant filed a 'Reply  to  Amended  Summary  Grounds  of  Defence',
      responding to the respondent's Amended  Summary  Grounds  of  Defence.
      Before me, Mr Biggs argued that what  he  was  there  seeking  was  in
      substance what had been agreed at the  hearing,  as  set  out  in  his
      skeleton argument.  The contents  of  Mr  Biggs'  pleadings,  and  the
      respondent's reply, are a matter of record and need not be further set
      out here, save to say that the 12 March 2021 Reply really adds nothing
      to the already pleaded case, and was submitted without leave.

  30. Mr Biggs  argued  that  the  applicant  should  have  his  costs:  the
      respondent had now agreed to reconsider without having taken, or  had,
      the time to consider the new  material  in  detail.   That  could  not
      therefore be her reason for agreeing.  Much of the  new  material  had
      already been provided, and the rest was to the  same  effect  as  that
      which the respondent had already received.   It was not correct to say
      that the applicant had not advanced his case in a timely manner.

  31. For the Secretary of State, Mr Thomann observed that the new  material
      had not been disclosed until Maundy Thursday, 1 April 2021.   Allowing
      for the Easter break, that gave the respondent far too little time  to
      consider whether she should continue to defend  these  proceedings  or
      whether the new material exonerated the applicant.   The  respondent's
      agreement to the consent order arose from a  change  of  approach,  on
      instructions today, and a willingness to consider the new material.

  32. The Tribunal had made no determination of  the  issues  regarding  the
      lawfulness of the 2014 or 2019 decisions on the basis of the  evidence
      then available, and whether the applicant should be treated as  having
      had leave to remain and  not  been  an  overstayer  when  the  present
      application was made.

  33. The applicant  had  not  advanced  in  his  original  application  the
      position taken in the amended grounds for review, which  was  that  he
      had continuous leave up to and including December 2014.

  34. On the contrary, the applicant knew of the December  2014  section  10
      decision and challenged  it,  albeit  permission  was  refused  by  Mr
      Justice Blake, on the basis of the law as it was  then  understood  to
      be.   The effect of the section 10 decision was to  bring  any  extant
      leave to an end, as  Mr  Biggs  confirmed  at  the  beginning  of  the
      hearing.

  35. The respondent's amended summary grounds of defence did  not  rely  on
      suitability or on the section 10 allegation as a  ground  of  refusal.
      However,  the  deception  allegation  was  not  withdrawn,   and   the
      respondent clarified that as soon as it was  raised.   The  underlying
      application for  leave  to  remain  was  made  on  the  basis  of  the
      applicant's family life and  was  granted  on  the  same  basis.   The
      suggestions made as to disposal bore little correlation  to  what  had
      now been agreed.

  36. The applicant had plenty of opportunity to file the new  material  now
      relied upon, and no good reason had been provided for the  delay,  and
      for producing the material this many years after the  event,  when  it
      should have been filed with the grounds.    The  proper  course  where
      documents were adduced this late was to apply for an  adjournment  and
      to provide a further witness statement.

  37. When granting permission to amend the grounds  in  March  2020,  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Rintoul had also given leave for further documents, but
      they were not filed then, nor until a year later.    They  could  have
      been filed in response to the detailed grounds in  October  2020,  but
      again, nothing was received.

  38. The compromise reached today did not involve a finding  of  fact  that
      the applicant was not guilty of TOEIC fraud, nor that he was  entitled
      to a fact-finding in-country hearing.  The respondent's  agreement  to
      look at the new material was the same as she would have needed  to  do
      in any event, had the documents been provided in a timely manner.  The
      only advantage to the applicant  was  that  in  making  these  further
      submissions, he would not have to pay any fee for a  new  application.
      There was, at last, a detailed statement from the applicant explaining
      why he asserted that he had not cheated, which  the  respondent  could
      consider.

  39. Stepping back, Mr Thomann argued  that  the  position  was  relatively
      conventional.  One party had changed its case, repeatedly,  and  filed
      fresh evidence at the end of the process, which  could  properly  have
      been filed at least a year earlier.

  40. The parties have agreed that the appropriate course is for  the  first
      consideration of that material to be by the respondent, not the  Upper
      Tribunal, and  the  matter  had  been  settled  on  that  basis.   The
      settlement offers made by the applicant were far more  ambitious  than
      what had been achieved.

  41. Mr Thomann submitted that the applicant should bear the costs  of  the
      proceedings, or alternatively, that  there  should  be  no  order  for
      costs, given the  timing  of  the  new  material,  the  shape  of  the
      applicant's application and judicial review grounds, and the extent to
      which he had succeeded.

  42. I reserved my decision on costs, which I now give.

M v London Borough of Croydon principles

  43. I remind myself of the principles in M v  London  Borough  of  Croydon
      [2012] EWCA Civ 595, which identifies three types of cases, applicable
      either following a contested hearing or pursuant to a settlement:

   i) Where a claimant has been wholly successful;

  ii) Where a claimant has succeeded only in part; or

 iii) Where there has been some  compromise,  which  does  not  reflect  the
      claimant's claims.

  44. In the first case, the claimant gets his costs in the normal way.   In
      the second case, the Tribunal is required to assess the reasonableness
      of the claimant pursuing the unsuccessful claim, how important it  was
      in relation to the successful claim, and to take  a  view  as  to  who
      should pay, or whether the costs should remain where they lie.

  45. The Master of the Rolls in Croydon, with whom Lady Justice Hallett DBE
      and Lord Justice Stanley Burnton agreed, held that in case (ii), where
      there is a settlement, 'there is often much to be said for  concluding
      that there is no order for costs', unless it is 'tolerably clear'  who
      would have won if the matter had proceeded to trial.  In  case  (iii),
      the Master of the  Rolls  considered  that  there  was  an  even  more
      powerful argument that the default position should  be  no  order  for
      costs, unless, again, it was 'tolerably clear' who would have won.

Analysis

  46. Neither party comes well out of the process  which  has  led  to  this
      sensible  resolution  at  the  eleventh  hour.   Counsel   and   those
      instructing them are to be congratulated on reaching a  settlement  of
      the application, but that could and should  have  been  possible  much
      earlier, if the respondent had admitted that she could find no October
      2014 decision on the Tier 4 application, served or otherwise, and  the
      applicant had made the new material available to the respondent's case
      worker for consideration, at the latest by March 2020.

  47. The issues which will no longer need to be determined in the light  of
      the consent order were set out at [14] of Mr Biggs' skeleton  argument
      of 1 April 2021:


           "(1)  Is it open to the applicant to challenge the s.10 Decision
                 in these
           proceedings?
           (2)   Is the s.10 Decision lawful?
           (3)   If it is not, does the illegality  of  the  s.10  Decision
                 render the Decision
           unlawful? In this respect, the following sub-issues arise:
                 (a)    Does a finding that the s.10  Decision  is  unlawful
                       entail it is a nullity, so that the 25  January  2013
                       application remained outstanding for  decision  until
                       it was varied by the 22  December  2017  application,
                       with the consequence that, by virtue of s.3C  of  the
                       IA, the applicant held leave to remain at the date of
                       the Decision? Ground (1).
                 (b)   Was  the  illegality,  or  the  claimed,  or  deemed,
                       illegality of the s.10  Decision  a  material  matter
                       which had to be considered before  the  Decision  was
                       taken? Ground (2).
                 (c)   Is the Decision contrary to article 8  ECHR,  because
                       it is  without  proportionate  justification  in  the
                       light of the historical injustice occasioned  by  the
                       unlawful s.10 Decision? Ground (3)."

  48. The relief sought by the applicant was set out at [71]  in  Mr  Biggs'
      skeleton argument:

           1) A finding and declaration that the 3 December 2014 section 10
              decision is unlawful;

           2) Declarations that:

              a) the applicant held leave to  remain  at  the  date  of  the
                 decision,

              b)  the  respondent's  decision  unlawfully   determined   the
                 applicant's entitlement to a grant of leave on  the  5-year
                 route, not the 10-year route, pursuant to  Appendix  FM  of
                 the Rules, and that

   c) the decision under challenge is contrary to Article 8 ECHR; and



           3) A mandatory order  requiring  the  respondent  to  reconsider
              whether the applicant is entitled to leave to remain on the 5-
              year route.

  49. The applicant has obtained only a small part of the remedy  he  sought
      and has compromised the rest by way of a remaking on the new  material
      and anything else he may submit within 28 days.

  50. The consent order expressly does not determine the issues in [14]  and
      gives the applicant only something akin to  (3)  in  [71],  albeit  by
      consent rather than as a mandatory order by the Upper Tribunal.   This
      application therefore falls into category (ii) in Croydon:

           "62.  In case (ii), when deciding how to allocate liability  for
           costs after a trial, the court will normally determine questions
           such  as  how  reasonable  the  claimant  was  in  pursuing  the
           unsuccessful claim, how  important  it  was  compared  with  the
           successful claim, and how much the costs  were  increased  as  a
           result of the claimant pursuing the unsuccessful  claim.  ...  I
           would accept the argument that, where the parties  have  settled
           the claimant's substantive claims on the basis that he  succeeds
           in part, but only in part, there is often much to  be  said  for
           concluding that there is no order for costs. That  I  think  was
           the approach adopted in Scott. However, where  there  is  not  a
           clear winner, so much would depend on the particular  facts.  In
           some such cases, it may help to consider who would have  won  if
           the matter had proceeded to trial, as, if it is tolerably clear,
           it may, for instance support or undermine  the  contention  that
           one of  the  two  claims  was  stronger  than  the  other.  ..."
                           [Emphasis added]

  51. Having considered the guidance in M v Croydon,  I  conclude  that  the
      proper order here is that each party should bear their  own  costs  of
      these proceedings, as indicated is the 'much to  be  said'  option  at
      [62] in Croydon.  I do so because in this  case,  there  is  no  clear
      winner, nor is it tolerably clear which party would have won, had  the
      application proceeded to a substantive hearing.   I  do  not  consider
      that it is 'tolerably clear'  which  party  would  have  won  if  this
      application had proceeded, due to the evidential difficulties on  both
      sides:

        1) The applicant's case is based on a disagreement with a  decision
           made and challenged in December 2014, which he seeks  to  reopen
           substantially out of time, and which was refused totally without
           merit by Blake J on the basis of the law as it then stood.




        2) The accepted position is that South Quay College  is  one  where
           the  ETS/TOEIC  results  were  at  best  questionable,  and  the
           applicant accepts that the voice on the test is not his,  though
           he says that is the fault of the College or ETS;




        3) The applicant relied on 200+ pages of evidence, produced just  a
           few days before the substantive judicial review hearing, none of
           which it appears to me could not have been  disclosed  promptly,
           or at least, in March 2020; and




        4) The respondent maintained for a period of seven years  that  she
           relied on a decision letter dealing with the applicant's Tier  4
           application in October 2014, which was not  only  never  served,
           but cannot now be found in the respondent's records, even in  an
           unserved form.

Costs decision

  52. I make no order for inter partes costs.

Onward appeal

  53. The proceedings having been compromised as reflected  in  the  consent
      order, no appeal lies to the Court of Appeal against  the  substantive
      disposition of these proceedings.

  54. The applicant seeks permission to appeal the costs decision  on  three
      grounds, arguing that:

   1) The Tribunal's decision on costs is vitiated by




   a) a failure to consider material matters and  by  the  consideration  of
      immaterial  matters,  for  example  (and  without  prejudice  to   the
      generality  of  the  foregoing)  all  of  the  applicant's  offers  of
      settlement and proposals relevant to the question of  costs,  and  the
      respondent's responses or failure to respond to these; and

   b) that the applicant was entitled to file the evidence  relied  upon  at
      the time he did pursuant to an order of the Tribunal; and

   c) that the applicant had provided at least some evidence in  support  of
      his case that he did not cheat on a TOEIC in earlier proceedings.

      (2)   The Tribunal failed to give legally  adequate  reasons  for  its
           decision on costs in the light of the competing arguments.

      (3)   In the light of all relevant  considerations  and  applying  the
           correct principles the Tribunal's decision on costs was not open
           to in the light of the reasons it gave.

  55. As to (1)(a), the applicant's case as asserted immediately before  the
      hearing is recited in this judgment,  but  he  agreed  to  settle  for
      reconsideration afresh on the  terms  already  set  out.   A  complete
      history of the applicant's offers and proposals over the previous  two
      years does not avail him, since none comes close to offering to settle
      for what has been agreed today or establishes that the applicant would
      have been the winner, or even that it was 'tolerably  clear'  that  he
      would have won, had the substantive hearing proceeded.

  56. As to (1)(b), time for filing relevant evidence began to run in  March
      2020 and the applicant has not explained, satisfactorily or indeed  at
      all, why he filed it on 1 April 2021, giving the respondent less  than
      a fortnight in which to reach a conclusion on over 200  pages  of  new
      material.  The consent order allows him to provide  further  material,
      over and above the new material before me.   Again, the assertion that
      the applicant was entitled to file it at any time  does  not  indicate
      that he would have been successful, nor that it  was  tolerably  clear
      that he would have succeeded, and so the default position in  [62]  of
      Croydon, that no order for inter partes costs is appropriate,  is  the
      right answer.

  57. As to (1)(c), the recital in the Consent Order that  the  parties  had
      "agreed  that  it  is  not   necessary   or   appropriate   in   these
      circumstances,  to  determine  the  issues  in  paragraph  14  of  the
      applicant's skeleton argument" is dispositive of sub-paragraph (c)  of
      the first ground of appeal.

  58. As to (2), my judgment contains adequate reasons why I do not consider
      that either the applicant or respondent should have their costs.

  59. As to (3), given the presumption in the Croydon guidance in favour  of
      'no order for costs' for examples (ii) and (iii) (see [62]-]63] of the
      judgment), and my finding that there was no clear winner, nor  was  it
      'tolerably clear' that the applicant would have won following  a  full
      hearing, it was unarguably open to me to make the costs order which  I
      have made.

  60. I am not satisfied that there is any  arguable  error  of  law  in  my
      judgment.

  61. I refuse permission to appeal.

                  ----------------------------------------


                                                       Case No: JR/5954/2019




   THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

   IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER




   IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO APPLY FOR JUDICIAL
   REVIEW




   BETWEEN:




              THE QUEEN on the application of Md Babul Hussain

                                                                   Applicant

                                     -V-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent







                                    ORDER







   UPON HEARING counsel for the Applicant and Counsel for the Respondent

   AND UPON

     1) The Applicant proposing to advance such material as  he  wishes  to
        rely upon in order to contest the allegation that he cheated  on  a
        TOEIC English language test and the removal decision of 3  December
        2014  was   accordingly   incorrect   and   provide   any   further
        representations and evidence upon which  he  wishes  to  rely  upon
        within 28 days.

     2) The Respondent agreeing to  review,  in  light  of  that  evidence,
        whether the Applicant should be granted Leave to Remain on the Five-
        year Year Route to Settlement and





        (although without prejudice to the generality of the foregoing)  to
        consider whether the applicant has,  or  falls  to  be  treated  as
        though has had, leave to remain from 3 December 2014.

     3) The Respondent waiving the requirement for the use of the Form  and
        payment  of  the  fee  specified  in  the  Immigration  Rules   for
        applications under these Routes.

     4) The Respondent agreeing that she will use her  best  endeavours  to
        complete  her  decision  within  three   months   (absent   special
        circumstances) of receipt of the Applicant's materials.



AND UPON the parties being agreed that it is not  necessary  or  appropriate
in  those  circumstances,  to  determine  the  issues  in  paragraph  14  of
Applicant's skeleton argument.

It is ordered

   l. The judicial review action is withdrawn;

   2. Costs reserved,



Dated this 14 day of April 2021

|                                     |                                     |
|.....................................|.....................................|
|...                                  |..                                   |
|Lexwin Solicitors                    |Government Legal Department          |
|102-105 Whitechapel High Street      |102 Petty France                     |
|London                               |Westminster                          |
|El 7RA                               |London                               |
|                                     |SWIH 9GL                             |
|                                     |                                     |
|Tel: 0208 0775079                    |Tel: 020 7210 3118                   |
|Fax: 0208 0773016                    |Fax: 0207 210 3433                   |
|Ref: ~                               |Ref: ~                               |
|Solicitor for the Appellant          |Solicitor for the Respondent         |





