
                                                                      UTIJR6

                                                                JR/5792/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                    [pic]Judicial Review Decision Notice


                       The Queen on the application of
                                 MONIKA [S]
                                                                   Applicant

                                      v



                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before




                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE MURRAY

                  (sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal


         [pic]Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives Mr Edward Nicholson, of  Counsel,  on  behalf  of
the Applicant and Mr Zane Malik, of Counsel, instructed  by  the  Government
Legal Department, on behalf of the Respondent, at a hearing at Field  House,
London on 22 May 2019.

Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

Mr Justice Murray:

 1. This is an application by Mrs Monika [S] for  judicial  review  of  the
    decision made by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  on  17
    May 2018 in which he refused her application for leave to remain  as  a
    Tier 2 (General) Migrant ("the Principal Decision") and of his decision
    made on 22 June 2018 in which the Secretary  of  State  maintained  his
    earlier decision following administrative review ("the Review Decision"
    and, together with the Principal Decision, "the Decisions").

 2. On 17 May 2018 the Secretary of State also refused the applications for
    leave to remain of Mrs [S]'s husband, Mr Krishna [S], and of their son,
    Master [KS],  and  on  22  June  2018  he  maintained  those  decisions
    following administrative review. Those applications for leave to remain
    are dependent on Mrs [S]'s application for leave to remain,  which  was
    refused by the Principal Decision and confirmed by the Review Decision.

Grant of permission for judicial review

 3. Mrs [S] was originally refused permission to apply for judicial  review
    on 7 January 2019 by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on his review of  the
    documents.

 4. Following the renewal of the application  for  permission  at  an  oral
    hearing on 27 February 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam,  by  order
    dated 1 March 2019, granted Mrs [S] limited  permission  to  apply  for
    judicial review as follows:

         "Considering  the  decision  (and  administrative  review)  it   is
         arguable that the decision maker decided to refuse a  human  rights
         application and thus it is arguable that under the statutory regime
         the applicant has a right of appeal  subject  to  certification.  I
         grant permission  on  the  basis  that  the  decision  is  arguably
         irrational in stating that the applicant does not have a  right  of
         appeal." (emphasis in original)


 5. UTJ McWilliam went on, in her order dated 1  March  2019,  to  say  the
    following:

         "However, judicial review is a remedy of  last  resort  and  it  is
         expected that the applicant endeavours to make  an  application  to
         appeal the decision in the FTT at the earliest possible opportunity
         because these proceedings may be rendered academic."


Claimant's application to adjourn the judicial review

 6. At the beginning of the substantive judicial review hearing before  me,
    Mr Edward  Nicholson,  of  Counsel,  on  behalf  of  Mrs  [S]  made  an
    application to adjourn the proceedings on the basis that  Mrs  [S]  had
    lodged an appeal with the First-Tier Tribunal (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) ("FTT") on 13 March 2019, but due to  a  difficulty  with  the
    payment of the fee it had taken some time for the application to appeal
    to be processed. The FTT had therefore not yet  considered  whether  it
    has jurisdiction to entertain the appeal. Mr  Nicholson  proposed  that
    this judicial review hearing be adjourned until the FTT had  determined
    jurisdiction. He submitted that it was possible to read the sentence of
    UTJ McWilliam that I have set out at [5]  above  as  meaning  that  the
    filing by Mrs [S]  with  the  FTT  of  an  application  to  appeal  the
    Decisions and the FTT's consideration of whether it is has jurisdiction
    to entertain the appeal was a pre-condition to the  permission  granted
    for this judicial review.

 7. Mr Zane Malik, of Counsel, for  the  Secretary  of  State  opposed  the
    application for adjournment on the basis  that  there  was  no  advance
    notice of it, and it was now too late. Both parties had  come  prepared
    for the substantive judicial review, and it  would  not  be  consistent
    with the overriding objective to adjourn.

 8. I refused the application to adjourn on the basis that it had come  too
    late, costs had been incurred by both  parties  in  preparing  for  the
    substantive judicial review hearing and it would not be consistent with
    the overriding objective for those costs to be thrown away when it  was
    possible to proceed. I was  also  of  the  view  that  UTJ  McWilliam's
    sentence quoted at [5] above did not amount to a pre-condition  to  the
    judicial review but merely the statement of an expectation.

Background

 9. Mrs [S] is a national of Nepal, as are her husband and son. Mrs [S] was
    born on 16 September 1990. Mr [S] was born on 6 August 1986. Their son,
    [K], was born on 2 November 2013 in London and  is  currently  5  years
    old.

10. Mrs [S] entered the  United  Kingdom  on  2  October  2009  with  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 (General) Student.  Mr  [S]  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on the same date with entry clearance as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Dependant. In each case, their leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  was
    valid until 31 July 2011. Mrs [S] was granted further leave  to  remain
    as a Tier 4 (General) Student on 8 February 2012, valid until 30  April
    2014. On 25 April 2014 Mrs [S] was granted leave to remain as a Tier  2
    (General) Migrant, valid until 14 May 2017. Mrs [S]'s  husband  was  on
    each occasion granted leave to remain as Mrs [S]'s dependant.

11. On 3 April 2017 Mrs [S] applied  for  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant. As I have already  noted,  the  Secretary  of  State
    refused the application in the Principal Decision and confirmed that in
    the Review Decision. On 17 May 2018 the Secretary refused  the  related
    applications of Mrs [S]'s dependants, her husband and son, for  further
    leave to remain and on 22 June  2018  confirmed  those  refusals  after
    administrative review.

12. In the Principal Decision the Secretary of State relied for his refusal
    of the application on his having revoked the  Tier  2  Sponsor  licence
    held by Mrs [S]'s Tier 2 Sponsor.

13. After an exchange  of  correspondence  under  the  pre-action  protocol
    between solicitors for Mrs [S] and the of Secretary of State,  Mrs  [S]
    brought this claim for judicial review of the  Principal  Decision  and
    the Review Decision. As already noted, following the initial refusal of
    UTJ Perkins on 7 January 2019, UTJ McWilliam granted permission on  the
    limited basis set out at [4]-[5] above.

14. As I have already noted, on 13 March 2019  Mrs  [S]  lodged  an  appeal
    against the Decisions with the FTT. The  FTT  has  not  yet  considered
    whether it has jurisdiction to entertain the appeal. I also  note  that
    on 8 July 2018 Mrs [S] had made an  application  for  leave  to  remain
    outside the immigration Rules and on 18 March 2019 she varied  that  to
    an application with the Secretary of State for leave to remain  on  the
    basis of family and private life relying on Article 8 of the Council of
    Europe Convention for the Protection of Human  Rights  and  Fundamental
    Freedoms of 4 November 1950  ("the  ECHR").  That  claim  is  presently
    pending.

15. It is common ground that at the time of the Principal Decision, Mrs [S]
    had not made a human rights claim in the required  form  in  compliance
    with the procedure stipulated by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  human
    rights claims. Mrs [S], however, maintains that it is  clear  from  the
    Principal Decision that in her case the Secretary of State considered a
    human rights claim based on Article 8 of the ECHR and  refused  it.  In
    support of this proposition,  Mrs  [S]  relies  on  a  portion  of  the
    following paragraph from the Principal Decision:

         "Consideration has also been given to section 55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (Duty regarding the welfare of
         children). The duty to have regard to the  need  to  safeguard  and
         promote the welfare of children requires the UK  Border  Agency  to
         consider the effect [on] any  children  of  a  decision  to  refuse
         leave, or remove, against the need to  maintain  the  integrity  of
         immigration control. Our aim is always to carry out enforcement  of
         the Immigration Rules with the minimum possible interference with a
         family's private life, and in particular  to  enable  a  family  to
         maintain continuity of care and development of the children in ways
         that are compatible with the immigration laws.  In  the  particular
         circumstances of your case, it has been concluded that the need  to
         maintain the  integrity  of  the  immigration  laws  outweighs  the
         possible effect on you that might result from you and your children
         having to re-establish family life outside the United Kingdom."


16. I have reproduced the full paragraph above and  put  into  italics  the
    portion on which Mrs [S] relies. The same wording was included  in  the
    letter dated 17 May 2018 sent by the Secretary of State  to  Mrs  [S]'s
    husband refusing his application for leave to remain as a dependant  of
    Mrs [S]. Similar wording, appropriately adapted, was  included  in  the
    letter dated 17 May 2018 sent by the Secretary of State  to  their  son
    refusing his application for further leave to remain as a dependant  of
    Mrs [S].

The issues

17. UTJ McWilliam granted  permission  on  the  basis  that  the  Principal
    Decision "is arguably irrational in stating that the applicant does not
    have a right of appeal". I note, however, that  neither  the  Principal
    Decision, nor  the  Review  Decision,  nor  the  Secretary  of  State's
    response dated 2 August 2018 to Mrs [S]'s  pre-action  protocol  letter
    includes an express statement by the Secretary of State  that  Mrs  [S]
    does not have a right of appeal. The argument, therefore, must be  that
    the Secretary of State made an implicit  statement  that  no  right  of
    appeal arises, by virtue of his denial that he had decided to refuse  a
    human rights claim.

18. The Secretary of State's alleged refusal is said to have been  set  out
    in the italicised wording I have quoted at [15] above. His denial  that
    this is a refusal of a human  rights  claim  is  the  subject  of  this
    judicial review  challenge.  I  have  a  slight  difficulty  with  this
    formulation of the issue in that the Secretary of State  did  not  deny
    that he has refused a human rights claim  in  the  Principal  Decision,
    which is challenged by this judicial review. The parties, however, have
    proceeded on this basis, and it is clear that the Secretary of  State's
    position now is that he did not consider, much  less  refuse,  a  human
    rights claim in the Principal Decision.

19. One issue raised by this judicial  review  application  is,  therefore,
    whether in the Principal Decision the Secretary of State  determined  a
    human rights claim made by Mrs [S], giving rise to a right of appeal in
    the absence of certification by the Secretary of  State,  and,  if  so,
    whether his denial that he has done so is irrational.

20. The other issue, which is raised by the Secretary of State as  part  of
    his defence of the claim, is whether Mrs [S] has an alternative  remedy
    such that this judicial review claim should be dismissed on that basis.
    I will deal with this issue first.

Alternative remedy

21. In my view, Mrs [S] has an  alternative  remedy,  namely,  to  file  an
    appeal with the FTT, as she has, in fact, done  since  she  filed  this
    claim for judicial review, as I have already noted. The FTT clearly has
    jurisdiction to determine whether it has  jurisdiction  in  this  case,
    although it had not done so as at the date of the hearing before me. In
    order to determine whether it has jurisdiction, the FTT  will  need  to
    determine whether, having regard to the facts of this case, Mrs [S] has
    made  a  human  rights  claim  giving  rise  to  a  right  of   appeal.
    Accordingly,  this  claim  is  premature.  It  is  a   well-established
    principle that administrative review is a remedy of  last  resort.  Mrs
    [S]'s claim must therefore be dismissed.

22. Mr Nicholson for Mrs [S] submitted that the FTT does not have the power
    to consider the  question  of  rationality  for  which  permission  was
    granted by UTJ McWilliam, and there is therefore no remedy available in
    the FTT for the irrationality of the Secretary of State's  denial  that
    it has refused a human rights claim that  is  an  alternative  to  this
    judicial review claim.

23. In my view, there is no force in that submission. If the FTT determines
    that it has jurisdiction on the basis that a right  of  appeal  arises,
    Mrs [S] will have, in substance, the remedy that she is seeking.

24. As noted by the Court of Appeal in the case  of  Khan  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 424 at [9] (Lord  Justice
    Underhill):

         "It is of course well-established that where there is  a  statutory
         right of appeal against a decision it is  only  where  'special  or
         exceptional factors' are in  play  that  the  court  will  allow  a
         challenge to that decision to proceed by  way  of  judicial  review
         rather than by the route provided by statute: see, most recently, R
         (Mehmood) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [20151  EWCA
         Civ 744, [2016] 1 WLR 461, per Beatson LJ at para. 49 (p. 475G)."


25. In my view, there are no special or exceptional factors  in  this  case
    that justify departing from the normal principle.

Did the Secretary  of  State  refuse  a  human  rights  claim  and,  if  so,
irrationally deny having done so?

26. Having decided that there is an alternative  remedy,  bearing  in  mind
    that administrative review is a  remedy  of  last  resort,  it  is  not
    necessary for me to consider the question of whether the  Secretary  of
    State has irrationally refused a human rights claim. Indeed, if I  were
    to address, even in part, the various submissions made by  the  parties
    in relation to this, there would be a risk of prejudice  to  the  FTT's
    consideration of its jurisdiction in this matter  and,  if  it  decides
    that it is able to exercise jurisdiction, to its consideration  of  Mrs
    [S]'s appeal. Accordingly, I decline to do so.

27. I am reinforced in this conclusion by the Court of Appeal's decision in
    the case of Khan. Khan was an appeal  from  a  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  ("UT")   dismissing   an
    application for  judicial  review  on  the  basis  that  there  was  an
    alternative remedy by way of appeal to the FTT. Lord Justice  Underhill
    said the following at [19]:

         "My starting-point is that it is both natural and  more  convenient
         that where an issue arises as to the jurisdiction  of  a  statutory
         tribunal that issue should be determined in the first  instance  by
         the tribunal  itself,  which  can  then  proceed  to  consider  the
         substantive issues if it decides that it has  jurisdiction.  It  is
         inherently more wasteful for proceedings to be brought in different
         courts or tribunals. I do not  see  the  force  of  Mr  Pennington-
         Benton's suggested distinction between cases where jurisdiction  is
         in issue and other 'alternative remedy' cases. Once it is accepted,
         as he does accept, that the tribunal is in  principle  entitled  to
         determine whether it has jurisdiction, I see  no  reason,  in  this
         context, for treating that question differently from  any  question
         which it is empowered to decide. I accept  that  if  one  or  other
         party is dissatisfied with the FTT's decision  on  jurisdiction  it
         may then have to be decided by the UT,  whether  on  appeal  (where
         there was a hearing in the FTT) or by way of judicial review (where
         there was not), in which case the parties will have been put to the
         additional time and trouble of arguing the case twice  rather  than
         once. But that is not peculiar to cases of the present kind. It  is
         an inevitable consequence of the  application  of  the  alternative
         remedy principle in the tribunal field and has not been treated  in
         other  cases  as  sufficient  reason  for  allowing  the  statutory
         jurisdiction to be undermined."

Order

28.    I  order,  therefore,  that  the  judicial  review   application   be
    dismissed.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

29.   I refuse permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  on  the  basis
    that an appeal would have no real prospect of success and there  is  no
    other compelling reason for the Court of Appeal to hear  an  appeal  in
    this case.

Costs

30.   I have dismissed this judicial review application on  the  basis  that
    there is an alternative remedy, an issue raised by the Respondent after
    permission had been granted on another ground. I  note,  however,  that
    the Applicant obtained permission on only one out of four Grounds,  and
    that she  was  obliged  to  review  her  position  on  receipt  of  the
    Respondent's Detailed Grounds of Defence, which raised the  alternative
    remedy point by reference to the clear authority of Khan.  Accordingly,
    in my view, the normal rule as to payment of should apply. I order that
    Applicant pay the Respondent's costs of this application  for  judicial
    review, to be assessed if not agreed.


       Signed:    [pic]
                    Mr Justice Murray (sitting as a Judge of the Upper
                    Tribunal)




       Dated:     10 June 2019
[pic]

Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
[pic]

Notification of appeal rights


A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.


A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself.  This must be done by filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission appeal  was
sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).






                                                                     UTIJR15

                                                                JR/5792/2018



                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber




                               Judicial Review


                     Notice of Decision/Order/Directions



                       The Queen on the application of
                                 MONIKA [S]

                                                                   Applicant

                                      v

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent








   Decision and Directions of Mr Justice Murray (sitting as a Judge of the
                               Upper Tribunal)


Having considered all documents lodged by the parties and having  heard  the
parties' respective representatives, Mr Edward  Nicholson,  of  Counsel,  on
behalf of the Applicant and Mr Zane Malik, of  Counsel,  instructed  by  the
Government Legal Department, on behalf of the Respondent, at  a  hearing  at
Field House, London on 22 May 2019.

 1) The applicant's claim for judicial review is dismissed.

 2) Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is refused.

 3) The applicant is to pay the respondents costs of  the  application  for
    judicial review, to be assessed if not agreed.


       Signed:    [pic]
                    Mr Justice Murray (sitting as a Judge of the Upper
                    Tribunal)




       Dated:     10 June 2019
[pic]
Sent to the Applicant, Respondent and any interested party / the
Applicants, Respondents and any interested party's solicitors on (date):
Home Office Ref:
