
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER



JR/5428/2019



Field House,

Breams Buildings

London

EC4A 1WR



22nd May 2020



BEFORE

THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FOSTER DBE

BETWEEN:

                    THE QUEEN (on the application of YA)

                                                                   Applicant

                                    -and-

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                              -----------------

Miranda Butler, instructed by Wilson Solicitors LLP, appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.


Jack Anderson, instructed by the Government Legal Department, appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.

                              -----------------

                                  JUDGMENT

                              -----------------

MRS JUSTICE FOSTER:

Introduction

   1. This is a claim for judicial review of  the  respondent  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department ("SSHD")'s decision of 15  October  2019
      refusing to  treat  further  submissions  made  by  the  applicant  as
      amounting to a fresh claim under  paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration
      Rules ("IRs"). It is also a challenge to a further  and  supplementary
      decision dated 6 January 2020 which  gave  extended  consideration  to
      further psychiatric materials concerning  the  mental  health  of  the
      applicant and provision of treatment on return.



   2. The issues which I have to decide concern  whether  the  Secretary  of
      State erred in concluding, initially on  15  October  2019,  that  the
      applicant YA does not have a real prospect of establishing  before  an
      Immigration Judge that his removal to Somalia would cause the UK to be
      in breach of Article 3 of the ECHR on  account  of  the  risk  of  his
      suicide.



   3. This case has a significant history. YA's right to remain  in  the  UK
      was first curtailed in the light of his conviction in 2015.  There has
      been a large number of individual decisions concerning him since then;
      at one point his removal to Somalia was actually in train but  aborted
      once aboard the aeroplane taking him back to Somalia.



   4. This judgment is divided into the following sections



        a. Background  paragraphs 5-30

        b. Medical Material paragraphs 31-49

        c. The Impugned Decisions paragraphs 50-72

        d. Legal Framework  paragraphs 73-119

        e. The Applicant's Case   paragraphs 120-126

        f. Consideration    paragraphs 127-152

        g. AM in the Supreme Court      paragraphs 153-165

        h. Summary of Conclusion  paragraphs 166-176



   a. Background

   5. The claimant was born in Somalia in 1988. His  father  owned  a  small
      business before the Somalian Civil War. His parents, who died  natural
      deaths in the early  1990s,  had  lived  in  the  Modena  District  of
      Mogadishu when he was a young child.  His grandmother brought  him  up
      with his siblings.



   6. YA  entered  the  UK  aged  about  14  on  a  trip  organised  by  his
      grandmother, with his family, in October 2003; he has two brothers  in
      the UK, and at least one cousin.  There  is  evidence  of  other  more
      distant family members still living in the Mogadishu area. He  claimed
      asylum on entry as a member of the Reer Hamar minority  clan  and  has
      described an incident where he was  kidnapped  aged  13  or  14  by  a
      criminal gang to obtain money from his family.  After several days  of
      ill-treatment including being hung out of a window and  being  beaten,
      he was released when the family paid the ransom.   He  also  described
      abusive forced work as a shoe-shiner between 2001 and 2003  which  the
      SSHD has recognised  as  falling  within  the  description  of  modern
      slavery.



   7. On 28 July 2008 aged 19 he was convicted of  rape  and  conspiracy  to
      rape a woman over the age of 16 and sentenced to 9 years  imprisonment
      in  August  2009.  He  had  one  previous  conviction  from  2007  for
      assaulting a police officer and being drunk and disorderly.  The  rape
      and conspiracy to rape were committed on 10  August  2007  with  three
      other men, in Central London, and involved the gang rape of a 16-year-
      old girl whom they had come across in Trafalgar Square after the clubs
      had closed. The victim was described as alone, lost, without money and
      under the influence of drink. She went with the applicant  and  others
      to a flat and was gang raped  within  20  minutes  of  arriving.   Her
      sanitary protection was forcibly removed, and she was hit and  bruised
      when resisting. In the course of the rapes, photographs  of  her  were
      taken, although not by the claimant.



   8. At trial, YA's defence to  the  effect  that  she  had  consented  was
      described by the judge as "absurd".   The circumstances of  the  crime
      were such as to cause the judge to describe the  defendants as  having
      no respect for  human  beings,  reflecting  that  the  sounds  of  her
      hysterical distress and screaming could be heard on the 999 call  made
      by neighbours, and that the victim would suffer  severe  and  enduring
      psychological harm as a result of the attack.   None of them had  been
      working, they spent their time hanging about at night in the West  End
      when the clubs were closing.  The  judge  said  the  applicant's  only
      mitigation was  his  age.  YA  continues  to  deny  his  guilt,  still
      maintaining it was consensual sex.



   9. YA was released from prison on 16 August 2012 but recalled on  23  May
      2014, then bailed for offences  of  alleged  GBH  common  assault  and
      theft,  which  were  eventually  dropped.  Whilst  in  prison  he  was
      convicted of an offence of causing another to convey  a  mobile  phone
      into prison and sentenced  to  a  further  six  months  to  be  served
      concurrently.



  10. On 21 April 2016 the Secretary of State decided to cease YA's  refugee
      status and to deport him to Somalia. This decision was  unsuccessfully
      appealed. On 4 July 2017 FTTJ Hollingworth  heard  evidence  including
      from the claimant, and in  a  long,  careful  and  detailed  judgement
      dismissed YA's appeal against the removal of status  and  refused  his
      further protection and human rights claims.



  11. The decision of FTTJ Hollingworth included the finding that  a  person
      in the position of the claimant, an ordinary civilian, would no longer
      face a real risk of persecution or harm such  as  required  protection
      under Article 3 ECHR or Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.
      There had been a durable change in the situation concerning  Al-Shabab
      in Mogadishu, a reduction in civilian casualties and no real  risk  of
      forced recruitment to Al-Shabab for  civilian  citizens  of  Mogadishu
      including recent returnees from the West. The  judge  held  that  some
      money from abroad,  namely  from  his  family  in  the  UK,  would  be
      available to him initially while he was seeking employment,  and  that
      he had been equipped by a  series  of  prison  courses  to  embark  on
      employment in joinery and construction or indeed catering or  cleaning
      on his return to Somalia. Taking into account details of  the  country
      situation in the relevant case  law,  the  judge  noted  there  was  a
      vibrant construction industry in Mogadishu.



  12. In light of the circumstances of his criminal record, and having  full
      regard to the consequences of return, the judge held that  the  active
      refoulement was a proportionate response to the danger  posed  by  the
      claimant to the community. He found in particular that it was a matter
      of great concern that the claimant had not  completed  work  regarding
      his sexual offending, and he retained unhealthy  and  distorted  views
      towards women and relationships, and authority figures, in  particular
      the  police.  It  was  clear  the  claimant  had  failed   to   accept
      responsibility  for  his  criminal  behaviour.  He  characterised  the
      offending as particularly serious and without mitigating factors.



  13. The Judge also found the applicant was  not  socially  and  culturally
      integrated in the UK due to his behaviour. He had not established that
      he had a family life in the UK and for most of his life had  not  been
      here lawfully. In all the circumstances the FTTJ held there  would  be
      no breach of Article 8 ECHR in respect of the applicant's  private  or
      family life if he were to be deported as a Foreign National Offender.



  14. Permission to appeal this decision was refused and also refused for  a
      subsequent judicial review application  made  in  September  2017.  In
      February 2018 the Court of Appeal refused permission to appeal against
      the High Court's decision to refuse permission.



  15. On 21 September 2018 the applicant was served with removal  directions
      effective 9 October 2018. YA had become appeal rights exhausted.  That
      day further representations were made by his  solicitors  and  refused
      that day by the SSHD. The applicant's removal   in  October  2018  was
      thwarted by  an  incident  on  the  aeroplane  involving  a  passenger
      protest, and the plane was impeded from leaving due to the disruption.





  16. YA was returned to immigration detention. On 25 October  2018  he  was
      found unresponsive in his cell having taken an overdose of  prescribed
      medication. It was noted in a medical report in November by a clinical
      practitioner that he had historically attempted to take his  own  life
      "through  overdose  and  tying  ligature".  50   mg   Sertraline   was
      prescribed.



  17. On 22 December 2018, a Dr Thomas sent  an  initial  opinion  by  email
      after assessing YA at HMP Bedford on 20 December 2018.   He  explained
      that YA had told him he had tried to kill himself twice,  he  believed
      he would be persecuted  because  he  was  from  a  minority  tribe  in
      Somalia. He was described as dishevelled, poorly kempt,  although  his
      attention and concentration were  alright.   Dr  Thomas  said  YA  had
      symptoms suggestive of a diagnosis of a  moderate  depressive  episode
      with anxiety and panic attacks.  YA was in  his  view  at  significant
      risk of self-harm/suicide.  He  recommended  that  his  mental  health
      would benefit from multidisciplinary support  available  in  a  secure
      healthcare setting and recommended transfer to secure hospital.  On 22
      December 2018 the applicant made further representations  in  a  human
      rights claim based on this preliminary report.



  18. In considering  the  representations  on  4  January  2019,  the  SSHD
      accepted the applicant's mental health issues but noted  that  it  was
      not suggested that there was no care or treatment in Somalia. She  did
      not accept that YA's case met the Article 3 threshold.  The  SSHD  set
      out 2017 materials on Somali Country of Origin Information  concerning
      medical treatment  and  medication,  recognising  that  any  treatment
      available "might not be of the same standard as that which is provided
      by the National Health  Service,"   but  saying  that  Somalia  had  a
      healthcare  system  which  the  Home  Office  considered  capable   of
      assisting YA if necessary - although  it was  not  accepted  that  his
      illness was of a type or severity that founded a claim  to  remain  in
      the UK, or precluded his removal from it under Article  3.   The  SSHD
      refused to treat the further submissions  in  as  a  fresh  claim  and
      served the applicant with notice of a removal window.



  19. This was challenged but on 15 of January 2019 the SSHD maintained  her
      decision, refusing YA's submission that he had  a  fresh  claim  under
      paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.



  20. On 24 January 2019,  in  a  formal  report,  Dr  Thomas  recorded  the
      previous findings, that YA said his symptoms of depression and anxiety
      had started since his current  detention  at  Harmondsworth  Detention
      Centre, describing a history of living at the YMCA,  going  to  clubs,
      and smoking cannabis  regularly  with  his  friends  and  drinking  at
      weekends.  The report  reflected  the  conclusions  made  earlier  and
      indicated that Dr Thomas was unable to comment on the risk of  suicide
      after YA's removal because he was unaware of  what  circumstances  his
      and support would be then.  Dr Thomas also indicated that although  YA
      may have exaggerated some details which he may perceive  assisted  his
      case, based on the history and mental state examination and  evidence,
      he nonetheless diagnosed a  moderate  depressive  episode  as  before.
      Further representations and the further report  from  Dr  Thomas  were
      sent to the SSHD on 4 February 2019.



  21.  The SSHD refused this  claim  on  1  April  2019.  That  refusal  was
      challenged by a pre-action protocol  letter.  Further  representations
      made on 9 April 2019 were refused on 17 April 2019 in respect  of  the
      human rights  applications,  and  also  under  paragraph  353  of  the
      Immigration Rules.



  22. On 15 April 2019 the applicant, whilst on bail, was found by police in
      Liverpool attempting to travel to Belfast. He admitted he was  seeking
      to travel via Dublin to Spain.  He was  detained;  a  further  refusal
      decision was made on 16 April 2019.



  23. Removal directions were served again upon the applicant on 26 of April
      2019 and on 30 April 2019 a  further  judicial  review  challenge  was
      submitted.  The removal directions were deferred. The application  was
      refused on 17 July 2019 at an oral hearing.  About a week  before  the
      judicial review refusal, the applicant was found  attempting  to  hang
      himself in detention.



  24. The 17 July 2019 oral refusal of permission by UTJ Craig  was  also  a
      detailed consideration of the materials including Dr Thomas'  reports.
      His dismissal of the application for judicial review was in  trenchant
      terms. The judge remarked that if there were  credible  evidence  that
      the applicant would be at a risk of breach of his Article 3 rights  on
      removal, then however appalling the offences had been, if  there  were
      that risk, removal would be unlawful;  however, he found there was  no
      such  evidence.  The  medical  evidence  indicated  the  symptoms   of
      depression and anxiety had started at Harmondsworth,  and  importantly
      did not refer to what will happen on return to  Somalia.   He  applied
      the case law, in particular J [2005] EWCA Civ 629.



  25. UTJ Craig, like FFTJ Hollingsworth, considered the risk of destitution
      and did not find it arguable such a case was made out.  In  dismissing
      the application for  judicial  review  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
      paragraph 353 refusal, the  judge  commented  "this  applicant's  case
      remains absolutely hopeless."  He considered YA had  been  seeking  to
      frustrate his lawful removal.



  26. Almost immediately thereafter on 19 July 2019 further  representations
      were made without his legal representatives, and he requested deferral
      of removal on the basis of concerns about mental health  and  suicidal
      tendencies but was refused.  Tribunal Judge Gleeson also  refused  the
      application stating there was no merit in the grounds for review.



  27. On 20 July 2019 Professor Katona  conducted  a  preliminary  telephone
      consultation with YA in order to assess whether he was fit to  fly  in
      light of proposed deportation on 22 July 2019.  He  reported  that  YA
      said to him he was struggling since the removal directions and that he
      wanted to die here. He was worried if they forced him back to Somalia,
      he might get tortured and enslaved as happened to him before  when  he
      was a youngster, he was worried to death.  He said he intended to  try
      and seek an opportunity to kill himself, but he was watched 24 hours a
      day.



  28. YA told Professor Katona  that  previous  suicide  attempts  had  been
      precipitated by receiving removal directions.  He was put on a  plane,
      screamed, and passengers protested. There had been  a  campaign  about
      him which he said was covered up by UK and Somali media.



  29. Professor Katona assessed YA's suicide risk. He reached a  preliminary
      psychiatric diagnosis that YA was suffering from PTSD.   He  described
      his prominent  depressive  symptoms  as  a  secondary  to  YA's  PTSD.
      Professor Katona did not believe YA was feigning to him.  He judged YA
      to be at "very high risk" of suicide with a "very high risk" he  would
      be actively suicidal and disruptive during the removal process planned
      for 22 July 2019.  He judged YA unfit to fly.



  30. He recommended YA's removal be  postponed  allowing  full  psychiatric
      assessment including full face-to-face assessment of suicide risk  and
      his fitness to fly.  He also recommended that before YA was removed to
      Somalia  there  should  be  another  face-to-face  assessment  of  any
      deterioration and to allow confirmation or otherwise of PTSD.



b. Medical Materials

   (i) Dr Galappathie's July 2019 Report

  31. The removal arranged for 22 July 2019 was in the event deferred  given
      YA's booking on 23 July 2019 with another Consultant Psychiatrist,  Dr
      Nuwan Galappathie. Further submissions were made on the basis  of  his
      31 July 2019 report, but refused.   The  applicant  asserted  for  the
      first time through this report that he was a victim of modern slavery.





  32. The material matters which emerge from the report of Dr Galappathie of
      31 July 2019 report are as follows.



  33. YA told Dr Galappathie that he had not ever drunk to  excess  and  had
      given up on entering prison and used cannabis from 16 or 17 for  three
      years only.  The report reflects medical notes through 2018  recording
      low mood and frustration but no suicidal  feelings.   However,  on  25
      October 2018 he reported taking an overdose of  tablets.  In  November
      2018 it was agreed he should start antidepressant medication  with  50
      MG Sertraline.  He saw a psychiatrist in February 2019 who was of  the
      opinion he did not suffer from a mental health problem but there is  a
      note that he had tried to hang himself in prison.  By May 2019 he  was
      reporting depression anxiety and  nightmares,  he  was  not  complying
      completely with his antidepressant medication regime.  He said he  had
      received Sertraline 150mg from February or May 2019, but  it  did  not
      help.  He denied active thoughts of self-harm.



  34. Dr Galappathie records the suicide attempt and  that  YA  was  put  on
      watch.  YA reported he was tired of the Home Office trying  to  deport
      him all the time, though his life was in danger in Somalia.  The  wish
      to kill  himself  was  due  to  going  back  to  Somalia.   He  denied
      committing the rape saying it was consensual. He  very  much  disliked
      detention, if released into the community he would  keep  appointments
      and engage with mental health services and take part in  psychological
      therapy to address his past trauma.  He had no plans to  harm  himself
      in the community because there he would get help from his  family  and
      he would not fear going back to Mogadishu and being killed.



  35. Emphasis within documents and case law has, throughout, been added.



  36. Dr Galappathie stated:

           "89.  ICD - 10 F 33 Recurrent Depressive Disorder

           ...

           "91 In my opinion, clinically, [YA] presented as  an  individual
           suffering from severe depression with active thoughts and  plans
           regarding suicide.  He presented  as  hopeless,  with  plans  to
           commit suicide should he be returned to Somalia.  In my  opinion
           the diagnosis of severe  depression  with  active  thoughts  and
           plans regarding suicide is supported by  his  history,  clinical
           examination and review of his health records.




           92.  In my opinion, his depression is likely to have been caused
           by his past history of suffering  from  trauma  within  Somalia,
           whereby he was kidnapped, tortured, beaten with weapons and hung
           out of a window with threats of being killed  made  against  him
           and his family.  [YA] also described being the victim of  modern
           slavery and said that he was made to work for two years  by  his
           neighbour shining shoes, and that he was threatened to  do  this
           work and was not paid, other than by his  neighbour  giving  him
           and his family food.  He told me he did not know  what  to  call
           this before, but now understands  he  has  been  the  victim  of
           slavery.  He is also likely to have found  his  prison  sentence
           for the index offence to have contributed to his  depression  as
           he reports being falsely convicted.  In  addition,  his  ongoing
           immigration detention and deportation proceedings are likely  to
           have further contributed to his ongoing symptoms of depression."





  37. Dr Galappathie also diagnosed Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder which  he
      related to YA's treatment in Somalia. Symptoms  consistent  with  PTSD
      were noted he observed on 12 July 2018 at HMP Littlehey, they appeared
      to have worsened as reflected in the account given to Dr Patel  on  11
      July 2019.  YA appeared to have suffered from a  marked  deterioration
      since seeing Dr Thomas in January.  However he placed his findings  in
      the context of the fact there were high levels of depression in  about
      80% of the detained community including, anxiety, PTSD,  hopelessness,
      particularly in those who had served prison sentences such as YA where
      high levels of frustration and anxiety were reported.  He  recommended
      release from immigration detention to accommodation in  the  community
      and he said:

           "99.  In my  opinion,  [YA]  would  benefit  from  release  from
           immigration detention to appropriate  accommodation  within  the
           community.  In my opinion,  the  current  deterioration  in  his
           mental state, in relation to  severe  depression  with  suicidal
           thoughts and serious attempts to commit suicide and worsening of
           his PTSD, are related to his detention under immigration  powers
           at the IRC and  his  ongoing  deportation  proceedings.   In  my
           opinion, he would benefit from release to  the  community,  such
           that he can receive appropriate treatment for his mental  health
           problems by his GP and community mental health services.  If you
           were to be released to the community, he is likely to no  longer
           present with suicidal thoughts and would be amenable  to  engage
           with appropriate treatment in the community."



  38. Specialist treatment in the UK was  recommended  with  antidepressants
      and therapy to address his depression, and follow-up by  a  consultant
      psychiatrist in secondary care. He  described  YA  as  insightful  and
      willing to engage and therefore likely to have  a  good  response.  He
      said he  would  anticipate  a  good  prognosis  if  he  could  receive
      treatment in the UK. His problems which are related to fear  of  being
      returned to Somalia where he believed he would be tortured and killed,
      could be managed within the community.



  39. Dr Galappathie concluded his report thus:

           "His current risk of self - harm suicide

           "104....  In my opinion  [YA]  presents  with  a  high  risk  of
           serious self-harm and completed suicide should he remain  within
           immigration detention with a view to being deported to  Somalia.
           This would be indicated by the high number of risk factors  that
           [YA] presents with, including depression, PTSD, the  significant
           worsening of his mental state, past history of  torture,  report
           of being a victim of modern slavery and recent serious  acts  of
           attempted suicide by way  of  attempting  to  hang  himself  and
           swallow a razor blade, such that he has been placed on  constant
           observations.   In  my  opinion,   should   he   remain   within
           immigration detention with a view to  being  deported,  he  will
           present with a high  risk  of  serious  self-harm  or  completed
           suicide.  In my opinion, his risk of self-harm and suicide  will
           increase further should attempts be made to forcibly remove  him
           to Somalia.  In my opinion, if attempts were made to  place  him
           on a flight to  Somalia,  he  is  likely  to  suffer  a  further
           deterioration  in  his  mental  state,  which  is  already  very
           fragile.  He would then be at risk of  unpredictable  behaviours
           including  serious  self-harm  and  completed  suicide.   In  my
           opinion, whilst in the IRC, he  presents  with  an  unacceptably
           high risk of suicide and is at  risk  of  death  by  way  of  an
           impulsive and highly lethal method, such as attempting  to  hang
           himself or swallow razor blades, given that he has recently made
           such attempts and has now been placed on constant observations.




           "105. Your assessment of the risk to his health in light of  the
           evidence of treatment available in Somalia




           106. In my opinion in light of  the  evidence  of  treatment  in
           Somalia, I would be highly concerned about [YA's] mental  health
           if [YA] were to be returned to Somalia.  In my opinion, if he is
           unable to access the treatment that he requires, he is likely to
           suffer from a substantial deterioration in his mental health  by
           way of depression and PTSD such that he  would  present  with  a
           high risk of serious self-harm or completed suicide.  His mental
           health is likely to worsen within Somalia, such  that  he  would
           lack the  ability  to  seek  treatment  for  his  mental  health
           problems."



  40. The SSHD had also sought a  Consultant  Psychiatric  opinion  from  Dr
      Nimmagadda.



   (ii) Dr Nimmagadda's Report of September 2019

  41. The material findings of Dr Nimmagadda  were  contained  in  a  report
      dated 13 September 2019 following a consultation with YA as follows:

           "10.2 When asked about his appetite, he told me that he  has  no
           appetite, but in the past to use to over-eat.  When I asked  for
           more details, he stated that he had not been eating for the last
           two weeks and  reported  that  he  had  lost  some  weight.   He
           described his energy levels as low.




           10.3 He told me that he has poor concentration and  cannot  read
           or concentrate.  When I asked him what he wishes to  happen,  he
           stated that he wants his life back; he wants to  reconnect  with
           his family.  He wants to clear his name and he wants a  job  and
           to succeed.




           10.4 When asked about suicidal thoughts,  he  told  me  that  he
           sometimes thinks he does not want to live  anymore.   He  stated
           that he overdosed in Bedford prison in the past.




           10.5 He told me that he  does  not  have  any  current  suicidal
           plans.  He did not disclose having any psychotic symptoms in the
           form of auditory hallucinations or delusions.




           10.6 He stated that he will feel safe and secure if  he  remains
           in the UK.  But if he goes to Mogadishu, he  will  be  targeted.
           He believes that he will be tortured  to  join  a  Militia.   He
           feels vulnerable there."



  42. YA told Dr Nimmagadda he had had flashbacks and nightmares  which  had
      got more severe.  He believed he would be targeted in Somalia  because
      he was the person on the news in the incident on the aeroplane stating
      they will think he is a madman and will chain him up.  He stated there
      were no mental health treatments in Somalia.



  43. Dr Nimmagadda considered information from  the  medical  records,  and
      collated "Other Relevant Information" as follows:

                 13.1  I  obtained  feedback  from  the  Engagement  Support
                 Officer, Suman Garrow from IRC that [YA] currently works in
                 the laundries in the afternoons.  Normally  he  spends  his
                 time in the laundry room on his own when he  is  not  busy.
                 The hours he works varies  from  day  to  day  and  usually
                 depends on when he gets out of  bed,  but  on  average  she
                 works 2 to 4 hours per day.  It was not clear how  long  he
                 had been doing this job in the laundry, but more  than  two
                 weeks.  I learned that the quality of his  work  was  good,
                 and he concentrates and works well with  detainees  and  is
                 compliant to instruction.  [YA] usually  skips  meals  from
                 the servery, sometimes going without food for the day.   He
                 occasionally eats his own food in his room.  On average she
                 is seen once per day at the servery.




                 13.2 I further learnt that he normally  sits  in  his  room
                 unless working or going to pray.  He is very quiet  on  the
                 wing and does not  want  to  interact  with  the  officers,
                 however  when  he  does  interact  is  always  polite.    I
                 understand that he has been compliant with his medication.



  44. The central part of Dr Nimmagadda's opinion was as follows:

                 "14.2 based on the available information including his  own
                 account, there is  no  evidence  to  suggest  that  he  has
                 received regular input  from  the  Mental  Health  Services
                 either in the prison or in the community  for  any  serious
                 mental health issues.  His mental health problems  seem  to
                 have started after the  deportation  process  has  started.
                 There is evidence to suggest that, during  this  period  he
                 has been diagnosed as suffering from depression and treated
                 with antidepressants.   There  is  evidence  that  he  made
                 suicidal attempts.  He gave a  history  of  suffering  from
                 flashbacks and nightmares related to his traumas during his
                 early teenage  years  in  Somalia.   I  note  that  he  has
                 recently been diagnosed with suffering from  Post-Traumatic
                 Stress Disorder by two independent psychiatrists.




                 14.3  I  have  considered  his  medical  reports   in   the
                 Harmondsworth IRC during the last four months.  During this
                 period  he  has  been  assessed  by  mental  health   staff
                 including Consultant Psychiatrists  and  he  has  not  been
                 diagnosed with any serious mental health  problems.   There
                 is evidence to suggest that  there  were  multidisciplinary
                 mental health team meetings  about  his  care,  and  it  is
                 deemed that he does  not  need  any  active  mental  health
                 input.  On the other hand, it has been agreed  that  he  is
                 likely to benefit from psychological support.   As  he  was
                 not prepared to undertake group work, he  was  referred  to
                 individual psychology sessions.  I believe this  is  mainly
                 of  a  supportive  nature.   He  continues  to  remain   on
                 antidepressants.




                 14.4 During  my  assessment  [YA]  presented  as  a  polite
                 gentleman who was cooperative, and he engaged well with  my
                 interview.  He was able to give a clear account  about  his
                 past and present situations.  He was able to clearly  argue
                 how he was wrongly convicted for the offence  of  rape  and
                 why he should be given an  opportunity  to  appeal  to  get
                 justice.  It is clear that [YA] is suffering from low  mood
                 and feels hopeless about  his  future  if  he  were  to  be
                 deported to Somalia.  He seems to have genuine fears  about
                 his safety in Somalia, particularly in light  of  his  past
                 experiences.




                 14.5 From a  mental  health  point  of  view  while  he  is
                 suffering from some depressive symptoms I believe  they  do
                 not qualify the diagnosis of depression.  I  believe  those
                 symptoms  could  be  understood  in  the  context  of   his
                 deportation proceedings.  I  note  that  while  he  is  not
                 engaging fully with other inmates or staff, he  still  able
                 to  do  his  job  in  the  laundry  and  able  to   display
                 concentration when doing the job.   He  has  been  able  to
                 maintain regular contact with his  family  members  and  is
                 benefiting from that input.  He  mentioned  that  he  feels
                 safe and secure if he were not to be deported  and  allowed
                 to remain in the UK and it appears to me that  his  serious
                 worries and fears about his future are  contingent  on  his
                 deportation to Somalia.  While he describes flashbacks  and
                 nightmares, I  do  not  have  enough  evidence  to  make  a
                 diagnosis of Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.  He  seems  to
                 have coped with the effects of his past traumas without any
                 help so far.   Even  if  it  is  considered  he  had  these
                 symptoms,  he  seemed  to  have  coped  with  these  for  a
                 considerable period of time without any  treatment.   There
                 is also no evidence  to  suggest  that  any  of  his  post-
                 traumatic symptoms have affected his functioning  while  he
                 has been living in the UK.  By his self-report, it is  only
                 after  the  deportation  proceedings  were   started,   the
                 symptoms have become severe."



  45. Dr Nimmagadda stated in his view the applicant was fit to be  detained
      with appropriate medical support and medication and

           "... he was fit to  fly  to  Somalia  with  appropriate  medical
           escorts and a supply of  his  medication  until  he  can  access
           suitable medical support in Somalia upon his return."



  46. It is clear there were distinct differences  of  opinion  between  the
      psychiatrists.



  47. In essence, Dr Galappathie  believed  YA  was  suffering  from  severe
      depression likely to have been caused by his past trauma  in  Somalia.
      He also  diagnosed  PTSD.  Dr  Nimmagadda  disagreed  that  there  was
      sufficient to form a diagnosis of PTSD, YA had coped with the  effects
      of past traumas for quite some time until then without  the  need  for
      any assistance. His mental health problems seem to have started  after
      the deportation process had  started.  He  attributed  the  depressive
      symptoms to YA's deportation proceedings, not to a depressive illness.
      Dr Nimmagadda believed his serious fears were contingent on his return
      to Somalia. Dr Galappathie  recommended  YA's  release,  since  if  he
      remained in detention with a view to deportation YA would present with
      an unacceptably high risk of self-harm and suicide.    Dr  Galappathie
      was highly concerned if YA returned to Somalia and  could  not  access
      the  treatment  he  required,  he  would  suffer  from  a  substantial
      deterioration.



  48. The difference in views was not stark in  all  areas.  Dr  Galappathie
      reflected that the circumstances  of  detention  contributed  to  YA's
      depression and that what he saw as a deterioration of  his  conditions
      with suicidal thoughts and serious  attempts  on  his  life  would  be
      ameliorated by appropriate treatment out of detention. Indeed, YA  was
      likely to present with suicidal thoughts no longer  if  released  into
      the community with treatment.



  49. Before the January decision a further  report  was  received  from  Dr
      Galappathie, but the first of the SSHD's decisions was based upon  the
      medical materials referred to above.



c. The Impugned Decisions of the SSHD

   (i) 15 October 2019 Refusal Letter

  50. The SSHD concluded in a decision of 15 October  2019  that  YA  was  a
      victim of modern slavery under the NRM process based on  the  time  he
      was a shoe-shiner as a boy but  refused  him  Discretionary  Leave  to
      Remain.



  51. YA argued that the materials in the medical reports, particularly that
      of Dr Galappathie, supported the contention that the situation  facing
      YA in Somalia would lead to a real risk of an  Article  3  breach  and
      constituted a new claim under IR 353.



  52. In her 15 October 2019 Refusal Letter the SSHD set out the issue thus:

           "35.  Consideration has been given to your  assertion  that  you
           should be allowed to stay in the UK based on Article  3  of  the
           ECHR on medical grounds.  You allege that you suffer from mental
           health problems and you would be unable to access  treatment  in
           Somalia.   Two  psychiatric  reports  have  been  provided   for
           consideration at... [Et cetera]"



  53. She set out most of the major paragraphs of the  expert  reports  with
      elements of the  history  from  past  detention  notes  including  the
      attempts YA had made on his life, and the deductions and diagnoses  of
      the doctors.  Citing paragraph 14.2 of the  report  of  Dr  Nimmagadda
      which she noted was more recent, where he understood the  symptoms  as
      in the context of the deportation proceedings, she did not accept that
      YA was suffering from a severe depressive illness. She  considered  YA
      was fit to fly with appropriate medical escorts and with a  supply  of
      medication.



  54. The SSHD reiterated that  the  threshold  set  in  Article  3  foreign
      medical cases  was  high,  and  exceptional  circumstances  preventing
      return had to be shown.  The information provided did not indicate his
      condition was such that it would be inhumane to remove him;  the  high
      threshold of severity that breached Article 3 had not been reached  on
      the basis of his mental health problems.



  55. She set out details of a WHO report  recognising  the  limited  number
      (five) of mental health centres in Somalia. It also  referred  to  the
      general possibility of mental health  patients  being  chained  up  in
      Somalia, which had exercised YA and his advisors.   She noted  however
      that the  Habeeb Hospital in the city of Mogadishu (from which he came
      and to which he would be returned), and another Hospital with a mental
      health ward had, with WHO help, implemented  a  programme  called  the
      "Chain-Free Initiative" which was aimed  at restoring the  rights  and
      dignity  of  mentally-ill  patients.   She  concluded   that   medical
      treatment was available in  Somalia  which  YA  could  access  in  the
      future. He had not provided evidence he would be denied it,  nor  that
      he could not travel to obtain it; the letter  concluded  YA's  removal
      did not breach Article 3.



  56. When dealing  with  the  risk  of  self-harm  particularly,  the  SSHD
      referred to the case of J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629 stating  she  had
      considered  whether  there  were  substantial,  strong   grounds   for
      believing removal would expose him to a real risk of serious  harm  or
      loss of life  through  suicide  or  self-harm  under  Article  3.  She
      concluded it would not, making reference to protections and support on
      the journey and the availability of care  in  Mogadishu,  plus  modern
      means of communication to keep in touch with family.



  57.  The letter concluded that whilst there  may  be  risks  when  he  was
      informed of the decision to remove, all reasonable measures  had  been
      put into place to protect  against  them,  similarly  during  physical
      removal, escorts would accompany him and a medic would be provided for
      his deportation. There would not therefore be a real risk  of  serious
      harm or loss of life during the removal.



  58. She acknowledged that an Article 3 claim could in principle succeed in
      a suicide case but if the fear of ill-treatment upon return  were  not
      well founded, that would tend to weigh against there being a real risk
      the return would  result  in  treatment  contrary  to  Article  3.   A
      question of considerable relevance  was  whether  the  UK  and/or  the
      receiving state  had  effective  mechanisms  to  reduce  the  risk  of
      suicide, and if so, that would weigh  heavily  against  the  claim  of
      violation of Article 3. Even if the risk were regarded as  severe,  an
      increase in the risk of suicide as a result of  the  removal  was  not
      sufficient to bring the case near the high Article 3  threshold,  when
      considering the measures put in place to minimise the risk of suicide.
       YA could seek treatment for a mental health condition,  especially  a
      predisposition to self-harm, in Somalia and the risk  of  suicide  and
      self-harm would be effectively minimised.  In  the  circumstances  the
      risk did not attain the level of severity necessary to meet  the  high
      Article 3 threshold.



  59. The SSHD expressly did  not  accept  that  YA's  claimed  thoughts  of
      suicide were as the result of past ill-treatment or  torture.  It  was
      not accepted  by  the  SSHD  that  the  risk  stemmed  from  YA  being
      "subjectively terrified at the prospect of returning to the  scene  of
      his torment" (reflecting language used in the case of  Y  and  Z  (Sri
      Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362).





(iii) Addendum Report of Dr Galappathie

  60. This application for judicial review was made on 28 October  2019.  An
      addendum psychiatric report was received from Dr Galappathie  dated  4
      November following a visit to YA on 1 November 2019.  YA reported  his
      mental health had continued to worsen since July, describing a  series
      of other symptoms and a constant fear of being returned to Somalia. He
      said he had not been seen by the Mental Health Team: he did not  trust
      them and did not want to see them.



  61. Dr Galappathie said he  remained  of  the  opinion  YA  suffered  from
      recurrent depressive disorder and  had  had  a  worsening  episode  of
      depression since  last  examined.   YA  described  worsening  suicidal
      thoughts,  and  hearing  voices-which  to  Dr   Galappathie   appeared
      plausible  and  was  likely  to  represent  underlying   psychological
      distress. He expressed again the view that the depression  was  likely
      to have been caused by his past history  of  suffering  trauma  within
      Somalia when he was kidnapped.  The prison sentence was likely to have
      contributed  to  his  depression  since  he  reported  being   falsely
      convicted.  His view was the PTSD had worsened and YA's  thoughts  and
      plans about suicide had become more intense.



  62. Dr Galappathie stated that YA's had  developed  an  "intense  fear  of
      persecution" by the man who made him shine shoes in Somalia.  He again
      recommended release into the community.  The detention and the fear of
      imminent return had acutely worsened his mental health. YA believed he
      would be recognised in Somalia and persecuted.



  63. Dr Galappathie further said that YA could be  safely  managed  in  the
      community and was unlikely to present with a risk of  harm  to  others
      given that he had effectively served a long prison  sentence  and  was
      unlikely to commit further offences. He described YA as insightful and
      willing to engage with therapy and therefore likely  to  have  a  good
      response to psychological treatment, concluding "I would anticipate  a
      good prognosis if he can receive treatment in the UK."    He  referred
      to a high risk of  serious  self-harm  and  completed  suicide  if  YA
      remained in immigration detention with a view  to  being  deported  to
      Somalia. Dr Galappathie formally disagreed with Dr  Nimmagadda  as  to
      diagnosis and fitness to be detained and flying to  Somalia.   In  his
      view Dr Nimmagadda had not adequately considered the impact of  return
      to Somalia on YA's mental state.



(ii) The 6 January 2020 Reconsideration

  64. On 6 January 2020, a further refusal letter was written by  the  SSHD.
      That letter and the Detailed Grounds of Defence reflect a  significant
      development in enquiries by the SSHD as  to  healthcare  provision  in
      Somalia.



  65. The letter set out  detailed  specific  enquiries  undertaken  with  a
      mental health provider in  Mogadishu  who  could  be  commissioned  to
      provide appropriate treatment upon the claimant's return  to  Somalia.
      The SSHD repeated she did not accept that there was such a risk as was
      alleged by YA, but, if there were, she said  it  was,  on  the  facts,
      mitigated.



  66. The medical materials were considered again,  including  the  addendum
      report of Dr Galappathie.  The detailed consideration previously given
      in the 15 October Refusal Letter  and  thereafter  in  the  pre-action
      protocol response were  referred  to,  but  the  SSHD's  position  was
      maintained.



  67.  The SSHD noted that Dr  Galappathie  said  YA  was  worse  and  would
      benefit from release into the community.  He  had  disagreed  with  Dr
      Nimmagadda, but she observed that Dr  Nimmagadda's  assessment  of  YA
      working in the laundry was  considered  rather  more  reliable  as  an
      indication of YA's  position,  so  she  placed  less  weight  upon  Dr
      Galappathie's views than upon Dr Nimmagadda's. A  further  ground  for
      placing less weight upon the Addendum Report  of  Dr  Galappathie  was
      expressed thus:

           "14.   The  SSHD  also  finds  the  conclusions  reached  by  Dr
           Galappathie in respect of your continued  risk  to  the  public,
           further undermines the credibility of the report.   To  clarify,
           the SSHD wholly refutes Dr Galappathie stance that you no longer
           pose a significant risk to the public, because you  have  served
           your prison sentence.




           15.  Such a view is also contradicted by your National  Offender
           Manager and two Immigration  Judges  who  have  maintained  your
           detention due to your high risk of harm to the  public.   It  is
           also  a  conclusion  which  is  wholly   contradicted   by   the
           Immigration Judge at your appeal for July 2017; as well  as  the
           subsequent Immigration Judges who upheld that decision.




           16.  As stated at paragraph 9-10 of our  letter  of  15  October
           2019, within your appeal determination promulgated on your  case
           by the IAC on 4 July 2017, upheld by the First Tier Tribunal  on
           21 July 2017 and by the Upper Tribunal's on 17 August 2017;  the
           Immigration Judge noted in his determination dated 4 July 2017:

                 "I do  not  find  that  the  Appellant  has  completed  the
                 necessary  or  sufficient  work  to  address  the  risk  of
                 repetition. I do not find that the Appellant  has  accepted
                 his responsibility for  rape.   I  do  not  find  that  the
                 Appellant has rebutted the presumption that he  constitutes
                 a danger to the community... I find that the appellant does
                 constitute a danger to  the  community"  (paragraphs  73-74
                 refer)."

           17. The SSHD maintains the  position  of  the  courts  and  your
           Offender Manager; your Offender  Manager  characterised  you  as
           being a high risk of harm; particularly to young  white  females
           in clubs, public houses  or  under  the  influence  of  alcohol,
           through physical and psychological harm, through committing acts
           of assault and rape, and a risk to males of  a  similar  age  to
           yourself.  This opinion was reached  in  part  because  of  your
           distinct lack of remorse and because you have failed to  partake
           in the rehabilitation programs offered to you.




           18.  Given that you continue to avoid taking responsibility  for
           your actions and the crimes you have  perpetrated  against  your
           victim; it is considered that you remain a high risk of harm.




           19.  This is also evident by Dr Galappathie's own admission that
           you have not shown awareness or remorse for the offence you have
           committed, despite his subsequent conclusion that your  risk  to
           the public is reduced. Dr Galappathie's [sic] goes so far as  to
           describe your crime as an "alleged" offence; whether this  is  a
           quote directly from you, or an opinion of Dr Galappathie, it  is
           uncertain."



  68. The SSHD continued:

           "23.  To conclude, given  all  of  the  above,  and  the  wholly
           refuted conclusions reached by  Dr  Galappathie  regarding  your
           criminality and the risk you pose to the UK, the SSHD finds that
           little weight can be attached to his report and  therefore,  the
           conclusions reached within it are not accepted.  As  above,  the
           SSHD relies upon the conclusions reached within Dr  Nimmagadda's
           report.




           24.  That said, without prejudice to the above  conclusions,  it
           is  ultimately  found  that  barring   all   speculation,   your
           submissions on the basis of your mental health are bound to fail
           before any further appeal court, given that  there  are  medical
           resources available to you on return to  Somalia  that  you  can
           access for support."



  69. The SSHD reflected that there was mental health provision in  Somalia,
      as previously set out, but in addition to this, further steps had been
      taken to ascertain and procure appropriate care if needed.



  70. The letter sets out that the SSHD established contact  with  a  Mental
      Health Care Centre in  Mogadishu  Somalia  and,  having  reviewed  the
      anonymised medical reports, they had accepted YA and that  they  could
      offer appropriate Mental  Health  and  Psychosocial  Services  on  his
      return  to  Somalia.  The  facility  had   psychiatric,   counselling,
      psychosocial support and emergency departments as well  as  a  trained
      team of qualified doctors; [redacted emails were enclosed].



  71. The SSHD referred to Dr Galappathie's  claim  that,  because  of  YA's
      subjective fear of return,  he  would  not  be  able  to  engage  with
      treatment if returned, whilst not accepting  that claim, the SSHD says
      that her exchanges with the facility in Somalia show that  steps  will
      be taken to address YA's personal needs before his arrival and on  his
      entry to Somalia. A personalised care plan package would be  purchased
      for YA by the SSHD for a treatment plan specific to his  needs  [again
      emails were enclosed]. The facility, which  was  specified,  had  been
      investigated  and  it  had  accepted  it  could  provide   appropriate
      treatment.



  72.  On the basis of these considerations the Secretary of State said  not
      only was treatment available in Somalia in general terms, but  it  was
      accessible to YA himself particularly, with a tailored treatment  plan
      available on his return.  At the First Tier Tribunal  hearing  YA  had
      accepted his family would be able to help him a little at  the  outset
      in Somalia, and that he had admitted having extended family there with
      whom he was in contact. In light of these factors the  SSHD  concluded
      that on no legitimate view could his claim succeed.



d. Legal Framework and the approach of this Court

  73. The approach this court is required to take is well established. It is
      "a Wednesbury approach, tempered by the demands of anxious  scrutiny":
      see R (TK) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1550 at paragraph 9. To examine  the
      lawfulness of her decision requires these questions to be considered:

        a.  First, has the SSHD asked herself  the  correct  question?  The
           question is not whether the SSHD herself  thinks  that  the  new
           claim is a good one or should succeed but  whether  there  is  a
           realistic prospect of an Immigration Judge taking  a  favourable
           view.

        b. Second, in addressing that  question  both  in  respect  of  the
           evaluation of the facts and in respect of the legal  conclusions
           to be drawn  from  those  facts,  has  the  Secretary  of  State
           satisfied the requirement of anxious scrutiny?

Fresh claims

  74. The starting point is the Immigration Rules where the requirements  of
      a fresh claim are set out. Paragraph  353  of  the  Immigration  Rules
      provides:

           '353. When a human rights or protection claim has  been  refused
           or withdrawn or treated as withdrawn  under  paragraph  333C  of
           these Rules and any appeal relating to that claim is  no  longer
           pending,  the  decision  maker   will   consider   any   further
           submissions and, if rejected, will then determine  whether  they
           amount to a fresh claim. The submissions will amount to a  fresh
           claim if they are significantly different from the material that
           has previously been considered. The  submissions  will  only  be
           significantly different if the content:

           a. had not already been considered; and

           b. taken  together  with  the  previously  considered  material,
           created a realistic prospect  of  success,  notwithstanding  its
           rejection.  This  paragraph  does  not  apply  to  claims   made
           overseas.



  75. The Court of Appeal in WM (DRC) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1495  said  the
      following at paragraphs 9 - 12 with regard to paragraph 353:

           "9  ...  As  the  Secretary  of  State  rightly  submitted,   his
           conclusion as to whether there was a fresh claim was not  a  fact
           nor precedent to any other decision but was the decision  itself.
           The court could not take that decision out of the  hands  of  the
           decision-maker. It can only do that  when  it  is  exercising  an
           appellate role, with appeal excluded, the decision  remains  that
           of the Secretary of State, subject only to review and not appeal.
           And in any event, whatever the logic of it all the issue to which
           Lord Bingham MR gave only a tentative answer in Onibiyo arose for
           decision before this court in Cakabay v Secretary  of  State  for
           the Home Department (No 2) [1999] Imm AR 176. It makes clear that
           the test is a Wednesbury test.




           ... Whilst, therefore, the decision remains that of the Secretary
           of State, and the test is one of irrationality, a  decision  will
           be irrational if  it  is  not  taken  on  the  basis  of  anxious
           scrutiny. Accordingly, a court when reviewing a decision  of  the
           Secretary of State as  to  whether  a  fresh  claim  exists  must
           address the following matters.




           First has the Secretary of  State  asked  [her]self  the  correct
           question? The question is not  whether  the  Secretary  of  State
           [her]self thinks that the new claim  is  a  good  one  or  should
           succeed  but  whether  there  is  a  realistic  prospect  of   an
           adjudicator applying the rule of anxious scrutiny  thinking  that
           the applicant will be exposed to a real risk  of  persecution  on
           return: see para 7 above. The Secretary of State  of  course  can
           and no doubt should treat  his  own  view  of  the  merits  as  a
           starting point for that inquiry but it is only a  starting  point
           in the consideration of a question that is  distinctly  different
           from the exercise of the Secretary of State  making  up  his  own
           mind. Second, in addressing that question both in respect of  the
           evaluation of the facts and in respect of the  legal  conclusions
           to be  drawn  from  those  facts,  has  the  Secretary  of  State
           satisfied the requirement  of  anxious  scrutiny?  If  the  court
           cannot be satisfied that the answer to both of those questions is
           in the affirmative it will  have  to  grant  an  application  for
           review of the Secretary of State's decision."



  76. The concept I must apply when considering "no  realistic  prospect  of
      success" is the meaning given in AK (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ
      447 where Laws LJ explained it meant "a  case  with  no  more  than  a
      fanciful prospect of success" (see paragraph (34) applied) in R (TK) v
      SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 15502).



  77. The SSHD relies in particular upon the dictum from WM set  out  above,
      and further, on AK (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 535 where  the
      question was phrased as

           "whether an independent tribunal might realistically  come  down
           in favour of the asylum or human rights  claim,  on  considering
           the  new  material  together  with   the   material   previously
           considered" (Toulson LJ @ [23]).



  78. Ms Miranda  Butler  on  the  applicant's  behalf  draws  my  attention
      particularly to the case decided by HHJ Anthony Thornton  QC,  sitting
      as a Deputy Judge of the High Court, ST v SSHD [2012] EWHC 988 (Admin)
      where the  question  was  characterised  in  somewhat  more  expansive
      language as

           "unless the claim is considered to  be  hopeless  and  as  being
           incapable  of  succeeding  at  the  second  hearing  before   an
           independent  professional  specialist   judge   with   all   the
           additional benefit of such a hearing..."



I do not take that case to be seeking to gloss  the  test  set  out  by  the
Court of Appeal  elsewhere.  The  court  was  there  dealing  with  material
adverse credibility  findings  capable  of  correction  at  a  further  oral
hearing, which is not this case.



   Article 3

  79. Article 3 of the ECHR provides that "no  one  shall  be  subjected  to
      torture or to inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment" and  where
      successfully invoked, provides absolute protection; no  balancing  act
      is conducted of public against private interests.



  80. The case of D v United Kingdom Application 30240/96 (1997) 24 EHRR 423
      was the first case to explain the application of Article 3 to cases of
      illness. The starting point of the Court's reasoning was  the  tension
      between the right of a state to control its borders  and  Article  3's
      absolute prohibition on torture and degrading treatment.

           46. The Court recalls  ...  that  Contracting  States  have  the
           right, as a matter of  well-established  international  law  and
           subject to their treaty obligations including the Convention, to
           control the entry, residence and expulsion of  aliens.  It  also
           notes the gravity of the offence  which  was  committed  by  the
           applicant and is  acutely  aware  of  the  problems  confronting
           Contracting States in their efforts to combat the harm caused to
           their societies ...


           47. However in exercising  their  right  to  expel  such  aliens
           Contracting  States  must  have  regard  to  Article  3  of  the
           Convention which enshrines one  of  the  fundamental  values  of
           democratic societies. It is precisely for this reason  that  the
           Court  has  repeatedly  stressed  in  its  line  of  authorities
           involving extradition, expulsion or deportation  of  individuals
           to third countries that Article 3 prohibits  in  absolute  terms
           torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment and that
           its guarantees apply irrespective of the reprehensible nature of
           the conduct of the person in question."



  81. The facts in D were extreme:

           "51.  ... the applicant is in the advanced stages of a  terminal
           and incurable illness. At  the  date  of  the  hearing,  it  was
           observed that there had been a marked decline in  his  condition
           and he had to be transferred to a hospital...


           52. The abrupt withdrawal of these facilities  will  entail  the
           most dramatic consequences for him. It is not disputed that  his
           removal will hasten his death. There is a  serious  danger  that
           the conditions of adversity which await him  in  St  Kitts  will
           further reduce his already limited life expectancy  and  subject
           him to acute mental and physical suffering."



  82. The test applied was stringent:

           "53. In view of these exceptional circumstances and  bearing  in
           mind the critical stage now reached  in  the  applicant's  fatal
           illness, the implementation of the decision to remove him to  St
           Kitts would amount to inhuman treatment by the respondent  State
           in violation of Article 3."



  83. The SSHD submitted before me that there were very  few  exceptions  to
      the stringency of the Article 3 threshold and a  similar  approach  to
      that seen in the illness cases applied to suicide risk. In the illness
      case of N v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] UKHL  31
      [2005] 2 AC 296 the House of Lords set out the  rationale  for  D  and
      cases like it, Lord Brown said:

           "94. What then must be established  to  bring  a  case  of  this
           nature within the category of very exceptional cases represented
           by D? I am content to adopt the test  stated  by  my  noble  and
           learned friend, Lord Hope of Craighead: it must  be  shown  that
           the applicant's medical condition has reached  such  a  critical
           state, that there are compelling humanitarian  grounds  for  not
           removing him or her to a  place  which  lacks  the  medical  and
           social services which he or she  would  need  to  prevent  acute
           suffering."



  84. The House of Lords in N agreed upon the test to  be  applied,  namely,
      that the applicant had to be effectively on his or  her  deathbed.  As
      set out in the judgment of Lady Hale in paragraph 69:

           ''... the test, in this sort of case, is whether the applicant's
           illness has reached such a critical stage  (i.e.  he  is  dying)
           that it would be inhuman treatment to deprive him  of  the  care
           which he is currently receiving and send him home  to  an  early
           death unless there is care available there to enable him to meet
           that fate with dignity."



  85. The SSHD before me relied upon this as the current approach to  health
      including suicide cases, and also upon a statement from N in the ECtHR
      (N v United Kingdom 2008 47 EHRR 39) at paragraph 91:

           "The fact that the applicant's circumstances, including his life
           expectancy, would be significantly reduced  if  he  were  to  be
           removed from the contracting state is not sufficient  in  itself
           to give rise to breach of article 3."



  86. The ECtHR had also said as follows in N:

           "43. The Court does not exclude that there  may  be  other  very
           exceptional cases  where  the  humanitarian  considerations  are
           equally  compelling.  However,  it  considers  that  it   should
           maintain the high threshold  set  in  [D]  and  applied  in  its
           subsequent case-law, which it regards as correct  in  principle,
           given that in such cases the alleged future harm  would  emanate
           not from the intentional acts or omissions of public authorities
           or non-State bodies, but  instead  from  a  naturally  occurring
           illness and the lack of sufficient resources to deal with it  in
           the receiving country.


           44. ... [I]nherent in the whole of the Convention is a search
           for a fair balance between the demands of the general interest
           of the community and the requirements of the protection of the
           individual's fundamental rights (see [Soering v United
           Kingdom (1989) 11 EHRR 439 ("Soering") at paragraph 89]).



  87. N was an AIDS sufferer, who received anti-retroviral treatment in  the
      UK, without which, if she  were  returned,  she  would  undergo  acute
      physical and  mental  suffering  and  an  early  death,  with  a  much
      diminished life expectancy. The Grand Chamber of the  ECtHR  concluded
      that removal of N would not breach Article 3. Since the decision in  D
      v United Kingdom the Court had in fact never found a proposed  removal
      to violate  Article  3  on  health  grounds,  although,  so  said  the
      majority, a very exceptional case might  exist  with  very  compelling
      humanitarian grounds. Three judges dissented in N on  the  basis  that
      the majority had introduced a policy balance into the  application  of
      Article 3, where other case law made it clear that the prohibition  on
      ill-treatment was an absolute one.




  88. In the domestic court in N the House of Lords had  also  decided  that
      for states to  allow  foreign  nationals   to  remain  for  indefinite
      medical or other benefits, and to interpret the Convention as imposing
      such an obligation would be to extend the  reach  of  the   Convention
      further than Contracting States would  be  prepared  to  accept.  They
      articulated the test, set out above:  such that a case  would  succeed
      where removal denied an applicant, in effect, the opportunity  to  die
      in dignity. Article 3 did not  require  Contracting  States  to  allow
      aliens to remain  for  indefinite  medical  treatment  and  associated
      welfare benefits.




  89. This exacting approach was applied in ECtHR suicide cases, as the SSHD
      showed by reference to Balogun v UK (60286/09) where a  challenge  was
      brought to the deportation of a Nigerian national on the grounds there
      was a real risk  of  suicide  were  he  to  be  returned.  He  had  an
      uncontested diagnosis of depression which had necessitated  in-patient
      psychiatric treatment following a suicide  attempt.  The  Court  found
      that the claim was manifestly ill-founded but revealed its approach in
      such cases was slightly different. It said at paragraph 31:

           "The  Court  reiterates  that,  according  to  its   established
           caselaw, aliens who are subject to expulsion cannot in principle
           claim any right to remain in  the  territory  of  a  Contracting
           State in order to continue to benefit from  medical,  social  or
           other forms of assistance provided by that  State,  unless  such
           exceptional   circumstances   pertain   as   to    render    the
           implementation of a decision to  remove  an  alien  incompatible
           with Article 3 of the Convention.  Finally,  the  Court  recalls
           that in order to violate Article 3 [pic] treatment must attain a
           minimum level of severity, this applies  regardless  of  whether
           the  risk  of  harm  emanates  from  deliberate  acts  of  State
           authorities or third parties; from a naturally occurring illness
            ... or even from the applicant himself....  The  Court  recalls
           that in previous cases involving a risk of suicide, it has found
           not only that the high threshold for Article 3  applies  to  the
           same extent as it  does  in  other  types  of  cases,  but  that
           appropriate and adequate steps taken by the relevant authorities
           to mitigate a risk of suicide will weigh  against  a  conclusion
           that the high threshold of Article 3 has been reached."


  90. The similarity of approach to the two types of medical issue  was  not
      in dispute in the present case. However, it is in my  judgement  clear
      that the importance of risk mitigation in judging Article 3 engagement
      is the important common feature of the suicide risk cases. It  assumes
      particular prominence in recent developments in the law affecting  all
      medical cases.



  91. In paragraph 32 of Balogun the ECtHR explained that  the  question  of
      risk was  to  be  addressed  in  three  stages:  notification  of  the
      decision, actual removal and after arrival in the foreign  state.  The
      Court also said, importantly:

           "The Court notes that this is the approach espoused by the Court
           of Appeal in J v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department...
           and which the court considers is entirely  consistent  with  the
           requirements of Article 3."




  92. In Balogun the government had proffered evidence of  the  risks  being
      considered and steps that would be taken to  minimise  them.   Escorts
      trained in suicide and self-harm awareness and prevention were  to  be
      provided on the flight and, on arrival, there was evidence psychiatric
      treatment would be  available  in  Nigeria  if  required.   For  those
      reasons the applicant's case was in the event rejected.



  93. The Court in Balogan thus concluded

           " (Paragraph ...)in the light of the precautions to be taken  by
           the Government and the existence of adequate psychiatric care in
           Nigeria, should the applicant require it, the Court is unable to
           find that the applicant deportation would result in a  real  and
           imminent risk of treatment of such a severity as to  reach  [the
           Article 3] threshold.  It therefore follows that the applicant's
           complaint under Article 3 is manifestly ill founded..."




  94. Following the case of N, the ECtHR has had occasion to reconsider  the
      Article  3  threshold  in  an  illness  case,  Paposhvili  v   Belgium
      Application 41738/10, decided in December 2016. The Grand Chamber  was
      invited (in the words of the submissions of the applicant)

            "to go beyond its findings in N v United Kingdom and to  define
           ... a  realistic  threshold  of  severity  that  was  no  longer
           confined  to  securing  a   "right   to   die   with   dignity""
           (paragraph149)




      The intervener made similar submissions.




  95. The Court recognised that the threshold for Article 3  had  been  that
      the applicant was close to death, and then said:

           "183.  The Court considers  that  the  "other  very  exceptional
           cases" within the meaning  of  the  judgment  in  N.  v.  United
           Kingdom ( 43) which may raise an issue under Article  3  should
           be understood to refer to situations involving the removal of  a
           seriously ill person in  which  substantial  grounds  have  been
           shown for believing that he or she,  although  not  at  imminent
           risk of dying, would face a real risk, on account of the absence
           of appropriate treatment in the receiving country or the lack of
           access to such treatment, of being exposed to a  serious,  rapid
           and irreversible decline in his or her state of health resulting
           in intense suffering or  to  a  significant  reduction  in  life
           expectancy.  The  Court  points  out   that   these   situations
           correspond to a high threshold for the application of Article  3
           of the Convention in cases  concerning  the  removal  of  aliens
           suffering from serious illness."




  96. It is important to note that the Court expressly maintains  the  "high
      threshold" for illness removal cases and that those meeting  the  test
      set out are to be understood as coming within  the  meaning  of  "very
      exceptional."




  97. Mr Paposhvili was a failed asylum seeker who sought exceptional  leave
      to remain in  Belgium  on  the  basis  that  his  chronic  lymphocytic
      leukaemia constituted exceptional humanitarian circumstances, since he
      would not have access to potentially life-saving treatment in  Georgia
      where  he  was  to  be  returned.   Medical  materials  suggested  the
      discontinuation of treatment, unavailable in Georgia, meant an average
      life expectancy of three months.




  98. The court's essential conclusion  (paragraph  205)  was  that  in  the
      absence of any actual assessment by the authorities of the risk facing
      the  applicant,  there  was  insufficient  material  to  conclude  the
      applicant would not run a real and concrete risk of treatment contrary
      to Article 3. The violation of Article 3 stemmed from the  absence  of
      an assessment of risk, by the government, given the materials that had
      been  provided  to   them   (Paragraph   206),   and   reliance   upon
      unsubstantiated claims about the possibility of posting medication  to
      him.




  99. The case of Paposhvili v Belgium therefore is authority  also,  in  my
      judgement, for imposing what can be regarded as a  set  of  procedural
      requirements, should the state wish to resist an  arguable  Article  3
      claim. In cases where an applicant brings forward  evidence  amounting
      to a prima facie case of substantial grounds for  believing  that,  if
      removed,  he or she would be exposed  to  a  real  risk  of  treatment
      contrary to Article 3 (to use the wording of paragraph 186), the state
      is called upon as follows:

           a. the state has to "dispel any doubts raised by" the  evidence,
              and closely  scrutinise  the  alleged  risk,  addressing  any
              reports made by reputable organisations concerning  treatment
              in the receiving state (paragraph 187);

           b. the state must "verify on a case-by-case basis"  whether  the
              care generally  available  in  the  receiving  state  was  in
              practice sufficient to prevent the  applicant's  exposure  to
              treatment contrary to Article 3 (paragraph 189);

           c. the state must consider accessibility  of  treatment  to  the
              applicant,  by  reference  to  its  cost,  available   family
              network, and location; (paragraph 190)

           d. if serious doubts nonetheless still surrounded the impact  of
              removal,  the  returning  state  must  obtain  an  individual
              assurance from the receiving state that appropriate treatment
              would be available and accessible to the applicant (paragraph
              191).




 100. I would not read Paposhvili as holding that there is some  independent
      breach of Article 3 obligations  where  enquiries  are  not  made  nor
      doubts dispelled: this would run counter in my view to the analysis in
      suicide cases where the measure of Article  3  risk  is  increased  or
      diminished by  the presence of effective inquiry. However,  the  point
      was not argued before me and I reach no concluded view. I refer to the
      close examination of this (among other issues) in the case of AXB (art
      3 health: obligations; suicide) Jamaica [2019]  UKUT  397  (IAC)  with
      whose conclusions on this point I respectfully agree.




 101. The approach in Paposhvili, an illness  case,  is  broadly  consistent
      with authoritative domestic guidance in J v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  629
      and in Y and Z (Sri Lanka) [2009] EWCA Civ 362,  both  of  which  were
      suicide risk cases,  as to the approach that should be taken where  it
      is said that the risk of suicide on refoulement is such  that  removal
      would be contrary to Article 3 ECHR.




 102. In J, the appellant, a citizen of  Sri  Lanka  said  he  would  commit
      suicide if returned to Sri Lanka and that the decision to  remove  him
      violated his rights arising under both Article 8 and 3.




 103. Summarising the law concerning Article 3  refoulement,  the  Court  of
      Appeal in a unanimous judgement delivered by Dyson LJ said materially:

                 "26. First, the test requires an assessment to be  made  of
                 the severity of the treatment which it  is  said  that  the
                 applicant would suffer  if  removed.  This  must  attain  a
                 minimum level of severity, The court has said on  a  number
                 of occasions that the assessment of its severity depends on
                 all the circumstances of the case,  But  the  ill-treatment
                 must "necessarily be serious" such that it is ('an  affront
                 to  fundamental  humanitarian  principles  to   remove   an
                 individual to a country where he is at risk of serious ill-
                 treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].


                 27. Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist  between
                 the act or threatened act of removal or expulsion  and  the
                 inhuman treatment relied on as  violating  the  applicant's
                 Article 3 rights. Thus in Soering at para [91],  the  court
                 said:


                       "In so far as any liability under the  Convention  is
                       or may be incurred, it is liability incurred  by  the
                       extraditing Contracting State by reason of its having
                       taken action which has as a  direct  consequence  the
                       exposure  of  an  individual   to   proscribed   ill-
                       treatment."


                 See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the court said that
                 the examination of the Article 3 issue "must focus  on  the
                 foreseeable consequences of the removal of  the  applicants
                 to Sri Lanka"


                 28. Thirdly, in the context of a foreign case, the  Article
                 3 threshold is particularly high simply  because  it  is  a
                 foreign case. And it  is  even  higher  where  the  alleged
                 inhuman  treatment  is   not   the   direct   or   indirect
                 responsibility of the public authorities of  the  receiving
                 state, but results from some naturally  occurring  illness,
                 whether physical or mental. This is made clear in para [49]
                 of D and para [40] of Bensaid.


                 29. Fourthly, an Article 3 claim can in  principle  succeed
                 in a suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid.


                 30. Fifthly, in deciding whether there is a real risk of  a
                 breach of Article 3  in  a  suicide  case,  a  question  of
                 importance is whether the ' fear of  ill-treatment  in  the
                 receiving state upon which the risk of suicide is  said  to
                 be based is objectively well-founded, If the  fear  is  not
                 well-founded, that will tend to weigh against there being a
                 real risk that the removal will be in breach of Article 3.


                 31. Sixthly, a further question of  considerable  relevance
                 is whether the removing  and/or  the  receiving  state  has
                 effective mechanisms to reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.  If
                 there are effective mechanisms, that too will weigh heavily
                 against an applicant's claim that removal will violate  his
                 or her Article 3 rights."



 104. Ms Butler relied on Y(Sri Lanka) and Z (Sri Lanka) v the Secretary  of
      State for  the  Home  Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362  where  these
      principles were applied in a situation in which the  claimants  argued
      they would commit suicide if returned to the scene of  their  previous
      rape and torture. This case adds a gloss to the fifth  of  Dyson  LJ's
      questions above.




 105. The background facts in Y and Z were extreme and described  by  Sedley
      LJ in the following way:

                 "8.  In addition to the torture  and  sexual  violation  of
                 both  appellants  in   government   custody,   the   second
                 appellant's  husband  and  daughter  were  killed  by   the
                 security forces in 2001 while she was working  in  Malaysia
                 as a housemaid to support her  family.   Two  male  cousins
                 were executed by the security forces, and their mother (the
                 appellants' aunt) starved herself  to  death  in  a  public
                 protest.  None of this was found to create  a  well-founded
                 fear of persecution or ill-treatment on return, but in  the
                 light of the AIT's reappraisal in LP [2007] UK AIT 00076 of
                 the  situation  of  returnees  in  Sri  Lanka   a   further
                 application has been made, and is still pending, by way  of
                 a fresh claim.  Meanwhile, however,  the  severity  of  the
                 appellants' experiences is capable of having a  bearing  on
                 the issues before this court, as is the further tragedy  of
                 the loss of some 50 family members  in  the  tsunami  which
                 occurred at the end of 2004.


                 9.  The Home Office has at no point of this protracted  and
                 complex case sought to have either appellant examined by  a
                 psychiatrist nominated by itself or to secure agreement  to
                 a joint psychiatric examination.  All the  expert  evidence
                 has been submitted on the appellants' behalf, and  all  has
                 come from a reputable specialist whose  qualifications  and
                 experience have not been in question.   The  Home  Office's
                 case has depended entirely on finding fault with it."



 106.  The six principles expounded by Dyson  LJ  in  J  were  set  out  and
      applied to the position in Y and Z.  Sedley LJ then said:

                 "15. ... The corollary of the final sentence  of  paragraph
                 30 of J is that in the absence of an  objective  foundation
                 for  the  fear  some  independent  basis  for  it  must  be
                 established if weight is  to  be  given  to  it.   Such  an
                 independent basis may lie in trauma inflicted in  the  past
                 on the appellant in (or, as here, by) the receiving  state:
                 someone who has been tortured  and  raped  by  his  or  her
                 captors may be terrified of returning to the place where it
                 happened, especially if the same authorities are in charge,
                 notwithstanding that the objective risk  of  recurrence  is
                 gone.




                 16.  One can accordingly add to the fifth  principle  in  J
                 that what  may  nevertheless  be  of  equal  importance  is
                 whether any genuine fear which the appellant may  establish
                 albeit without an  objective  foundation,  is  such  as  to
                 create a risk of suicide if there is an enforced return."




 107. The Court of Appeal in Y and Z made striking criticism of the Tribunal
      below in its approach to an assessment of the psychiatric evidence and
      its conclusion upon  that  evidence,  for  example  at  paragraph  45,
      describing the Tribunal's approach to the evidence:

            "45. There is a limit to  how  much  Panglossian  optimism  can
           decently be extracted  from  such  a  history  of  physical  and
           familial devastation.  I am entirely unable to accept that  this
           limb of the case has been approached with the necessary  realism
           and attention to fact."




 108. In that case the experts accepted that the particular experiences of Y
      and Z were so extreme that they were so fearful of the authorities  at
      whose hands they had suffered, that they would not be able to actually
      seek any treatment in Sri Lanka.

                 "47. ... if it [i.e. their location on return] is their now
                 devastated home area, what medical help would be  available
                 there, and to whom, if anyone, could they look for help and
                 support?  If it  is  Colombo,  where  they  were  held  and
                 tortured  in  the  CID  headquarters  (and   the   horrific
                 character of their treatment is relevant to this), what  is
                 the realistic  possibility  of  their  venturing  into  any
                 proximity with officialdom?  It is not  and  cannot  be  an
                 answer that, because it has  been  decided  that  there  is
                 objectively no real risk of repetition, all such fears will
                 evaporate in the light of day.  The subjective  reality  of
                 fear has to be given its full - and sometimes  overwhelming
                 - weight."


                 "55 In relation to Y, Dr Patterson  ... reported that  "the
                 recent multiple bereavements  that  he  has  suffered  have
                 precipitated a significant deterioration in his  depression
                 and markedly increased the risk of suicide",  She  restated
                 her opinion that if returned to Colombo he would  not  seek
                 out the help he needed, and that none would be on hand."



      Similar evidence was given about Z.




 109. In a passage to which the SSHD in this case draws my attention, Sedley
      LJ summarised the effect of the evidence thus:

                 "61 The upshot of the material findings and of  the  expert
                 evidence which (for reasons I have given)  stood  unshaken,
                 is that, although some psychiatric care is available in Sri
                 Lanka, these two appellants are  so  traumatised  by  their
                 experiences, and so subjectively terrified at the  prospect
                 of return to the scene of their torment, that they will not
                 be capable of seeking the  treatment  they  need.  Assuming
                 (what cannot be certain) that they come  unscathed  through
                 interrogation at the airport, with no known family left  in
                 Sri Lanka and no home to travel to: the  chances  of  their
                 finding a secure base from which to seek the palliative and
                 therapeutic care that will keep them from taking their  own
                 lives are on any admissible view of the evidence remote.


                 62.None  of  this  reasoning  represents  a   licence   for
                 emotional  blackmail  by  asylum-seekers.   Officials   and
                 immigration judges will be right to continue to  scrutinise
                 the authenticity of such claims as these with care. In some
                 cases, the Home Office may want to seek  its  own  a  joint
                 report. But there comes a point  at  which  an  undisturbed
                 finding that an appellant had been tortured  and  raped  in
                 captivity has to be conscientiously related to credible and
                 uncontradicted expert evidence that the  likely  effect  of
                 the psychological trauma (aggravated in the  present  cases
                 by the devastation of home and family by the  tsunami),  if
                 return is enforced, will be suicide.


                 63. On the present evidence, including where  material  the
                 AIT's evaluation of it, the clear likelihood  is  that  the
                 appellants'  only  perceived  means  of  escape  from   the
                 isolation and fear in which return would place  them  would
                 be to take their own lives. For reasons I have  given,  the
                 concomitant  findings  that  their  fear   is   no   longer
                 objectively well-founded and  that  there  exists  a  local
                 health  service  capable  of  affording  treatment  do  not
                 materially  attenuate  this  risk,  which  is   subjective,
                 immediate, and acute.


                 64. In this situation, return would in my  judgement  reach
                 the high threshold  of  inhuman  treatment  unconditionally
                 prohibited by art,3 of the ECHR."



 110. Read with J, Y and Z means that in an extreme case, where there is  an
      independent basis for the fear giving rise  to  a  genuine  terror  of
      return likely to prompt a successful suicide attempt, the fear is  not
      to be discounted simply because the basis of the fear expressed cannot
      any longer be objectively established.



 111. It is the SSHD's submission that the facts  in  YA's  case  are  of  a
      different order from these.



 112. Mr Anderson noted  that the Article 3 threshold  was considered in  AM
      (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ. AM was an illness  case   in  which
      the appellants wished to invite the Supreme Court  to  reconsider,  in
      the light of Paposhvili,  the very stringent approach derived from  N.
      It was accepted in AM, that the applicants were not "deathbed  cases",
      and so not within N.



 113. Paposhvili clearly relaxes the test for violation of article 3 in  the
      case of removal of a foreign national with a medical condition.  Sales
      LJ held at paragraph 38:

           "... [T]he boundary of article 3  protection  has  been  shifted
           from being defined by imminence of death in the  removing  state
           (even with the treatment available there) to  being  defined  by
           the  imminence  (i.e.  likely  'rapid'  experience)  of  intense
           suffering or death in the receiving state, which may only  occur
           because of the non-availability in that state of  the  treatment
           which had previously been available in the removing state."



 114. The Court of Appeal however held that Paposhvili

           "37. ...relaxes the test for violation of Art 3 in the case of
           removal of a foreign national with a medical condition...only to
           a very modest extent"




 115. The Court of  Appeal  accepted  nonetheless  that  the  threshold  for
      involvement of Article 3 was changed. (paragraph 38 above).




 116. Sales LJ held that the Grand Chamber  sought  only  to  "clarify"  the
      approach set out in N v UK (paragraph 38(iv))  and  had  maintained  a
      high threshold for the application of Article 3 in [pic]medical  cases
      (paragraph 38(v)). The Court of  Appeal  expressly  disavowed  that  a
      "significant reduction in life-expectancy" was to be read  as  a  wide
      extension of protection in medical Article 3 cases (paragraph 40).




 117. On the facts of Paposhvili, it was concluded that in reality there was
      only a procedural obligation placed upon states:

           "41. .... it is also significant that even on  the  extreme  and
           exceptional facts of the Paposhvili case,  where  the  applicant
           faced a likelihood of death within  six  months  if  removed  to
           Georgia, the Grand Chamber did not feel able to say that it  was
           clear that a violation of Article 3 would have occurred for that
           reason had he been removed. Instead, all that the Grand  Chamber
           held was that he had raised a sufficiently credible  art.3  case
           that it gave rise to a procedural obligation  for  the  relevant
           Belgian authorities to examine that  case  with  care  and  with
           reference to all the available evidence. The violation of  art.3
           which the Grand Chamber held would have occurred if he had  been
           removed  to  Georgia  was  a  violation   of   that   procedural
           obligation."




 118. Since oral argument concluded in YA's  case,  the  Supreme  Court  has
      considered the case of AM and given important  guidance  that  differs
      from the approach of the Court of Appeal. Further written argument was
      helpfully submitted by invitation of the Court and the  applicant  and
      respondent parted company on the appropriate approach  that  I  should
      now take in light of the Supreme Court's  conclusions.  I  shall  deal
      with the impact of AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2020] UKSC 17 when I come  to
      consider the application of the law below.



 119. Country Guidance for Somalia was given - now several years ago-in  the
      case of MOJ (Return to Mogadishu) (rev 1) (CG) [2014] UK  QT  442  and
      considered the position of a returner  to  Mogadishu.   The  applicant
      drew attention to the following passages regarding general conditions.

"...

       ix)  If it is accepted that a person facing a  return  to  Mogadishu
           after a period  of  absence  has  no  nuclear  family  or  close
           relatives in the city to assist him in  re-establishing  himself
           on return, there will need to be a careful assessment of all  of
           the circumstances. These considerations will  include,  but  are
           not limited to:




               . circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

               . length of absence from Mogadishu;

               . family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;

               . access to financial resources;

               .  prospects  of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
                 employment or self-employment;

               . availability of remittances from abroad;

               . means of support  during  the  time  spent  in  the  United
                 Kingdom;

               . why his ability to fund the journey to the West  no  longer
                 enables an appellant to secure financial support on return.




        x) Put another way, it will be for  the  person  facing  return  to
           explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the  economic
           opportunities that have been  produced  by  the  economic  boom,
           especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees are
           taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away.




       xi) It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or family support
           who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad  and  who
           have no real prospect of securing  access  to  a  livelihood  on
           return who will face the prospect  of  living  in  circumstances
           falling  below  that  which  is   acceptable   in   humanitarian
           protection terms.




      xii)  The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply those  who
           originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return  to  live
           in the city without being subjected to an Article 15(c) risk  or
           facing a real risk of destitution. On the other hand, relocation
           in Mogadishu for a person of a minority  clan   with  no  former
           links to the city, no access to funds and no other form of clan,
           family or social support is unlikely to be realistic as, in  the
           absence of means to establish a home and some  form  of  ongoing
           financial support there  will  be  a  real  risk  of  having  no
           alternative but to live in makeshift accommodation within an IDP
           camp where there is a real possibility  of  having  to  live  in
           conditions   that  will  fall  below   acceptable   humanitarian
           standards."




   e. The Applicant's Case

 120.  The  applicant  expressed  YA's  challenge  as  advancing  a   single
      compendious ground, namely that the Refusal Letter of 15 October  2019
      and the Supplementary Decision of  6  January  2020  evinced  numerous
      errors and showed  that  the  SSHD  had  failed  to  exercise  anxious
      scrutiny when she rejected the applicant's further  submissions.   The
      essential submissions centred on the SSHD's approach  to  the  medical
      evidence adduced in support of the applicant's  position  and  factual
      evidence as to access to healthcare  in  Somalia;  irrelevancies  were
      taken into account and material errors of fact.   Among  the  material
      errors Ms Butler submitted that the SSHD had failed to have regard  to
      Dr Galappathie's conclusions, to YA's medical history (which had  also
      been ignored by Dr Nimmagadda) and had misdirected herself  about  the
      availability of healthcare in Somalia.



 121. She submitted that the only rational decision open to the SSHD on  the
      evidence was to find the  paragraph  353  test  was  met,  namely  the
      applicants further submissions were capable of  succeeding  before  an
      Immigration Judge because they showed that YA had a realistic prospect
      of showing that he was at a real risk of suicide on return to  Somalia
      and a realistic prospect of showing that his treatment as  a  returnee
      with serious mental health conditions and no close family  in  Somalia
      would be contrary to Article 3 ECHR.



 122. By reference to YA's history, the material parts of which are set  out
      above, Ms Butler submitted there is  a  realistic  prospect  that  the
      tribunal would prefer Dr Galappathie's second  report  which  reflects
      his view that there is a serious deterioration in YA's condition.  The
      SSHD's preference for Dr Nimmagadda's report  of  13  September  2019,
      even if open to her (which she said it was not,  due  particularly  to
      the inadequate treatment of  the issue of work in  the  laundry),  was
      wrong because it had been  superseded  by  Dr  Galappathie's  later  4
      November 2019 report.



 123. First Ms Butler attacked the SSHD's reasoning  when  saying  that  the
      Galappathie evidence was undermined due to his  approach  to  criminal
      risk.   On  the  evidence  before  Dr  Galappathie  these  were,   she
      submitted, reasonable, and qualified conclusions.  In any event,  even
      if it was illogical and wrong, criminal  risk  was  a  discrete  issue
      which did not infect his judgement as to the position of YA.  Further,
      in her submission the approach  of  the  SSHD  did  not  show  anxious
      scrutiny.



 124. Ms Butler accepted that the court's approach would be as in  the  case
      of RA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 4073 (Admin) a decision  of  Andrew
      Thomas QC sitting as a Deputy Judge of the High Court  on  8  December
      2014.  In that case he said:

           "63....  it is  clear  that  the  defendant  gave  very  careful
           consideration to Dr Bell's report.  There is nothing to  suggest
           that the defendant  failed  to  have  regard  to  his  undoubted
           expertise.  The decision letter contains a careful  analysis  of
           the contents of the  report.   However,  in  my  judgement,  the
           defendant was entitled to take into account  all  of  the  other
           material which was available to her.  On  any  view...  had  far
           more information available to them and  Dr  Bell  and  had  been
           better placed to assess the claimant.




           64. The task which the defendant was required to perform in this
           case was not  the  determination  of  hard  facts.   It  was  an
           assessment of  risk,  requiring  a  holistic  view  of  all  the
           information available.  The defendant could not ignore Dr Bell's
           opinion, but she was entitled to take  the  limitations  of  his
           review into account in deciding what weight to attach to it when
           reviewing the case in the round."



 125. She submitted secondly that YA's fear  could  be  described  as  acute
      subjective fear, especially since he understood that he was now  high-
      profile.  All of the factors led to the increase in his PTSD which was
      likely to worsen his mental health position such that  he  would  lack
      the ability to seek help.  YA could be stabilised just so long as   he
      remained in the UK, like the case of Y.  Whatever happens,  she  says,
      the applicant will be  too  unwell  to  engage  with  treatment.   She
      pointed to the risk of the applicant being chained and said there  was
      no  information  about  the  availability  of  drugs.   There  may  be
      facilities, but they do not conform to basic standards of decency. She
      described significant barriers to YA getting treatment on his  return,
      insufficient detail about the treatment package was available  in  the
      context of prejudice and ill-treatment of mental health  patients.  In
      short, the evidence was far from sufficient to show that treatment was
      available.



 126. In essence, she said the mere fact that the removing state takes  some
      steps was not enough; there  was  a  realistic  likelihood  of  street
      homelessness for YA, in effect  destitution;  his  circumstances  were
      equivalent to those in Y and  Z.   It  was  open  to  the  Immigration
      Tribunal to find a breach of Article 3 on  these  facts;  the  minimum
      level of severity in the J criteria was met; further YA  was  now  far
      too unwell to work in Somalia.  Like Y, the  subjective  fear  was  of
      such magnitude that the case was soundly based given his history; that
      is to say it is a "subjective,  immediate  and  acute  risk"  and  was
      comparable to Y.







   f. Consideration

 127. I approach this case on the basis that I must consider whether  in  my
      judgement, looking with great care at the decisions of the  SSHD,  she
      made a Wednesbury error in concluding  that  there  did  not  exist  a
      realistic prospect of an Immigration Judge (himself applying the  rule
      of anxious scrutiny), concluding  that YA would be exposed to  a  real
      and immediate risk of treatment of  such  severity  as  to  reach  the
      Article 3 threshold. Throughout, the SSHD must be seen to have applied
      anxious scrutiny.



 128. Persuasively as they were advanced, I do not accept the submissions of
      Ms Butler.



 129. Considering first whether the SSHD asked herself the  right  question.
      In my judgement it is perfectly clear she did.



 130. The SSHD set out the test which she applied  accurately  (see  the  15
      October 2019 Refusal Decision at paragraphs 85 and 86).  She  set  out
      the wording of paragraph 353 of the IR and indicated a list of  points
      that had been previously considered.  These were firstly, the fear  of
      return to Somalia (extensively considered In July 2017 in  the  appeal
      determination upheld by the  FTT  and  by  the  UT  in  August  2017).
      Further consideration was given 16 April 2019 and upheld by the UT  on
      2 June 2019 and 16 July 20.  Secondly, YA's risk of suicide and mental
      health problems which were considered on 16 July 2019 and  further  in
      letters dated 20 July 2019 and 21 July 2019.



 131. The SSHD then looked at submissions not  previously  considered;  they
      did not in her view create a realistic prospect of success.



 132. In this category came the psychiatric reports of Dr Galappathie of  31
      July 2019 and Dr Nimmagadda of 13 September 2019.  As set out in  some
      detail above, the SSHD analysed both of the reports  and  adopted  the
      findings of Dr Nimmagadda who had accepted that YA was suffering  from
      some depressive symptoms but did not believe they met a  diagnosis  of
      depression or PTSD.  He had put the symptoms in  the  context  of  the
      deportation proceedings  noting that YA seemed to have coped with  the
      effect of his past traumas without any help so far and even  if  these
      were such symptoms, he had coped with them for a  considerable  period
      of  time  without  any  treatment.   It  was  only  after  deportation
      proceedings, on his own evidence, that the symptoms became severe.  In
      my judgement these conclusions are clear, logical and evidence-based.



 133. It was on the basis of this assessment from  Dr  Nimmagadda  that  the
      SSHD rejected the applicant's case as to the severity of his symptoms.
      Further, available evidence showed that the Chain-Free Initiative  had
      been implemented in the Mogadishu hospital and the actual risk to this
      applicant, with his symptoms, of being chained, was  not  significant.
      Given the diagnosis of depressive symptoms linked to his  deportation,
      this was a clearly sustainable conclusion.



 134. Dr Nimmagadda formed  a  different  view  of  YA's  symptoms  from  Dr
      Galappathie, that recognised their connection to his deportation.  His
      view  of  YA's  functioning  was  informed  by   careful,   reasonable
      deductions including from YA's operation in  the  prison  environment,
      working in the laundry. This was plainly a sustainable approach from a
      non-treating doctor, called upon to assess medical notes, context, and
      the patient in person, as well as a  number  of  previous  psychiatric
      opinions upon him. It is not the case, as suggested, that  he  ignored
      the medical notes, he made reference to them.



 135. The SSHD applied obvious  care  to  her  assessment  of  the  relevant
      information  including  expert  opinion.  She   considered   competing
      diagnoses carefully,  and  took  detailed  soundings  of  the  factual
      position in Mogadishu; it is not arguable that  she  failed  to  apply
      anxious scrutiny to YA's case.



 136.  In the present case it is clear that the SSHD to an extent lost faith
      in Dr Galappathie's judgement, possibly also in his  independence,  in
      light particularly of his somewhat surprising  re-assessment  of  YA's
      risk on release, given the previous compelling evidence of  unresolved
      risks deriving from the gang rape offence, including  YA's  denial  of
      it. This is not an illogical response, and it is not the case that the
      SSHD ignored the conclusions of Dr Galappathie  as  alleged.  She  was
      entitled to prefer Dr Nimmagadda's judgement. It is relevant that what
      is not unreasonably regarded as a material failure of Dr Galappathie's
      judgement on the issue of criminal risk and YA should  cast  doubt  on
      his appraisal of a case where judgement and risk analysis, albeit in a
      different context, were central.



 137. In this case, unlike Y and Z, the SSHD had  a  coherent  well-reasoned
      expert report  from  Dr  Nimmagadda  that  had  come  to  a  different
      conclusion as to the causes of the depressive symptoms and the  likely
      risks on removal.



 138. The issue here, however, is not whether  an  Immigration  Judge  might
      possibly prefer one medical report over another. The issue is whether,
       even on the basis propounded by Dr Galappathie, that YA  was  a  high
      risk of suicide when he returned, it could properly be said  that  the
      Article 3 threshold was reached in light of the requirements  of  case
      law and the positive steps taken by the SSHD to minimise any risk that
      had been identified on YA's behalf.



 139. The issue is whether YA's facts could amount to a breach of  the  high
      Article 3 threshold where the SSHD had researched  and  undertaken  to
      provide appropriate medical care in the country to which the applicant
      could be removed on the basis that the risk (which she did not accept)
      materialised.



 140. In my judgement given that factual background,  this  case  could  not
      reach the Article 3 threshold.



 141. The SSHD had read the materials and reasonably formed  the  view  that
      the opinion of Dr Nimmagadda was to be preferred.  On  that  view,  in
      fact YA did not suffer from a mental  disorder;  further  he  did  not
      require  a  programme  of  treatment  as  Dr  Galappathie   suggested.
      Nonetheless, provision of mental health care was sought out in Somalia
      in case that indeed proved to be necessary- and the SSHD had  actually
      made inquiries and found a provider for YA himself. What is  more  the
      SSHD would pay for this provision if it were needed.



 142. In my judgement this case is bound to fail before an immigration judge
      for these reasons. The SSHD had  properly acknowledged  an  Article  3
      claim could in principle succeed, but on the facts of  this  case,  in
      particular the evidence of mechanisms to reduce the risk of suicide at
      each stage, she did not accept the threshold of  Article  3  had  been
      reached. Her conclusion that the Immigration Judge could not find  the
      threshold breached cannot be impugned.



 143.  By reference to the list of matters set out in  J  and  the  approach
      taken by the Court in Paposhvili when considering the measures put  in
      place to minimise the risk of suicide, in the context of YA's history,
      this must be the case. YA had suffered when a youth of  about  13,  he
      was now over 30.  The factual  circumstances  have  been  exhaustively
      dealt with by the Tribunal at  various  stages,  and  his  ability  to
      achieve employment in Mogadishu recognised. He was a  young  man  with
      some usable trade qualifications, who had  managed  to  work  when  in
      detention. He would have some support from the  UK  for  a  time,  and
      possibly had relations in Mogadishu (enquiries having been made of the
      local police by family on his behalf for an earlier submission).   The
      SSHD was entitled to reject the suggestion that he would be  destitute
      on return.



 144. The Secretary of State also considered the  case  law,  the  prominent
      parts of which have been set out above and, rightly, it has  not  been
      suggested that errors were made in respect of it.



 145.  The  January  2020  decision  of  the  SSHD  gave  detailed   further
      consideration to the medical evidence,  including  the  November  2019
      addendum report of Dr Galappathie. Ms Butler laid particular  emphasis
      upon  the  SSHD's  preference  for  the  medical  conclusions  of   Dr
      Nimmagadda over those of Dr Galappathie which she said were not  taken
      into account. I do not accept  that  submission.   The  SSHD  went  at
      length  into  the  materials  presented   by   Dr   Galappathie.    Dr
      Nimmagadda's report was detailed, logical  and  balanced.  He  reached
      conclusions that were internally consistent but reflected a  different
      assessment from Dr Galappathie. He accepted that YA  was  subjectively
      fearful of return, but reflected that before the threat of removal  to
      Somalia, had coped effectively  without  treatment  or  interventions,
      subject to the inevitable context  of  incarceration  and  immigration
      detention.



 146. Ms Butler characterised the reviewable errors as,  first,  failing  to
      realise that the Dr Galappathie report recognised a risk that  crossed
      the Article 3 threshold, second, that the SSHD had relied only  on  Dr
      Nimmagadda and third,  that  the  preference  for  Dr  Nimmagadda  was
      unreasoned by the SSHD - indeed it was a  flawed  report  itself.  She
      submitted there was no proper  basis  for  rejecting  the  conclusions
      reached by Dr Galappathie. I disagree. The evidence did not  compel  a
      view  that  the  Article  3  threshold  was   crossed.    Furthermore,
      Paposhvili and J  make plain that detailed specific enquiries such  as
      were undertaken with the mental health provider in  Mogadishu  with  a
      view to providing appropriate treatment upon the claimant's return  if
      necessary,  go directly to diminish risk and thus obviate a breach  of
      the Article 3 threshold.



 147. The SSHD was clear she did not accept the order of risk alleged by YA,
      but, that if such there were, it was, on the facts, mitigated.   I  do
      not accept that Ms Butler makes a sustainable critique of  the  SSHD's
      approach to the material nor that the  medical  evidence  compels  the
      result for which she argues.



 148. The argument latterly from YA was that he was really a Y and Z type of
      applicant. He claimed such an intense, subjective fear  of  return  to
      where, as a boy, he had been captured for ransom and held  for  a  few
      days, and, as a child, had been made  to  work  shining  shoes  for  2
      years, that his position was comparable to the extreme position  of  Y
      and Z whose egregious  suffering  was  described  by  Sedley  LJ  (see
      above).The SSHD's conclusion that Y's position was not  comparable  to
      this was plainly open her on the facts.



 149. I accept that YA's return to Somalia is a matter  of  great  fear  and
      concern to him, but on the tests set  out  in  the  case  law,  in  my
      judgement the facts do not approach the intensity of those  pertaining
      in Y and Z whose experiences might be described  as  at  the  edge  of
      human endurance and were overlaid  by  terrible  losses  of  immediate
      family, both from the regime in  Sri  Lanka  in  the  past,  and  more
      recently from the  Tsunami  which  took  scores  of  others  of  their
      relations.



 150. It is clear from the decision letters that  the  SSHD  has  gone  into
      careful detail about the substance of the matter  being  put  on  YA's
      behalf by Dr Galappathie.  Her reasons for finding  that  his  opinion
      was less persuasive than that of Dr Nimmagadda and could not form  the
      basis of a case with  a  reasonable  prospect  of  success  before  an
      Immigration judge are not  flawed.  The  Immigration  Judge,  properly
      directing himself could not find that the Article 3 threshold had been
      crossed,  especially  in  light  of  the  pre-removal  enquiries   and
      preparation made.



 151. Even if an Immigration Judge were to find that YA had adduced evidence
      demonstrating there are substantial grounds  for  believing  that   he
      would be exposed to a real risk of treatment contrary to Article 3, in
      my judgement looking very closely at the risks, the Immigration  Judge
      would be bound to find that any serious doubts about  this  particular
      person's return had been dispelled by the provision made by  the  SSHD
      in all the circumstances.



 152. This is not a case where the adjudicator  would  have  the  option  of
      simply relying upon the report of Dr Galappathie in preference to that
      of Dr Nimmagadda.  The provision made is premissed on  Dr  Galappathie
      being correct. The gist of the SSHD's analysis is that the  Article  3
      hurdle just is not surmounted on the  facts  of  this  case,  and  the
      contrary argument does not stand a reasonable prospect of success.



g. AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2020] UKSC 17

 153. I must now consider AM in the Supreme Court and whether it  makes  any
      difference to my conclusions, not least because the  SSHD  opened  her
      submissions with heavy reliance upon a stringent test derived from the
      case of N for ascertaining whether the Article 3  threshold  had  been
      reached. Sales LJ in AM in the CA (37 above) supported her  view  that
      the impact of Paposhvili was not significant.



 154. AM was another illness case, involving the return to  Zimbabwe  of  an
      AIDs sufferer who arrived in  2000  but  was  subject  to  deportation
      following the commission of serious offences. By 2012  he  was  under-
      going antiretroviral therapy for AIDs.  It  was  doubtful  whether  he
      could access the relevant drug in  Zimbabwe  without  which  he  would
      suffer infections that, untreated, would lead to his death.  The  SSHD
      had determined since he was not "at a critical stage of  the  illness"
      his physical and mental health did  not  engage  the  high  Article  3
      threshold.



 155. The Supreme Court reflected  upon  the  wide  criticism  of  the  test
      articulated in N, including judicial criticism in Yoh- Ekalein  Mwanje
      v Belgium (2013) 56 EHRR 35. They noted that Paposhvili  decided  that
      there was a violation if  removal  were  carried  out  "at  the  stage
      proposed by Belgium", i.e. before proper consideration of  the  risks,
      emphasising the weight given to procedural steps.



 156. Lord Wilson giving the judgment of the Court made clear that the Court
      in Paposhvili, contrary to the Court of Appeal's assessment,  did  not
      purport to agree with the ratio in N. Nor was it helpful  to  describe
      its re-working of the scope of protection under Article  3  as  merely
      "clarification" - as the court itself had done (AM, paragraph 32).  In
      cases of resistance to return on grounds of  ill-health,  the  Supreme
      Court said the principle has been modified.  The "new focus" was  upon
      the existence  and  accessibility  of  appropriate  treatment  in  the
      receiving state, and for that reason, Paposhvili had made  significant
      findings about the procedural obligations that fell upon a state.  The
      Court observed that the full scope of such obligations remained to  be
      decided in Europe, in that in Savran v Denmark [2019]  ECHR  651,  the
      ECtHR, by 4 votes to 3 appeared to have gone further  than  Paposhvili
      in placing obligations on  the  state.  The  issue  was  still  to  be
      considered by the Grand Chamber,  but  the  Supreme  Court  recognised
      guidance was required (paragraph 32).



 157. The Court explored what was meant  by  paragraph  183  in  Paposhvili,
      emphasising that an applicant had to show  "substantial  grounds"  for
      believing that it was a "very exceptional" case  because  of  a  "real
      risk" of subjection to inhuman treatment.  This  was,  accordingly,  a
      prima  facie  case:  a  case  which  if  not  challenged  would  prove
      infringement. A reason for emphasis upon state  enquiry  is  that  the
      state will  be  able  more  easily  to  assemble  evidence  about  the
      availability and accessibility  of  suitable  treatment  for  the  ill
      person  upon  return.  The  requirement  to  "dispel  any  doubts"  in
      paragraph 191, however, was to be read in context  as  dispelling  any
      serious doubts.



 158. The Supreme Court recorded that the SSHD, before them, had not  sought
      to dissuade them from adopting the Paposhvili  tests.  This  reflected
      the SSHD's stance before me. Both counsel had agreed the  approach  as
      set out in J, a suicide  case,  was  consistent  with  Paposhvili,  an
      illness case. For that reason, J was likely to be of  more  assistance
      although both reflected a procedural duty upon the state.



 159.  The   applicant  suggested  that  AM,  although  an   illness   case,
      represented a general relaxation of the operation of the threshold  in
      Article 3 cases and that therefore  it was now  clear  that  he  could
      rely upon a "serious, rapid and irreversible decline" as the  test  in
      law and, by reference to it, he crossed that  Article 3 threshold.



 160. The SSHD submitted that AM made no difference  here.   It  was  agreed
      that Paposhvili had not required any modification of the tests in  the
      two suicide risk cases J v SSHD and Y and Z and the departure  from  N
      does not affect YA's application.



 161. I agree with Ms Butler that inevitably, the adoption of the Paposhvili
      approach in domestic law modifies the approach to illness cases.  That
      is clear from AM, an illness case, and the terms in which the risk  is
      now expressed as that of "serious  rapid  and  irreversible  decline",
      rather than the "deathbed test" of  N.  She  argues  the  approach  to
      suicide cases is also modified by this.



 162.  The caselaw shows that the high threshold  that  applied  to  illness
      cases brought under Article 3 also applies to suicide cases  where  as
      here, they are "foreign" cases, that is where  the  risk  is  of  ill-
      treatment in the state to which removal  is  proposed,  and  secondly,
      where illness or suicide risk  is not the direct responsibility of the
      contracting state. Nothing in AM derogates from that principle.



 163. However, whilst adopting "serious  rapid  and  irreversible  decline",
      rather than an  "imminent  risk  of  dying",   as  the  threshold  for
      engagement of Article 3 has some meaning for an illness case, (such  a
      relaxation would, of course, have won N's case for her),   the  change
      is hard to transpose to a suicide case. Such  cases  have  principally
      been dealt with in terms of steps taken in mitigation of risk.



 164. Furthermore, the  ECtHR  expressly  did  not  retreat  from  the  high
      threshold in Article 3 cases (see Paposhvili paragraph  183,  set  out
      above), nor has AM done so, the modified test is a  reflection  it  is
      said of a stringent approach. To the extent that Paposhvili as applied
      in AM has changed the landscape for suicide cases under Article 3,  it
      has done so in my judgement by the adoption of  the  unequivocal  risk
      mitigation requirements that fall upon the  expelling  state  in  such
      circumstances. The Article 3 threshold in suicide cases  is  generally
      judged ex post facto by the ECtHR, as analysed by Dyson  LJ  in  J  at
      paragraph 32. It is the risk as mitigated that is judged to meet or to
      not meet the criteria for Article 3.



 165.  In my judgement AM can make no difference at all to  the  outcome  of
      YA's case because here considerable and particular steps were taken in
      respect of YA's needs and the position on his return has been provided
      for if the worst risks canvassed materialise.



h. Summary of Conclusion

 166. In my judgement the position in law after AM in the Supreme  Court  is
      as follows:

            a. Paposhvili is not to be read as holding that  N  was  rightly
               decided;

            b. Paposhvili should be seen as filling a gap in the  protection
               against inhuman treatment afforded by  Article  3   that  was
               left by the case of N v UK  such that  gravely  ill  patients
               no longer need to show they  are  close  to  death:  serious,
               rapid and irreversible  decline  in  their  state  of  health
               resulting  in  'intense  suffering'  or  in  a   'significant
               reduction in life expectancy' may breach Article 3;

            c.  A  significant  reduction  in  life   expectancy   means   a
               substantial one in the context  of  inhuman  treatment  under
               Article 3;

            d. The procedural requirements are not "mere clarification"  but
               a change in approach for illness cases;

            e. The context suggests (pending  determination  in  the  Savran
               case) that the principle that you have  to  "prove  what  you
               allege" has been modified by Paposhvili,   so that  in  order
               to trigger the state's obligations  to  consider  the  risks,
               the  applicant   has   to   adduce   evidence   "capable   of
               demonstrating  that  there  are   substantial   grounds   for
               believing"  that Article 3 would be violated (i.e.  that  the
               evidence  is  capable  of  forming  substantial  grounds  for
               believing)  it  is  a  very  exceptional  case    nonetheless
               because of the real risk of subjection to  inhuman  treatment
               test (AM  per Lord Wilson paragraph 32);

               This is not materially different to the approach of J in  the
               Court of Appeal;

            f. Such a case has to be  one  that,  without  challenge,  would
               establish infringement - in other words a  prima  facie  case
               as was analysed in AXB v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
               Department [2019] UKUT 00397 (IAC);

            g.  The  "very  exceptional"  test  still   applies   expressly,
               following AM and Paposhvili, because of  the  nature  of  the
               ill-treatment risked, arising as it  does  in  the  state  of
               return in the present case: (it is "not  ...  an  undemanding
               threshold" per Lord Wilson  AM  paragraph 32;

            h. Both J and Y and Z which reflect Paposhvili,  will  apply  in
               cases of  threatened  suicide  where  the  emphasis  is  upon
               mitigation of risk through investigation, and  that  approach
               has been expanded into the Paposhvili requirements where  any
               prima facie breach is shown in an illness case;

            i. Where there is a perceptible difference  between  a  "serious
               rapid and  irreversible  decline  ...  resulting  in  intense
               suffering"  (Paposhvili)  and  circumstances  equivalent   to
               "nearing death" (N) for  a person  at  risk  of  suicide,  an
               applicant may invoke an arguable case  based  on  the  former
               rather than the latter degree of intensity; however,

            j. The real impact of Paposhvili as  understood  in  AM,  is  to
               enshrine the  investigatory  aspect  of  suicide  refoulement
               cases.



 167. Nothing in the Supreme Court suggests in my judgement  that  the  risk
      mitigation approach in suicide cases has changed,  nor  has  the  high
      Article 3 threshold test of exceptionality in medical  cases  of  both
      kinds.



 168. The SSHD has with some margin to spare in my judgement, fulfilled  the
      obligations as they are now to be understood in an Article  3  suicide
      case and an Immigration Judge properly applying  the  law,  could  not
      find that YA's case amounted to a fresh claim under IR paragraph 353.



 169. Whilst she does not accept the level of risk postulated on  behalf  of
      YA, as she submits, it is heavily mitigated by the investigations  and
      provisions put in place for YA's  return.  The  investigation  of  the
      healthcare situation in Mogadishu,  the  provision  of  mental  health
      treatment of the nature suggested by  YA's  expert  witness,  and  the
      payment for it by the SSHD, all point on these facts to the conclusion
      that a submission that this case crosses the high Article 3  threshold
      is bound to fail.



 170. In my judgment the conclusion to this effect reached by  the  SSHD  is
      unassailable.  She  has  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  there  is  a
      significant risk of deterioration on  return  such  that  YA  requires
      specialist mental  health  assistance.  She  has  made  inquiries  and
      procured that assistance, personally for him, with preparation  before
      his arrival available, and paid for by her.



 171. The circumstances of this case require sympathy and the  most  careful
      of consideration. Accordingly, in  assessing  the  lawfulness  of  the
      decisions of the SSHD, I bear in mind particularly the  importance  of
      considering the issues with anxious scrutiny, understanding the import
      of the medical materials and the SSHD's assessment of them,  but  also
      recognising that the decision is that of the SSHD, and  not  for  this
      court, as if on appeal (see the case law above passim).



 172. In the present case the SSHD investigated the risks on her own account
      by commissioning a report herself  and  commencing  investigations  in
      Somalia taking steps of the very kind set out in  Paposhvili,  on  the
      premiss that the materials adduced by YA raised the requisite case.



 173. In my judgement the  approach  explained  in  AM  by  Lord  Wilson  is
      consistent with the relevant cases already decided  on  suicide  risk.
      Where an articulated risk is  addressed,  as  here,  the  Court  would
      regard the risk itself as mitigated. If the coherent procedural  steps
      are followed by the state as set out, then the threshold itself is not
      crossed: the risk that would cause the violation  is  mitigated.  That
      remains the approach, after AM, in the Supreme Court  and  it  remains
      the position here.



 174. Where there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  removal  risks
      inhumane  treatment  and  those  risks  remain  unaddressed,  then  an
      applicant may succeed. That is not this case.



 175. The SSHD's submission after  AM  remained  that  the  evidence  of  Dr
      Nimmagadda undermined the case run for YA as to his condition and  the
      risks inherent in it,  but, even if that were not so, conclusively, he
      suggested, the  steps  taken  by  the  SSHD  to  ascertain  treatment,
      conditions, and availability, plus providing for the treatment herself
      if necessary were sufficient to bring the risks well below the Article
      3 threshold. I agree.



 176. The SSHD was not making an error of law when she  determined  that  an
      Immigration Judge properly applying the law could not find  in  favour
      of YA on an Article 3 claim in this case. The claim must be dismissed.





                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/5428/2019


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


                       The Queen on the application of

                                     Y.A
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                Before The Honourable Mrs Justice Foster DBE


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision
          Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

UPON hearing counsel for the Applicant and for the Respondent

AND UPON the Applicant's application for permission to appeal

AND UPON reading the written submissions of the parties on  costs  and  upon
the stay of the Applicant's removal



IT IS ORDERED THAT:

   1. The claim is dismissed.

   2. Permission to appeal is refused for  the  reasons  appearing  in  this
      Order

   3. Permission for applying to the Court of Appeal must be done by  filing
      an appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office of  the  Court  of
      Appeal  within  28  days  of  the  date  the  Tribunal's  decision  on
      permission  to  appeal  was  sent  (Civil  Procedure  Rules   Practice
      Direction 52D 3.3).

   4. Stay on removal is continued until 10.00 am. Monday 22  June  2020  or
      sooner Order.

   5. Claimant do pay the Respondent's costs of the case.

   6. The Claimant having the benefit of cost protection under section 26 of
      the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders  Act  2012,  the
      amount that he is to pay shall be determined on an application by  the
      Defendant  under  regulation  16  of  the  Civil  Legal  Aid   (Costs)
      Regulations 2013. Any objection by the Claimant to the amount of costs
      claimed shall be dealt with on that occasion.



REASONS

   1. I refuse permission to appeal. It is not the case  that  the  judgment
      did not deal with the issue of Dr Galappathie's opinion that YA was so
      traumatised he would not access treatment  once  in  Mogadishu  if  he
      needed it.

   2. The judgment had concluded that whether the Article  3  threshold  had
      been reached must be judged in the light of mitigated risk,  and  that
      steps taken by the returning state went directly to the scale  of  the
      risk in any case.

   3. The argument had been that YA  was  so  affected  he  would  not  seek
      medical help once had returned. What the SSHD did was arrange for  and
      agree to pay for treatment in Mogadishu from  a  named  clinician  who
      agreed, having read the reports, to take YA as a patient.

   4. Expressly in mitigation of the risk of him not going to get  treatment
      once there if he needed it, arrangements were also made to address his
      need before he arrived and on his entry to Somalia. This is  reflected
      in the judgment at para  71  where  (in  the  context  of  the  SSHD's
      appraisal) the gist of the evidence on mitigation of risk is set out:

           "71. The SSHD referred to Dr Galappathie's claim  that,  because
           of YA's subjective fear of return,  he  would  not  be  able  to
           engage with treatment if returned, whilst  not  accepting   that
           claim, the SSHD says that her exchanges  with  the  facility  in
           Somalia show that steps will be taken to address  YA's  personal
           needs before  his  arrival  and  on  his  entry  to  Somalia.  A
           personalised care plan package would be purchased for YA by  the
           SSHD for a treatment plan specific to his  needs  [again  emails
           were enclosed]. The facility,  which  was  specified,  had  been
           investigated and it had accepted it  could  provide  appropriate
           treatment."

   5. The judgment rejects in terms that it would be open to the Immigration
      Judge lawfully to find the Article 3 threshold had been reached in the
      present case - and this was because the risks had  been  mitigated  to
      such an extent- including that articulated by Dr Galappathie as above.

   6. Further the case of Y and Z was prayed in aid as a  direct  comparator
      by YA- this was examined (and set out) in the judgment. It is  a  case
      dealing with a  purely  subjective  fear  of  extreme  intensity  that
      renders the applicants, among other things, so fearful that  they  are
      unable  to  accept/seek-out  treatment  if  returned,  even  if   that
      treatment is available. Significant  emphasis  was  laid  upon  it  on
      behalf of the applicant.

   7. The submission is recorded thus:

           "126. In essence, [Ms Butler] said .... his  circumstances  were
           equivalent to those in Y and Z.  It was open to the  Immigration
           Tribunal to find a breach of  Article  3  on  these  facts;  the
           minimum level of severity in the J criteria was met; further  YA
           was now far  too  unwell  to  work  in  Somalia.   Like  Y,  the
           subjective fear was of such magnitude that the case was  soundly
           based given his history; that is to say  it  is  a  "subjective,
           immediate and acute risk" and was comparable to Y.

   8. Then the judgment says:

           "148. The argument latterly from YA was that he was really  a  Y
           and Z type of applicant. He claimed such an intense,  subjective
           fear of return to where, as a boy,  he  had  been  captured  for
           ransom and held for a few days, and, as a child, had  been  made
           to work shining  shoes  for  2  years,  that  his  position  was
           comparable to the extreme position of Y and  Z  whose  egregious
           suffering was described by  Sedley  LJ  (see  above).The  SSHD's
           conclusion that Y's position was  not  comparable  to  this  was
           plainly open her on the facts.

           149.  I accept that YA's return to Somalia is a matter of  great
           fear and concern to him, but on the tests set out  in  the  case
           law, in my judgement the facts do not approach the intensity  of
           those pertaining in Y and Z whose experiences might be described
           as at the edge of human endurance and were overlaid by  terrible
           losses of immediate family, both from the regime in Sri Lanka in
           the past, and more recently from the Tsunami which  took  scores
           of others of their relations.

           150.  ... The  Immigration  Judge,  properly  directing  himself
           could not find that the Article 3 threshold  had  been  crossed,
           especially in light of the pre-removal enquiries and preparation
           made."

   9. Accordingly I do not find there to be a real prospect  of  success  in
      the Ground raised, the judgment determined that  an  argument  to  the
      effect that the Article 3 threshold was crossed would, in light of the
      facts, be bound to fail, even if Dr Galappathie were correct.

  10. I do not agree that the SSHD should be penalised in costs for  ongoing
      preparations and inquiries as to provision for YA in Mogadishu,  which
      are, of  their  nature,  responsive  to  evidence  and  contingent  on
      correspondence with agencies abroad. The Respondent should have  their
      costs of the case in the usual way.





       Signed:


      THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE FOSTER DBE


        Dated:    22 May 2020





Applicant's solicitors: Wilson LLP
Respondent's solicitors: GLD
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 22.05.2020
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------

                        Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


