

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                JR/5268/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR

                                                            20 November 2018

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE rintoul

Between

                       the queen on the application of

                   1) BJ
                   2) RHS (A CHILD BY HER LITIGATION FRIEND, AHS)
                   3) shs (A CHILD BY HER LITIGATION friend, AHS)
                   4) nhs (a child by her litigation friend, ahs)
                   5) ahs


                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Applicants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Miss C Kilroy and Miss M Knorr, instructed by The Migrants Law Project,
Islington Law Centre appeared on behalf of the Applicant.

Mr G Lewis, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    JUDGE:


 2. The applicants challenge with permission a decision of  the  respondent
    made on 19 April 2018 to refuse a Take Charge Request ("TCR")  made  by
    the Greek government on 13 March 2018.  That application was  expressed
    to be pursuant  to  Article  9  of  Regulation  604/2013  ("Dublin  III
    Regulation").


 3. The background facts to this case are not substantially in dispute.


 4. A1 is married to A5; A2 to A4 are their minor children.  A5 was born in
    Kuwait in 1976 but he was  not  recognised  as  a  national  as  he  an
    undocumented Bidoon.  He arrived in the United Kingdom in June 2005 and
    was subsequently recognised as a refugee and  granted  status  on  that
    basis.  He was granted indefinite leave to remain in 2011 and  in  2012
    he was naturalised as  a  British  citizen.   Having  acquired  British
    citizenship, he returned to Kuwait where his family introduced  him  to
    A1.  They were married in 2013 and A1 went to live with A5's parents in
    Kuwait.  He returned to the United Kingdom after two months.


 5. A5 continued to return to Kuwait and his wife on several occasions  and
    their three children, A2, A3 and A4 were born in 2013, 2014  and  2016.
    It is the applicant's case that the children are  British  citizens  as
    they were born after A5 became a British citizen.


 6. Towards the end of 2017 A1 and the children fled Kuwait  and  travelled
    to Turkey overland and then on to Greece by boat.  During  the  journey
    they were rescued by the Greek coastguard and  the  applicants  claimed
    asylum  in  Greece  on  29  December  2017.   A1  supplied  the   Greek
    authorities with evidence of A5's status in the United Kingdom who then
    made a TCR to the United Kingdom pursuant to Article 9 of Dublin III.


 7. On 19 April 2018 the United  Kingdom  refused  the  TCR  although  that
    decision was not communicated  to  the  applicants  until  some  months
    later.  The reason given for refusal was as follows:-


         "You have stated that the husband of the  above  named-A5-lives  in
         the United Kingdom  and  has  status.   However,  according  to  UK
         immigration records, (A5) became a British citizen on 26 July 2012.
          As such they are not the recipients of or requesting international
         protection.  They are therefore outside the Dublin  III  Regulation
         and thus Articles 9 and 10 are not engaged.


         Consequently I regret to inform  you  that  your  request  to  take
         charge of the above named is respectfully denied."


 8. It is not contended that the Greek authorities renewed their request.


 9. The applicants obtained the assistance of the Migrant Law  Project  who
    wrote a pre-action protocol letter to the  respondent  submitting  that
    the applicants fell within Article 9 Dublin III as confirmed by HA  and
    Others [2018] UKUT 00297 or, in the alternative, they should have  been
    accepted for transfer pursuant to Article 17  (2)  of  Dublin  III,  it
    being argued that the rejection  of  the  TCR  was  in  breach  of  the
    children's best interests, Articles 8 ECHR and/or Articles 7 and 24  of
    the Charter of Fundamental Rights and Freedoms  ("CFR")  on  the  basis
    that, at the time, A1 to A4 were housed in wholly unsuitable conditions
    as they lived in a  shipping  container,  sharing  toilet  and  cooking
    facilities.  Further,  A1  has  significant  health  problems  and  the
    children have developed worrying developmental signs  as  well  as  one
    suffering a medical condition indicative of a significant spinal defect
    requiring correction.  It was also stated that A5 has poor physical and
    mental health after his experience of torture in Kuwait and as a result
    of separation from his family.


10. The respondent rejected that submitting that :-


      i) HA and Others and ZM could be distinguished;


     ii) the  only  evidence  provided  by  the  Greek  authorities  of  the
         relationship being an untranslated documented which describes  them
         as married and that no evidence had been provided that A5  was  the
         father of the children A2 to A and so Articles 9 and  10  were  not
         engaged;


    iii) the Greek authorities had not made the TCR under Article 17 (2) and
         no evidence had been  provided  that  could  reasonably  allow  any
         assessment of a request made under that the Article.


Grounds of Challenge


11. In summary, the applicants challenge the respondent's decision on  four
    principle grounds: that-


      i) Properly interpreted, Article 9 of Dublin III applies to A1  to  A4
         as A5 had been recognised as a refugee prior to naturalisation as a
         British citizen and is therefore a family member "has been  allowed
         to reside as a beneficiary of  international  protection";  HA  and
         Others could not be distinguished as Article 9 applies  "regardless
         of whether the  family  was  previously  born  in  the  country  of
         origin"; and, the Secretary of State erred in requiring as  an  ex-
         post facto justification that  there  were  additional  reasons  in
         particular a failure to provide evidence that A5 did not  expressly
         require his desire for unification.


     ii) In the alternative, the respondent erred in not considering the TCR
         under Article 17 (2)  of  Dublin  III,  the  case  clearly  raising
         humanitarian  grounds  based  on  family  considerations  and   had
         triggered a duty to treat the children's best interests  and  their
         right to family life is a primary consideration, the  PAP  response
         wrongly submitting that there was insufficient evidence to  trigger
         a 17 (2) assessment;


    iii) In failing to assess and take  into  account  the  children's  best
         interest in considering the TCR as required by  Articles  6(1)  and
         (3) of Dublin III Regulation this being a breach of Dublin III  and
         CFR Article 8; that the  Greek  authorities  conclusions  that  are
         determinative that the children's best interests require that  they
         be transferred to the United Kingdom, absent  evidential  basis  to
         depart from that; and, that the Secretary of State should have made
         enquiries and required further evidence to  assess  the  children's
         best interests, the children having a  right  to  maintain  regular
         direct contact with both parents pursuant to Article 24 CFR;


     iv) In the circumstances of the respondent's failures, it  is  for  the
         Tribunal to assess for itself whether  the  interference  with  the
         applicants' right to family life is disproportionate, if  necessary
         taking into account evidence that was not before the decision maker
         pursuant to it being that pursuant to Articles 8 ECHR Articles  and
         7 and 24 CFR were being breached by the decision to refuse the TCR.


12. The respondent considered that ground 1  was  arguable  and  a  consent
    order was made to that effect. He did not, however, accept  that  there
    was merit in the other grounds.


13. In summary, the respondent rejected the claims arguing that:-


      i) On a proper construction of Article 9 in line with Article 7(2), it
         did not  apply  to  A1  to  A4  as  A5  is  not  a  beneficiary  of
         international protection as defined;


     ii) The Greek government had not made a request pursuant to Article  17
         but solely under Article 9 and  there  was  no  obligation  on  the
         United Kingdom unilaterally to accept the asylum claims pursuant to
         Article 17 .2 as no request in the terms set out  in  that  Article
         had been made;


    iii) That a proper rejection of the Article 9 request had been made  and
         that a requested state was not subject to a  separate  freestanding
         obligation to accept responsibility for every asylum claim made  by
         a child if it would be in their best interests to  be  admitted  to
         the United  Kingdom  whose  obligation  was  to   regard  the  best
         interests of the children as a primary consideration which  informs
         the mandatory criteria in Chapter 3 of the Dublin  III  Regulation;
         and, in any event, none of the mandatory criteria were met  and  no
         further request was made in the United Kingdom to accept the asylum
         claims on humanitarian grounds relating to family circumstances;


     iv) Dublin III  does  not  provide  a  generic  obligation  to  reunite
         families and none of the discretionary criteria in Article 17(1) or
         (2) are met it only being in an exceptionally compelling case  that
         Article 8 would provide  an  independent  basis  for  requesting  a
         member state to accept responsibility.


14. On 19 October 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt granted permission on  all
    grounds.


15. When the matter came before me, substantively, Miss Kilroy raised as  a
    preliminary  matter  an  application  to  admit  further  evidence.   I
    indicated  that  I  would  make  a  decision  having   considered   the
    application as a whole as to whether this additional material should be
    admitted.


16. I then proceeded to hear submissions from both parties and reserved  my
    decision.


17. I deal first with ground 1 and then  with  grounds  2  to  4.  That  is
    because ground 1 raises a discrete issue of interpretation  of  EU  law
    which is more conveniently dealt with separately.


The law:


18. Dublin III provides as follows:


    Recitals


    (13) In accordance with the  1989  United  Nations  Convention  on  the
    Rights of the Child and with the Charter of Fundamental Rights  of  the
    European Union, the best interests of the child  should  be  a  primary
    consideration of  Member  States  when  applying  this  Regulation.  In
    assessing the best interests of the child,  Member  States  should,  in
    particular, take due account  of  the  minor's  well-being  and  social
    development, safety and security considerations and the  views  of  the
    minor in accordance with his or her age and maturity, including his  or
    her  background.  In  addition,  specific  procedural  guarantees   for
    unaccompanied minors should be laid down on account of their particular
    vulnerability.


    (14) In accordance with the European Convention for the  Protection  of
    Human  Rights  and  Fundamental  Freedoms  and  with  the  Charter   of
    Fundamental Rights of the  European  Union,  respect  for  family  life
    should be a primary consideration of Member States when  applying  this
    Regulation.


    (15) The processing together of the applications  for  inter�  national
    protection of the members of one family by a single Member State  makes
    it possible to ensure that the applications  are  examined  thoroughly,
    the decisions taken in respect of them are consistent and  the  members
    of one family are not separated.


    ...


    (35) In order to provide for supplementary rules, the  power  to  adopt
    acts in accordance with Article 290 TFEU should  be  delegated  to  the
    Commission in respect of the identification of family members, siblings
    or relatives of an unaccompanied minor; the criteria  for  establishing
    the existence of proven family links; the criteria  for  assessing  the
    capacity of  a  relative  to  take  care  of  an  unaccompanied  minor,
    including  where  family  members,  siblings  or   relatives   of   the
    unaccompanied minor stay in more than one Member  State;  the  elements
    for assessing  a  dependency  link;  the  criteria  for  assessing  the
    capacity of a person to  take  care  of  a  dependent  person  and  the
    elements to be taken into account in order to assess the  inability  to
    travel for a significant period of time. In exercising  its  powers  to
    adopt delegated acts, the Commission shall not exceed the scope of  the
    best interests of the child as provided for under Article 6(3) of  this
    Regulation. It is of particular importance that  the  Commission  carry
    out appropriate consultations during its preparatory work, including at
    expert level. The Commission, when preparing and drawing  up  delegated
    acts, should ensure a simultaneous, timely and appropriate transmission
    of relevant documents to the European Parliament and to the Council. ?


    ...


    (37) Detailed rules for the application of Regulation (EC) No  343/2003
    have been laid down by Regulation (EC) No 1560/2003. Certain provisions
    of Regulation (EC)  No  1560/2003  should  be  incorporated  into  this
    Regulation, either for reasons of clarity or because they can  serve  a
    general objective. In particular, it is important, both for the  Member
    States and the applicants concerned, that there  should  be  a  general
    mechanism for finding a solution in cases where  Member  States  differ
    over the application of a provision of this Regulation. It is therefore
    justified to incorporate the mechanism provided for in Regulation  (EC)
    No 1560/2003 for the settling of disputes on  the  humanitarian  clause
    into this Regulation and to extend its scope to the  entirety  of  this
    Regulation. ?


    ...


    (40) Since the objective of this Regulation, namely  the  establishment
    of criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State responsible
    for examining an application for international protection lodged in one
    of the Member States by a third-country national or a stateless person,
    cannot be sufficiently achieved by the Member States and can therefore,
    by reason of the scale  and  effects  of  this  Regulation,  be  better
    achieved at Union level, the Union may  adopt  measures  in  accordance
    with the principle of subsidiarity as set  out  in  Article  5  of  the
    Treaty on European Union (TEU). In accordance  with  the  principle  of
    proportionality, as set out in that Article, this Regulation  does  not
    go beyond what is necessary in order to achieve that objective.


    Article 1


    Subject matter


    This Regulation lays down the criteria and mechanisms for determining
    the Member State responsible for examining an application for
    international protection lodged in one of the Member States by a third-
    country national or a stateless person ('the Member State
    responsible').


    Article 2


    Definitions


    For the purposes of this Regulation:


    (a)  'third-country national' means any person who is not a citizen  of
    the Union within the meaning of Article  20(1)  TFEU  and  who  is  not
    national of a State which participates in this Regulation by virtue  of
    an agreement with the European Union;


    ...


    (f)  'beneficiary of international protection' means a  third-  country
    national or a stateless  person  who  has  been  granted  international
    protection as defined in Article 2(a) of Directive 2011/95/EU;


    (g)  'family members' means, insofar as the family already  existed  in
    the country of origin, the following members of the applicant's  family
    who are present on the territory of the Member States:


         -    the spouse of the applicant or his or her unmarried partner in
         a stable relationship, where the law  or  practice  of  the  Member
         State concerned treats unmarried couples in  a  way  comparable  to
         married couples under its law relating to third-country nationals,


         -    the minor children of couples referred to in the first  indent
         or of the applicant, on  condition  that  they  are  unmarried  and
         regardless of whether they were  born  in  or  out  of  wedlock  or
         adopted as defined under national law,


    Article 9


    Family members who are beneficiaries of international protection


    Where the applicant has a family  member,  regardless  of  whether  the
    family was previously formed in the country of  origin,  who  has  been
    allowed to reside as a beneficiary of  international  protection  in  a
    Member State, that Member State shall be responsible for examining  the
    application for international protection,  provided  that  the  persons
    concerned expressed their desire in writing.


Submissions on Article 9


19. Miss Kilroy submitted that it was plain from the recitals in the Dublin
    agreement particularly at Article 5 that there was a  need  for  speed;
    and, at Articles 13 to 17 the  issues  of  children  are  of  paramount
    concern.   She submitted  further  that  recital  15  in  this  context
    indicated that the asylum applications of A1 to A4 should be determined
    in the United Kingdom given  the  connection  with  A5  this  being  an
    indication that there should  be  consistency  and  thoroughness.   She
    submitted that, properly considered, recital 15 gave three reasons  why
    the applications should be processed in the United Kingdom.


20. Turning to the definitions in Article 2 Miss Kilroy submitted that  the
    definition set out in Article 2(f) did not apply such that A5 was not a
    person within Article 9; it was accepted that the wording in Article  9
    did, however, disapply the definition of family member in Article 2(g).
     Miss Kilroy submitted that regard needed to be paid to  the  stricture
    of the hierarchy in that not only did it seek to give  primacy  to  the
    best interests of children in the assessment criteria particularly that
    it was possible  that  the  clarity  of  reason  overlapped,  it  being
    possible that the country identified in one Article might be  different
    from a category in another depending on where a family  was  dispersed.
    She relied on MA at paragraphs 54, 59 and 60 submitting that there  was
    a need for Article 9 to cover children as well as adults and that  this
    showed a concern for the right to family life.


21. Miss Kilroy submitted that contrary to the respondent's  assertions,  a
    close temporal nexus between one  member  of  the  family's  claim  for
    asylum and the remainder is not necessary and  indeed,  if  the  family
    member in the member state had not acquired citizenship, then there was
    no time limit.


22. Miss Kilroy submitted that Article 9  ought  to  be  construed  in  its
    context as the Supreme Court in ZN  (Afghanistan)  had  done  and  that
    there was no reason to depart from the analysis in HA and Others.


23. Mr Lewis submitted that the title preceding Article 9 was an  important
    matter to be taken into account as the title reads "are"  beneficiaries
    of international protection and that, combined with the  definition  of
    the person in receipt  of  international  protection  in  Article  2(f)
    indicated that the scope of Article 9 should cease once the  individual
    in question had ceased to be such a person through for  example  taking
    citizenship.  He submitted further that HA & others could  properly  be
    distinguished on the basis that the family had existed in Kuwait before
    the asylum claim had been made and indeed before  the  first  applicant
    there had come to the United Kingdom to  claim  asylum.   He  submitted
    further that on a proper construction of HA &  others,  the  point  was
    obiter, it arising only in consideration of Article 17 (2).


24. Although accepting that recital 15 could apply equally to Article 10 of
    Dublin III, Mr Lewis submitted  that  a  temporal  proximity  or  nexus
    between the claim of the person granted  international  protection  and
    the claims of the family members was an  important  consideration.   He
    accepted that, as I observed,  the  categories  of  people  covered  by
    Article 8 and Article 9 were different, Article 8  applying  where  the
    family member in  question  was  a  citizen  of  a  member  state.   He
    submitted, however, that  this  was  in  the  context  of  a  different
    situation which was the protection of  unaccompanied  minors.   It  was
    submitted that it was evident that the policy here  was  not  to  admit
    family members arising from a  family  once  one  member  had  acquired
    citizenship that being  evident  both  from  Article  7.2  and  it  was
    important to note that on  a  proper  construction  of  Article  9  the
    consent of the person in the member state was also required, this being
    the necessary part of the  checks  that  would  be  undertaken  by  the
    Secretary of State.  He was, however, unable to  provide  any  evidence
    that this is what would be undertaken or that this was the Secretary of
    State's  policy  or  that  this  is  what  was  usually  done  in   the
    circumstances.  He submitted that such a check might  be  necessary  if
    for example there was a request from a man to join  a  spouse  who  had
    been recognised as a refugee in a member state as a result of  domestic
    violence.


25. Mr Lewis submitted that once an individual became a citizen  of  an  EU
    state, they should no longer be able to obtain the  benefit  of  family
    reunion under Dublin III.


26. Mr Lewis submitted further that ZN was not directly applicable in  this
    case, given the very different context of interpreting the  Immigration
    Rules.


27. Miss Kilroy submitted that it was not proper to seek to distinguish  ZN
    there being no real difference in the language  and  that  the  Supreme
    Court  had  identified  in  its  analysis  of  paragraph  352D  of  the
    Immigration Rules (see paragraph  27)  that  this  applied  equally  to
    Article 9.  She submitted further that there  was  nothing  to  suggest
    that Dublin III  Regulation  would  be  undermined  by  the  particular
    interpretation that the applicant sought to place on Article 9 and that
    there was no reason to read it in the manner indicated by the Secretary
    of State.  She submitted that in reality what the  Secretary  of  State
    was doing was to make again the submission rejected in HA& Others  that
    the family should apply for entry clearance, an argument which had been
    rejected. She submitted further that Article 7(2) did  not  assist  the
    Secretary of State as it related not to the position of A5  but  rather
    to the fixing position so that, for  example,  there  could  not  be  a
    marriage after a person had claimed asylum  so  that  they  would  then
    obtain the benefit of one of the Articles.  It was submitted that there
    was no reason.


Discussion


28. Both parties accept that if the  applicants  succeed  in  showing  that
    Article 9 does apply to them, then the other challenges to the decision
    in  effect  fall  away.   It  is  also  accepted  that  the  means   of
    interpreting EU law are not the same as interpreting domestic law; that
    is uncontroversial.


29. It is established law that the usual canons of statutory interpretation
    used in English Law are not applicable  to  the  law  of  the  European
    Union. Equally, a court of a member state is not assessing  a  question
    of foreign law. How then is a court to interpret European Law?


30. As can be seen from CILFIT [1982] EUECJ 283/81 the  starting  point  is
    the usual meaning of the words. As  the  ECJ  has  observed  in  BCE  v
    Germany [2005] ECR I-10595 (Case 220/03) at [20]:


         "Although an interpretation of a provision of an Agreement 'in the
         light' of its legal context is possible in principle to resolve a
         drafting ambiguity, such an interpretation cannot have the result
         of depriving the clear and precise wording of that provision of all
         effectiveness."


31. To do otherwise would  be  to  detract  from  the  principal  of  legal
    certainty.


32. This  principle  is  subject  to  two  observations  about  "clear  and
    precise":


      a) EU Legislation is drafted in several languages, each  of  which  is
         equally authentic (CILFIT at [18]); and,


      b) Even if the different language versions are in  agreement,  EU  law
         uses terminology which is particular to it, and legal  concepts  do
         not necessarily have the same meaning in EU law and in the  law  of
         the member states (CILFIT at [19]) as the law of the European Union
         constitutes a new legal order of international law  (Van  Gend  end
         Loos [1963] ECR 3415 Case 26/62;


33. With respect to the former, if there are differences then the case  law
    of the ECJ suggests that regard should be had to the intention  of  the
    author and in light of the objectives the measure sought to  achieve  -
    see Stauder [1969] ECR 419 (case 29/69). In the  case  of  the  latter,
    care must be taken to  consider  if  the  words  in  question  have  an
    autonomous meaning given to them in EU law.   A  domestic  court  does,
    naturally, have significant practical problems in  assessing  texts  in
    different languages. If the issue  arises  then  it  may  be  a  factor
    militating in favour of a preliminary reference to the CJEU,  an  issue
    which does not arise here.


34. If, however, the meaning is not clear and precise, regard must  be  had
    to the context and purpose of the legislation in question  as  the  ECJ
    did in Elgafaji [2009] ECR I-92 (Case 465/07). Faced with  an  apparent
    contradiction within the terms of Article 15 (c), the  ECJ  interpreted
    it in such a way as to give it an  autonomous  meaning  which  gave  it
    effect, illustrating the premise that the creator of the legislation is
    acting rationally, and that the provision was introduced to have effect
    in a logical and rational scheme. A  provision  of  EU  law  cannot  be
    redundant. It follows that where several interpretations of a provision
    are possible, that which best  ensures  effectiveness  and  consistency
    with primary EU law should be followed.


35. It is evident also from the case law of the ECJ that in interpreting  a
    provision, regard may be had to the travaux pr�paratoires if  they  are
    available. This, in the context of immigration, can be seen in Teixeira
    [2010] ECR I-1107 at [58].


36.  The  method  of  interpretation  which  is  generally  seen  as   most
    characteristic of the ECJ is a purposive  or  "teleological"  approach.
    That is most easily seen in the interpretation of TFEU provisions  such
    as Article 21 in, for example, Zambrano and the extensive case  law  on
    the meaning of "worker" within Article 45  and  its  predecessors.  The
    teleological approach  to  interpretation  may,  as  the  circumstances
    require, give rise to three closely linked questions:


      a) Which interpretation, having had  regard  to  the  context  of  the
         provision, best preserves its effectiveness?


      b) If the provision is ambiguous, which interpretation  best  achieves
         the objective it pursues?


      c) What consequences would flow from each interpretation?


37. Teleological interpretation is, however, subject to  the  proviso  that
    exceptions are to be interpreted strictly (see Commission v UK [2010] I-
    03491 at [39]) although a broader interpretation may be adopted if that
    is required to give effect to the objectives.


38. It is to be noted also that the words which are to be construed are the
    operative part of the instrument in question; the preamble  may  be  an
    aid to the interpretation as in Toshiba Europa  GmBH  v  Katun  Germany
    GmBH [2001] ECR I-7945 where at  [36]  -[37]  recourse  was  had  to  a
    recital because a literal interpretation of Directive 84/450 as amended
    would result in a contradiction with Directive 89/104 but it is  not  a
    legal   Rule   -   see   Casa   Fleischhandel   v   Bundesantalte   fur
    Landwirtschaftliche Marktordnung [1989] ECR 2789  at  [31]:  "Whilst  a
    recital in  the  preamble  to  a  regulation  may  cast  light  on  the
    interpretation to be given  to  a  legal  rule,  it  cannot  in  itself
    constitute such a rule."


39. It follows that the approach to interpreting  a  provision  of  EU  law
    requires a systematic approach, looking at the words in the context  of
    the structure of EU law as a whole and asking:


      i) Is the meaning of the provision defined in EU Law?


     ii) If not, can the words be given their usual, ordinary meaning?


    iii) If not, what are the possible different interpretations?


     iv) What is the objective of the provision?


      v) Which interpretation best preserves its effectiveness?


     vi) Which interpretation best achieves the objective?


    vii) What are the consequences of the different interpretations?


40. As a starting point, it must be recalled that in HA& Others  the  Upper
    Tribunal did not receive detailed submissions on the interpretation  of
    Article 9, and submissions were not made in respect of  the  effect  of
    Article 2(f).  Article 9 was  not  directly  in  point;  no  Article  9
    request had been made.


41. It is not submitted that versions of Article 9 in  other  languages  do
    not have the ambiguity of the English version, nor do I  consider  that
    obtaining certified translations would be appropriate in this  case  as
    the difficulty arises not from the words used; there is  no  suggestion
    that unlike in other cases such as Stauder words appeared in the German
    version but not others.  Here, the issue is the effect of  "has  been".
    The use of the perfect tense in English in  this  context  suggests  an
    event in the past which continues to have effect in the  present.  That
    type of nuance may or may not exist in other languages but is  unlikely
    to be resolved by a certified translation; rather, it would most likely
    require expert evidence as to whether  the  tense  used  had  the  same
    effect as in English.


42. The parties take differing views of Article 9. The  applicants  contend
    that it applies to them as it includes the family members of all  those
    who, historically, have been allowed to  reside  as  a  beneficiary  of
    international protection. The respondent  contends  that  it  does  not
    apply where the that person has subsequently acquired  citizenship,  as
    the definition of "beneficiary of international protection" in  Article
    2(f) excludes such persons, and that this interpretation is  consistent
    with scheme of Dublin III.


43. I therefore turn first to Article  2(f).  There  is  no  suggestion  of
    ambiguity of the text in the different language versions and there  is,
    I conclude, no reason why the words used cannot be given their  natural
    meaning. That is, to be a beneficiary of  international  protection  an
    individual must meet two conditions: first that the  person  is  not  a
    citizen of an EU state (or  other  state  party  to  Dublin  III),  and
    second, that the person  has  been  granted  international  protection.
    The first condition is consistent with CEAS  framework  as,  under  the
    Qualification Directive, status can be granted  only  to  third-country
    nationals. The second equally,  mirrors  the  Qualification  Directive.
    There is only ambiguity if you read "means" as "is". It could have been
    worded as a person who is a third country national  and  who  has  been
    granted protection, but it does not.   There is a linking  together  of
    both characteristics in conformity  with  the  overall  scheme  of  the
    Common European Asylum System's definition of refugee being limited  to
    third-country national; citizens of  member  states  fall  outside  the
    definition.


44. There are two conditions to  be  fulfilled  before  the  definition  in
    Article 2(f) is met, nationality and the grant of protection. The first
    condition is not immutable as an individual's  nationality  may  change
    but the second condition is immutable; the grant of  protection  is  an
    historical fact.


45.  The  phrase   "beneficiary   of   international   protection"   occurs
    infrequently in Dublin III. It occurs only in the definition of  family
    member within Article 2(g) where it relates only to a minor  child  who
    has been granted protection and in Article 9, where the restriction  of
    family member confining that to a family which existed in  the  country
    of origin is disapplied.


46. The group of individuals who fall within  Article  2(f)  is  large  and
    covers all those granted protection  by  the  member  states  party  to
    Dublin III. It is inevitable that people within  that  group  may  move
    between  member  states,  lawfully  or  otherwise.   For  example,   an
    individual recognised in Belgium might lawfully move to France.  Unless
    it is the case that the grant of  residence  is  as  a  beneficiary  of
    protection, then Belgium would be the state responsible  for  examining
    the claim even many years after it had recognised the family member  as
    a refugee.  That attenuated nexus is still thinner if the family member
    seeking asylum within the EU becomes a family  member  post-  grant  of
    protection.  In the case of the Belgian-recognised refugee now resident
    in France it would not facilitate family reunion as  it  would  require
    consideration of the claim made by post-grant family members by a state
    in which the beneficiary of international protection is not resident.


47. At first glance that may suggest that similar or linked cases should be
    determined in the same state. But in  the  case  of  post-grant  family
    members that need not be the  case:  suppose  the  spouse  was  from  a
    different country from the person recognised already - that  would  not
    be a consideration, and Article 9 would still apply.


48. There is, I consider, no ambiguity in the provisions of Article  2  (f)
    which could, applying principles of family unity, or best interests  of
    children, permissibly lead to  an  interpretation  giving  a  different
    answer to the question of which state is responsible.


49. Turning back to Article 9, it is useful to consider it as if  it  reads
    as follows, adding in the words from Article 2(f):


          'Where the applicant has a family member,  regardless  of  whether
          the family was previously formed in the country of origin, who has
          been allowed to reside as a third- country national or a stateless
          person who has been granted international protection in  a  Member
          State, that Member State shall be responsible  for  examining  the
          application  for  international  protection,  provided  that   the
          persons concerned expressed their desire in writing.'


50. This does not resolve the ambiguity in the text; the words  "has  been"
    apply to the whole of the definition set out  in  2(f)  and  it  is  an
    historical fact that at the time of the grant of protection, A5  was  a
    stateless person.


51. It is therefore necessary to move on to a consideration of the  context
    of Article 9, and Dublin III as  a  whole.   In  doing  so,  I  am  not
    persuaded that weight can be attached to the headings in the directive,
    contrary to what Mr Lewis submitted. There is no authority cited to  me
    from EU case law that they are an aid to interpretation and  given  the
    presence of recitals, it is difficult to discern what their  value,  if
    any, could be. Further, as I observed during  submissions,  the  French
    version has no verb in the heading,  nor  do  the  Italian  or  Spanish
    versions, each of which is authentic.


52. Dublin III's purpose is, as is stated in Article 1,  to  establish  the
    criteria and mechanisms for determining the  member  state  responsible
    for examining an application for international protection lodged in one
    of the member states, as confirmed in Ghezelbash where the CJEU held:


         "42. Thus,  according  to  recitals  4,  5  and  40  of  Regulation
         No 604/2013, the objective of the regulation  is  to  establish  a
         clear and workable method based on objective,  fair  criteria  both
         for the Member States and for the persons concerned for determining
         the Member State responsible for examining an  asylum  application.
         It follows, in particular, from  Articles 3(1)  and  7(1)  of  the
         regulation that the Member State responsible is, in principle,  the
         Member State indicated by the criteria set out in  Chapter  III  of
         the regulation. Moreover, Chapter IV of the  regulation  identifies
         specifically the situations in which a Member State may  be  deemed
         responsible  for  examining  an  asylum  application  by   way   of
         derogation from those criteria.


         43.  The crucial importance, for  the  application  of  Regulation
         No 604/2013, of the  process  for  determining  the  Member  State
         responsible on the basis of the criteria laid down in  Chapter  III
         of the regulation is confirmed by the fact that  Article 21(1)  of
         the regulation provides that it is possible for  the  Member  State
         with which an application for  international  protection  has  been
         lodged to request another Member State to take charge of an  asylum
         seeker only if the first Member State considers that the second  is
         responsible for the examination of the application. Moreover, under
         Article 21(3) of the regulation, the request for charge to be taken
         of the applicant must include evidence enabling the authorities  of
         the Member State requested to check whether it  is  responsible  on
         the basis of the criteria laid down in the  regulation.  Similarly,
         it is apparent from Article 22 of Regulation No 604/2013 that the
         response to such a request must be based on an examination  of  the
         elements of proof and circumstantial evidence whereby the  criteria
         laid down in Chapter III of the regulation are applied."


53. Its purpose must also be seen  in  the  context  of  the  CEAS  and  EU
    Immigration law as a whole. While the UK, Ireland and Denmark opted out
    of Directive 2003/86/EC on the  right  to  family  reunification  which
    covers refugees and their families, it  is  nonetheless  part  of  that
    context. Article 2 (d) of that  directive  extends  its  provisions  to
    families coming into being after a sponsor's entry into a member state,
    and there are within chapter V  of  the  Directive  special  provisions
    applicable in the case of refugees.


54. Equally of note is Directive 2003/109/EC concerning the status of third
    country nationals who are long-term  residents  which  again  does  not
    apply to  the  UK,  Ireland  and  Denmark  but  is  still  part  of  EU
    immigration law. Broadly,  it  provides  that  third-country  nationals
    lawfully resident for a period of  5  years  can  (subject  to  various
    conditions) acquire a status which gives them a bundle of rights  under
    EU law including a conditional right (Articles 14-  23)  to  reside  to
    pursue an economic activity, study or "other purposes".  In the context
    of Article 9 of Dublin III it  is  of  note  that  the  long  residence
    directive applies to those granted international  protection  and  thus
    would permit, as  in  the  scenario  set  out  above,  a  third-country
    national recognised in Belgium to move to live and work in France after
    acquiring 5 years' lawful residence in Belgium.  It is of note that  by
    operation of Article 8, any long residence permit issued by the  member
    state recognising a person as entitled to international protection must
    state that as must any subsequent long residence permit issued  by  the
    member state in which he then takes  up  residence  and  acquires  long
    residence.  This  does  not,  however   transfer   responsibility   for
    international protection - see recital 9 of Directive 2011/51.


55. In this context, it becomes apparent that the legislative intention  is
    primary responsibility for those granted international protection  lies
    with the member state which granted.  This then explains  why,  in  the
    scenario set out above, it is the member state which  first  granted  a
    person international  protection  remains  the  state  responsible  for
    determining claims made by his family members. It  also  indicates  why
    recital (15) of Dublin III is more relevant to Article 10.


56. Taking these factors together, it can be seen  that  the  hierarchy  of
    criteria is not primarily focussed on family  reunion.  Although  under
    Article 8, the best interests of minors is prioritised,  the  state  in
    which the minor has a family member who is  lawfully  present  and  may
    even be a citizen, is responsible for assessing his  claim.  It  is  of
    note given the tenuousness of some of the relationships that  would  be
    covered that there may in some cases be no existing family life between
    the child and the relative in the other member state;  they  may  never
    have met. It must, however, be borne in mind in this context that regs.
    12.3 and 12.4 in the Implementing Regulations 1560/2003 as  amended  by
    Reg 118/2014, give  detailed  provisions  as  to  how  enquiries  about
    relatives able to care for unaccompanied children are to be made.


57. A different principle applies in respect of Article  9;  that  is,  the
    continuance of responsibility of  the  state  which  initially  granted
    protection without any real temporal limit. There is some degree of the
    promotion of family unity here, and it is complementary to  Article  10
    which applies only when there has yet to be a determination  of  status
    in respect of the family member who first arrived in the EU and it does
    not extend to family acquired post-flight from the country  of  origin.
    To that extent it promotes family  unity  only  to  a  limited  extent;
    rather, Article 10 promotes the efficiency  of  examining  like  claims
    together.


58. I remind myself that all that is being  decided  under  Dublin  III  is
    which member state is responsible for assessing  an  asylum  claim.  It
    need not necessarily follow that the family  members  who  fall  within
    Article 9 would be granted international protection or,  failing  that,
    residence  in  the  member  state  to  which  they   are   transferred,
    particularly if the sponsor no longer resides there. That would not  be
    family reunion; indeed, it could have the opposite effect.


59. Pausing then to take stock, it is apparent from this analysis that  the
    purpose of Article 9 within the overall framework of  the  CEAS  is  to
    ensure that the member  state  which  granted  a  person  international
    protection retains the responsibility for assessing the claims of  that
    person's family members.  That responsibility does  not  diminish  over
    time, or where there is no common  nexus  between  the  claims  of  the
    person recognised and his family members, or when the person recognised
    has moved to another member state.


60. The respondent's case is not  that  a  condition  that  the  person  in
    question is  still  in  receipt  of  international  protection  can  be
    interpolated into Article 9. It is, rather,  that  the  combination  of
    Articles 2(f) and 9 has the effect of making it a  condition  that  the
    person concerned is still in receipt of protection.


61. If the construction the respondent seeks to place  on  Article  9  were
    correct, and it is engaged only while the historical fact of a grant of
    residence as a beneficiary of  international  protection  in  a  member
    state is still subsisting, this would have the effect of, to  take  the
    example of the person recognised in Belgium moving to  France,  Belgium
    no longer being responsible. That is contrary to the purpose of Article
    9 as identified above.  It is not possible to  put  different  temporal
    constraints on the separate conditions of a) a grant of  residence  and
    b) the basis of that grant of residence such that Article  9  could  be
    read as requiring only the fact of a prior grant  of  residence  but  a
    continuing requirement of the basis of that grant.


62. The acquisition of citizenship of the EU by the grant of citizenship by
    a member state significantly alters the status of the person concerned,
    not least as such a person ceases to be a refugee. But there are  other
    circumstances in which that status  can  cease.  It  may  be  that  the
    circumstances giving rise to the claim no longer apply, in  which  case
    the state which granted international protection could cease or  revoke
    it.   While that would not  affect  entitlement  to  a  long  residence
    permit, it would mean that Article 9 would operate differently  if  the
    respondent's submission that it can apply only where the individual  in
    question retains international protection as that interpretation  would
    have to be consistent with change in nationality.


63. Accordingly, and given that only one interpretation of  Article  9  can
    apply, it cannot be read so as to include the scenario where  a  person
    granted protection lawfully goes to another EU state, but  exclude  the
    scenario,  including  the  acquisition  of  nationality,   without   an
    interpolation to the effect that the situation must still subsist.  If,
    however, and bearing in mind that all that is being done  here  is  the
    allocation of responsibility, the use of the words "has been" is simply
    construed as a requirement that the family member had at a time in  the
    past  been  granted  a  right  of  residence  as   a   beneficiary   of
    international protection, there is no need to  strain  the  wording  to
    give effect to the purpose of the provision. It would also, and this is
    perhaps marginal, have an ancillary effect of, to a  degree,  promoting
    the best interest of children and family unity.


64. I am not persuaded either that Article 7 (2)  assists  the  respondent.
    As can be seen from Articles 8 to 15, it is conceivable that, depending
    on how a family's different members are distributed, an application  of
    the different Articles will identify different states  as  responsible;
    it is the hierarchy which determines which. As people can and  do  move
    around, if a date on which that hierarchy was to  be  applied  was  not
    fixed, application of the criteria would become difficult, and  subject
    to abuse, including for example a marriage of  convenience.  It  is  to
    this that the "situation" referred to in Article 7(2) applies.


65. In summary, therefore, albeit for different reasons,  I  conclude  that
    the interpretation placed on Article 9  in  HA  &  Others  is  correct.
    Acquisition of British citizenship by a family member  does  not  alter
    the fact that he was in receipt  of  international  protection  and  so
    Article 9 would still apply.


66. The respondent argues that even if that is so,  the  applicants  cannot
    succeed as the take charge request requires that "the persons concerned
    expressed their desire in writing."  This, it  is  submitted,  requires
    consent not just from those who are the subject of the TCR but  of  the
    family member who, in this case, had been  granted  protection  in  the
    past.


67. It is clear that the written consent of the  transferees  is  required.
    That  is  provided  for  in  the  standard  forms  prescribed  by   the
    implementing Directives.  These, however, do not expressly provide  for
    the consent of the family member who has been granted protection in the
    past. That is unsurprising given that the form is to  be  completed  by
    the requesting state which may have no means of contact with  a  person
    outside its jurisdiction and it is  not  possible  to  imply  into  the
    scheme any requirement on the requesting  state  to  provide  it.  This
    would cause significant delay and add a further layer of complexity and
    uncertainty, undermining the purposes of the Dublin III scheme.


68. The respondent contends that the checking of consent  from  the  person
    within the jurisdiction is something that he would have done as part of
    the checks required to be undertaken.  There is, however,  no  evidence
    to support this bare assertion or the assertion  that  checks  such  as
    this are done to protect, for example, a woman granted status in the UK
    on grounds of  domestic  violence  from  being  joined  by  an  abusive
    husband. There is nothing that  Mr  Lewis  could  take  me  to  in  the
    relevant policy indicating that this would  be  done,  still  less  any
    witness statement from a responsible official setting out what is done.




69. If the respondent is correct that consent or acquiescence of the person
    to be joined is necessary, it  does  not  apply  in  the  case  of  the
    relative whom a minor will be joining (Article 8) or to  family  groups
    (Article 11), albeit that the Implementing  Regulations  make  specific
    provision for unaccompanied minors at reg. 12.3 and  12.4.  I  consider
    nothing turns on the use of "persons" in the plural given that  it  has
    to be plural as the TCR may apply to several people.


70. In conclusion:


    (i)  the phrase "family member ... who has been allowed to reside as  a
         beneficiary of international protection" in Article 9 of Dublin III
         is to be interpreted as including a person who has, since the grant
         of international protection, acquired the  nationality  of  the  EU
         member state; and,


    (ii)     the "persons concerned" in Article 9 of Dublin  III  does  not
         include  the  family   member   or   members   previously   granted
         international protection in the requested state.


71. In conclusion, I am  satisfied  that  first,  Article  9  applies,  and
    second, that the consent or desire to the transfer has to be  expressed
    only by those who are its  subjects.   The  respondent's  decision  was
    therefore unlawful as it proceeded on an  incorrect  interpretation  of
    the law and I quash that decision.


    Grounds 2 to 4 - the law


72. Article 17 (2) of Dublin III provides:


    'Article 17 Discretionary Clauses


     17 (2). The Member State in which an  application  for  international
    protection is made and which is carrying out the process of determining
    the Member State responsible, or the Member State responsible, may,  at
    any time before a first decision  regarding  the  substance  is  taken,
    request another Member State to take charge of an applicant in order to
    bring together any family relations, on humanitarian grounds  based  in
    particular on family or cultural considerations, even where that  other
    Member State is  not  responsible  under  the  criteria  laid  down  in
    Articles 8 to 11 and 16.  The  persons  concerned  must  express  their
    consent in writing.


     The request to take charge shall contain  all  the  material  in  the
    possession of the requesting Member State to allow the requested Member
    State to assess the situation. The requested Member State  shall  carry
    out any necessary checks to examine the humanitarian grounds cited, and
    shall reply to the requesting Member State within two months of receipt
    of the request using the 'DubliNet'  electronic  communication  network
    set up under Article 18  of  Regulation  (EC)  No  1560/2003.  A  reply
    refusing the request shall state the reasons on which  the  refusal  is
    based.'


73. In addition, the Dublin Implementing Regulation 1560/2003 provides:

    Article 2 Preparation of requests for taking back
    Requests for taking back shall be made on a standard form in accordance
    with the model in Annex III, setting out the nature of the request, the
    reasons for it and the provisions of Regulation (EU) No 604/2013 of the
    European Parliament and of the Council (*) on which it is based.
    The request shall also include, as applicable:
    (a) a copy of all the proof and circumstantial  evidence  showing  that
    the requested Member State is responsible for examining the application
    for  international  protection,  accompanied,  where  appropriate,   by
    comments on  the  circumstances  in  which  it  was  obtained  and  the
    probative value attached to it by the  requesting  Member  State,  with
    reference to the lists of proof and circumstantial evidence referred to
    in Article 22(3) of Regulation (EU) No 604/2013, which are set  out  in
    Annex II to this Regulation;
     Article 3 Processing requests for taking charge
    1. The arguments in law and in fact set out in  the  request  shall  be
    examined in the light of the provisions of Regulation (EC) No  343/2003
    and the lists of proof and circumstantial evidence which are set out in
    Annex II to the present Regulation.
    2. Whatever the criteria and provisions of Regulation (EC) No  343/2003
    that are relied on, the requested Member State shall, within  the  time
    allowed by Article 18(1) and (6) of that Regulation, check exhaustively
    and objectively, on the basis of all information directly or indirectly
    available  to  it,  whether  its  responsibility  for   examining   the
    application for asylum is established. If the checks by  the  requested
    Member State reveal that it is responsible under at least  one  of  the
    criteria of that Regulation, it shall acknowledge its responsibility.

74. I turn now to the remaining grounds of appeal.  Miss  Kilroy  submitted
    that even if the applicant did not fall within Article A9,  nonetheless
    there was a proper Article 17 (2)  request  made  in  this  case  which
    needed to be considered because the information disclosed  in  the  TCR
    was sufficient to create an obligation where, as here, it raised issues
    of fundamental rights, on the respondent to  investigate.   She  relied
    for this submission on Ghezelbash at [42].


75. Miss Kilroy submitted (although there is no evidence to  support  this,
    only her assertion), that the TCR form at Part 1 has a  drop-down  list
    permitting the reference to only one Article and that the  evidence  of
    how the matter was considered was lacking in any detail.  She submitted
    further that the decision was defective in that there was no attempt to
    assess the impact of HA& others it being contrary to the  rule  of  law
    for the Secretary of State simply to  ignore  decisions  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and in failing to advise the Greek government of the  position
    taken by the courts in the United Kingdom.


76. Miss Kilroy submitted that there  was  in  this  case  a  duty  on  the
    Secretary of State to investigate  matters  properly  and  to  ask  for
    further evidence as identified in MS and also in MK.   Accordingly,  on
    that basis the failure to do that alone rendered the decision unlawful.


77. Miss Kilroy submitted that  in  light  of  Article  27  of  Dublin  III
    Regulation and following MS, as well as Ghezelbash and Mengesteab there
    was on the facts of this case a duty on the Tribunal and the  Secretary
    of State to undertake a full merits review and, where  necessary,  take
    into account evidence which had not been in existence at  the  time  of
    decision and had not been in front of the  Secretary  of  State.   Miss
    Kilroy  submitted  that,  having  had   regard   to   the   appropriate
    construction of the implementing Regulations particularly Article  3(2)
    in the light of the Articles 21, 22 and 23 of Dublin III, the Secretary
    of State was compelled to ask  for  further  evidence.   She  submitted
    further, following A v Croydon at paragraphs 197 to 209 that  this  was
    in effect a precedent fact issue and  thus  judicial  review  ought  to
    proceed on that basis.  She submitted that the decisions of the CJEU in
    the  case  of  Ghezelbash  and  Mengesteab  were  supportive  of   this
    submission.


78. Mr Lewis submitted that a TCR made pursuant to Article 17(2) was  of  a
    different character  from  those  made  under  Articles  8  to  15.  He
    submitted further that that was clear from Articles 21.1  and  21.3  as
    well as 22 and the nature of checks to be undertaken, as  well  as  the
    Implementing Regulations particularly at Article 3.2 that there was  an
    obligation for a proper request to seek consent to be made and that  it
    was in effect for the government to set out all the  details  necessary
    to trigger an Article 17 (2) request.  He submitted that there  was  in
    reality  no  evidence  submitted  with  the  application   capable   of
    generating a humanitarian protection argument and  that  there  was  no
    obligation in the circumstances for the Secretary of State to undertake
    an examination of any Article 17(2) case which may arise if it had  not
    been made by the requesting state.  I agree.


79. Mr Lewis submitted further that having had  regard  to  the  procedural
    aspect with particular regard to Article 5 and what had to be  done  in
    respect of a negative reply and checking the  evidence  submitted,  the
    implementing  Regulations  indicate  the  type  of  evidence  that  was
    required and this  was  intended  to  be  a  streamlined  process,  the
    Secretary of State's decision was correct.  Mr Lewis submitted  further
    that this case could be clearly distinguished from MS at paragraphs 171
    to 201, particularly 193 as this was not a hard-edged  question  unlike
    the question put there.  Article 17(2) is clearly not hard-edged as  it
    required an evaluation and balancing of factors and thus is subject  to
    judicial review of the exercise discretion as opposed to the  hard-edge
    question which  may  be  susceptible  to  a  hard-edge  precedent  fact
    analysis that (see MS 200, 208 and 209), was a proper construction.  In
    short, he submitted that there was in fact no duty on the Secretary  of
    State on the facts of this case make a formal assessment and  that  the
    Secretary of State was functus officio having made a  decision  on  the
    Article  9  issue  which  is  the  only  issue  engaged  by  the  Greek
    authorities.


80. Mr Lewis  submitted  that  it  was  fanciful  in  the  absence  of  any
    humanitarian grounds cited by the Greek authorities that the  Secretary
    of State should somehow magic up an Article  17(2)  issue.   It  simply
    could not be said that there was an Article 17(2) request here or  that
    if there was any basis in which it could be argued that  the  Secretary
    of State's duty is extended to, although not being the requested  state
    (note to self and how could she actually do this given she is  not  the
    state in which people are  not  located)  to  undertake  a  full  means
    appraisal.


81. With respect to grounds 3 and 4, Mr Lewis submitted that the  Secretary
    of State's decision could not be faulted on the very  limited  evidence
    put before him as to the best interests of the children. It  could  not
    be argued that the Secretary of State must undertake a wide ranging and
    broad enquiry on these facts as to the situation of the children.


82. Mr Lewis submitted further that there was no general duty under  Dublin
    III to reunite families the  legal  reality  being  different;  it  was
    simply a means by which the EU Member States had agreed  to  adopt  the
    criteria as to who would assess asylum claims.   He  submitted  further
    that the children are not unaccompanied and  although  their  situation
    was bad, they were looked after by their mother in stable accommodation
    and the evidence which  had  not  yet  been  admitted  indicated  their
    situation was better.  It could not be said that they were in any great
    difficulties or met the necessary high Article 8 threshold.


83. In response Miss Kilroy submitted that it was necessary to have  regard
    to how this case had developed and how the Secretary  of  State's  case
    has changed to incorporate an assertion that 17 (2) had not been raised
    and raising doubts as to the nature of the relationships.


84. Miss Kilroy submitted that there was a duty on the Secretary  of  State
    to consider an Article 17 (2) issue and,  in  failing  to  do  so,  and
    indeed to make any comments whatsoever, this required the  Tribunal  to
    make a full finding on this issue applying the most  intense  level  of
    review as indicated in HA and Others. She submitted also  that  in  not
    allowing the children to be reunited with their father that  there  was
    an  unjustified  breach  of  Articles  7  and/or  8,  given  a   proper
    understanding of what the right of family life and respecting the  best
    interests of children required.


    Discussion


85. The applicants assert that the TCR should have  been  considered  as  a
    request made under Article 17 (2) of Dublin III, as  that  is  required
    under Article 3 (2)  of  the  Implementing  Directive.  I  accept  that
    provision requires the requested member state to consider  if,  on  the
    basis of the information it has from  the  requesting  state  or  as  a
    result of its checks, and applying the hierarchy  of  criteria,  it  is
    responsible. That is what occurred  here,  the  respondent  considering
    whether Article 10 was engaged and concluding that it was not.


86. The applicant emphasises Article 3(2) but it  cannot  be  severed  from
    Article 3(1) which provides the context of what is  to  be  considered,
    that is, the evidence supplied by the requesting state.  Nor  for  that
    matter can it be divorced from Article 2 (as amended). It  is  of  note
    that in both Articles 2 and 3, the phrase "that  the  requested  Member
    Stated is [emphasis added] responsible"  is  used  given  that  Article
    17(2) is expressed to allow the requesting state to make a request when
    the requested state is not responsible under Articles 8 to 11 and 16.


87. There is no real indication that the Greek authorities who had  primary
    responsibility for evaluating the position of A1 to  A4  considered  an
    exercise of their discretion under Article 17(2). While it is submitted
    by Miss Kilroy that the electronically generated form used permits only
    one Article of Dublin III to be identified, there is nothing beyond her
    submission to show that is so, and there is clearly in the  form  space
    for the requesting state to make additional comments. No proper  reason
    is advanced as to why that could not include an Article 17(2) request.


88. I do not accept the submission that the nature of the request made here
    and  the  limited  information  provided  invoked   even   arguably   a
    humanitarian or human rights claim. The reference to A1  having  kidney
    problems is lacking in any detail, and the submission that  Greece  had
    considered matters beyond Article 9 is not borne out, not least  as  no
    medical evidence was produced. The interpretation the  applicants  seek
    to make are, in reality, contrary to the scheme of Dublin III which  is
    to  provide  an  efficient  and  rapid  determination  of   the   state
    responsible for assessing a protection claim.  Further,  it  cannot  in
    that context be  argued  that,  as  the  applicants  seek  to  do,  the
    respondent was on notice such that he was under a  duty  to  carry  out
    further investigations. While there may be  merit  in  that  submission
    with respect to unaccompanied minors, there is no  actual  support  for
    that proposition within the scheme.  There was no requirement  for  him
    to seek out the medical and other evidence now presented.


    Grounds 3 and 4:


89. I am not persuaded that the new evidence put forward by the  applicants
    should  be  admitted.  I  do  not  accept  that   the   admission   and
    consideration of new evidence not before either the  Greek  authorities
    or the respondent must be  taken  into  account,  nor  that  Ghezelbash
    requires that.  As was held in R (on the application of RM) v Secretary
    of State for the Home Department  (Dublin;  Article  27(1);  procedure)
    [2017] UKUT 00260 (IAC) at [52] and [53]


         "(52)    For all the reasons given  above,  and  having  considered
         Article 27(1) of Dublin III in the context of the  wording  of  the
         Regulation as a whole, its general scheme, its objectives  and  its
         context, I conclude, as Advocate General Sharpston did in Karim (at
         [AG44]) that the, "intensity of any appeal or review process is not
         laid down in the [Dublin III] regulation and must  therefore  be  a
         matter for national procedural rules...".


         (53) I am satisfied that adherence of the Tribunal  to  traditional
         principles of judicial review does not, either in this case or more
         generally in challenges brought to decisions made  in  relation  to
         the second sub-paragraph of Article 19(2), result in  a  breach  of
         either Article 27 of Dublin III or Article 47 of the Charter."


90. In short, whether or not new evidence should be admitted  is  a  matter
    for domestic procedural law. It is, I accept, permissible to adduce  in
    some circumstances evidence to show that a mistake of fact arose, or in
    certain precedent fact cases, but that is not applicable here. What the
    applicants are seeking to do is to transform  a  challenge  brought  by
    judicial review into a full merits appeal assessed as at  the  date  of
    hearing. That is not arguable and in the circumstances,  I  reject  the
    application to adduce further material.


91. Contrary to what is submitted by the applicants, it  cannot  be  argued
    that he Greek authorities have determined that it is in the  children's
    best interests to be  transferred  to  the  United  Kingdom.  There  is
    insufficient evidence that they made such an analysis over and above  a
    conclusion that Article 9 was engaged and that the mother consented  to
    the transfer.  Further, and in  any  event,  there  was  little  or  no
    evidence upon which the respondent could have made a  determination  of
    the children's best interests, nor was there  sufficient  evidence  for
    them to determine whether the children are British Citizens.  That is a
    process entirely separate from and outwith a Dublin III  consideration.
    It was and still is  open  to  the  applicants  to  apply  for  British
    passports for the children.


92. Essentially, the submissions set out in grounds 2 to 4 seek  to  impose
    as part of the Dublin III process a duty  on  the  respondent  to  make
    investigations in respect of children not within  the  jurisdiction  of
    the United Kingdom as to their best interests, and to seek out evidence
    which may show that the United Kingdom  is  responsible  for  them  and
    should allow them to come here. While it is correct that Dublin III and
    indeed EU and domestic law emphasises the best interests  of  children,
    that is not sufficient on the material put  before  the  respondent  to
    engage any duty to conduct an investigation to determine if they should
    be admitted if Article 9 was not made out and the Greek authorities had
    made no express request under Article 17(2).


93. For these reasons, I conclude that on the basis  of  the  very  limited
    evidence put before the respondent,  he  did  not  err  in  failing  to
    consider whether an Article 17(2) request had been made, or in  failing
    to have proper regard to the children's best interests; or,  the  right
    to family life.






    Conclusions


94. While I find for the applicants in respect of Ground  1,  I  find  that
    grounds 2 to 4 are not made out.


95. I quash the decision under challenge.


96. I am satisfied that it is appropriate to make an anonymity order, given
    the circumstances of the child applicants and as applicants 1 to 4  are
    claiming asylum.





[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
11 January 2019










