
      IAC-FH-CK-V1


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                                                JR/5723/2018


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                Heard on: 13th December 2019

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

            The Queen (on the application of Mr Arifuzzaman Rana)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

    Mr M West, instructed by Liberty Legal Solicitors, appeared on behalf
    of the Applicant.
    Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department, appeared on
    behalf of the Respondent.
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW
                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

This is the approved written record of the judgment which was given orally
at the end of the hearing on 13 December 2019.

The application

The applicant applied on 24 August 2018 for judicial review of, and relief
from, the respondent's decision of 22 June 2018 (the 'Decision'), to refuse
to treat the applicant's application for leave to remain on the basis of
his long residence as a fresh claim, for the purposes of paragraph 353 of
the Immigration Rules.

The applicant claimed that he should have been granted an in-country right
of appeal in respect of his application, as it included a human rights
appeal; and that the respondent's conclusion that he did not have the
required period of continuous lawful residence was irrational.

On 7 March 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson refused permission on the
papers for the application to proceed, but the applicant renewed his
application and at an oral renewal hearing, on 4 June 2019, Upper Tribunal
Judge Kamara granted permission for review of the Decision to proceed to
full judicial review.  She regarded it as arguable that the appellant's
circumstances could be distinguished from those in the Upper Tribunal case
of R (Ahmed) v SSHD (para 276B - ten years lawful residence) [2019] UKUT
00010 (IAC) (at the time of the permission hearing, the Court of Appeal had
not given its decision in R (Ahmed) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1070), in light
of what she regarded as 'concessions' in the Decision, the nature of which
are unclear.  She regarded it as arguable that the applicant had resided
lawfully in the UK for at least 10 continuous years, apart from a period of
20 days immediately prior to his application of 20 October 2016. She
concluded that it was at least arguable that a First-tier Tribunal could
legitimately allow his appeal on human rights grounds, on the basis that he
met the requirements of paragraph 276B of the Immigration Rules at the time
that the respondent considered his application.

Previous Orders and Judgments

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara had, when granting permission, issued
directions for the respondent to file detailed grounds of defence, but as
the applicant failed to pay the continuation fee, his application was
automatically struck out on 25 June 2019.  His application was reinstated
by Upper Tribunal Lawyer Lewenstein in an order sent to the parties on 16
July 2019 and the respondent was granted a further extension of time to
file detailed grounds of defence.

Grounds

The applicant challenged the Decision, on the following grounds, which I
summarise below:

Ground (1): whilst the applicant made his application seven months and 13
days prior to completion of 10 years residence, the respondent's policy
indicated that an earlier application should be granted if, when it was
considered, within 20 days, the applicant would complete the required
qualifying period for continuous lawful residence, provided that he met all
of the other Immigration Rules relating to long residence. The respondent
had made the Decision on 22 June 2018, by which time the applicant had been
resident in the UK for over 11 years and had never breached any immigration
laws except for a period of overstaying from 1 October 2016 to 20 October
2016.  The applicant asserted that this should be disregarded as a result
of paragraph 39E of the Immigration Rules, as confirmed by the respondent's
policy, which instructed her caseworkers to disregard the absence, pursuant
to paragraph 39E.

Ground (2): whilst the respondent had refused the applicant's application,
to the extent that it related to his human rights, she had erred in
refusing to provide a statutory right of appeal.

Ground (3): because the respondent had failed to refer to a previous
certification of an earlier human rights application being 'maintained' in
the Decision, the respondent erred in refusing to treat the subsequent
application as a fresh claim.

       The hearing before me

       The challenge on the basis that the appellant should have been given
       the right of appeal

The representatives agreed that I should deal with the second ground, as if
it succeeded, I would have to quash the Decision.  The ground was based on
a decision of the Upper Tribunal, Sheidu (Further submissions; appealable
decision) [2016] UKUT 00412 (IAC), which related to a statutory appeal, but
which also dealt with fresh claims under paragraph 353 of the Immigration
Rules.  What was said was that the respondent may, in reaching a decision,
decide a human rights application afresh, even if the decision then goes on
to consider and purport to apply paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules and
refuse to treat the application as amounting to a fresh claim.  In that
case, reliance on paragraph 353 is without effect and the appellant should
be granted a right of appeal.

In developing the submissions before me, Mr West relied also on the
substantive judicial review decision of R (Mohammad Kamrul Islam) v SSHD
JR/8109/2018, which although not reported formally, was nevertheless a
substantive decision of the Upper Tribunal (a panel of Upper Tribunal
Judges Kopieczek and Sheridan) and said to be of persuasive authority, in
the absence of any other reported authority.  Mr West asserted that the
facts of the case in Islam, were 'on all fours' or 'virtually identical' to
the facts in this application, and the Upper Tribunal in that case had
quashed the decision refusing to treat as a fresh claim the application in
that case.  I should similarly quash the Decision. There should be a
declaration to the effect that the applicant had an in-country right of
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

I accepted that the wording of the Decision appears to be similar to that
in Islam and it was unnecessary for Mr West to address me in detail on a
line-by-line comparison of the two decisions.

Mr Malik submitted, on behalf of the respondent, that setting aside, for
one moment, the issue of whether the Islam decision was wrongly decided in
light of the Supreme Court's decision in  Robinson v SSHD [2019] UKSC 11,
and the asserted ratio in the later case that the respondent must accept an
application as a fresh claim under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules,
before it generates a right of appeal (see [64] of Robinson), on a more
practical note, in this case, the applicant had an alternative remedy which
he had not sought to exercise, specifically to present a statutory appeal
to the First-tier Tribunal, to allow them to decide whether to accept that
appeal.

In the case of R (Khan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 424, the Court of Appeal, in
endorsing the Upper Tribunal decision of Principal Resident Judge O'Connor,
emphasised that where there were alternative remedies available,
specifically the presentation of a statutory appeal to the First-tier
Tribunal, it would not be appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to grant
judicial review.  Mr Malik emphasised that it was far from clear that the
Upper Tribunal in Islam were ever referred to Khan. Even if it were
appropriate for me to consider Islam, which Mr Malik disputed as it was not
a reported authority, it could be distinguished on the basis of Khan.

       Discussion and conclusions

I accept Mr Malik's submissions that this is a case which falls squarely
within Khan. The arguments raised by Mr West (such as the possibility that
the First-tier Tribunal might reject a statutory appeal, which would then
necessitate a further judicial review application, with additional cost,
and that it was more convenient for me to decide the issue, given its
complexity) were precisely those considered and rejected by the Upper
Tribunal and Court of Appeal in Khan. Mr West has raised no practical
reason why the applicant in this case could not seek to present a statutory
appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (for example, any point that an appeal
would be out of time, which will be for the First-tier Tribunal to
consider).  My conclusion is fortified by [19] and [23] of Khan, where the
Court of Appeal stated:

"19.     My starting-point is that it is both natural and more convenient
that where an issue arises as to the jurisdiction of a statutory tribunal
that issue should be determined in the first instance by the tribunal
itself, which can then proceed to consider the substantive issues if it
decides that it has jurisdiction. It is inherently more wasteful for
proceedings to have to be brought in different courts or tribunals. I do
not see the force of Mr Pennington-Benton's suggested distinction between
cases where jurisdiction is in issue and other "alternative remedy" cases.
Once it is accepted, as he does accept, that the tribunal is in principle
entitled to determine whether it has jurisdiction, I see no reason, in this
context, for treating that question differently from any other question
which it is empowered to decide. I accept that if one or other party is
dissatisfied with the FTT's decision on jurisdiction it may then have to be
decided by the UT, whether on appeal (where there was a hearing in the FTT)
or by way of judicial review (where there was not), in which case the
parties will have been put to the additional time and trouble of arguing
the case twice rather than once. But that is not peculiar to cases of the
present kind. It is an inevitable consequence of the application of the
alternative remedy principle in the tribunal field and has not been treated
in other cases as a sufficient reason for allowing the statutory
jurisdiction to be undermined.

23.     Before us Mr Pennington-Benton repeated the submission that denying
him access to the judicial review route forced the Appellant to waive his
right to a valid decision notice, which is an important right. I do not
agree. If he proceeds with an appeal to the FTT he loses nothing of value.
All that he will be waiving is the right to object to the jurisdiction of
the FTT on the basis that the absence of a notice rendered the decision
appealed against a nullity. If he succeeds in showing that he had a right
of appeal, the FTT will enjoy its full powers under section 84 of the 2002
Act (as it then stood). That would include the power, as Mr Malik expressly
conceded, to allow the appeal on the basis that the decision was not "in
accordance with the law", within the meaning of section 84 (1) (e), because
the notice was invalid. The Appellant might, however, as Mr Malik pointed
out, seek a decision on any substantive grounds also, in order (if he were
successful) to preclude the possibility of the Respondent simply making the
same decision again and accompanying it with a valid notice."

In summary, on the basis that the appellant has, in this particular case,
an alternative remedy available, it is unnecessary for me to decide on the
applicability of Sheidu to applications for judicial review. The
application is therefore dismissed on this ground.

Remaining Grounds

Ground (3) - the relevance of certification

I deal first with grounds which Mr West did not formally abandon, but
following Mr Malik's response, indicated that he could make no further
submissions. The first was ground (3) and the assertion that because an
earlier certification under section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration and
Asylum Act 2002 had not been expressly referred to and 'maintained' in the
Decision, that the respondent could not then refuse to treat later further
submissions as a fresh claim under paragraph 353. I accept Mr Malik's
submission that this was a paradigm of the case considered in Z T (Kosovo)
v SSHD [2009] UKHL, where the House of Lords specifically endorsed the
approach of refusing to treat fresh submissions as a fresh claim under
paragraph 353. The Supreme Court confirmed in Robinson that certification
and refusal to treat as a fresh claim operate at different stages of a
response to a purported renewed application (see [46] of Robinson) and
paragraph 353 continues to have a role independent from certification (see
[47]).

       Paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules - a new ground

Mr West sought to rely on a new ground in respect of which no permission to
proceed had been granted and no application to amend the grounds had
previously been made, namely that the respondent had failed to refer
expressly in the Decision to the factors set out paragraph 353B of the
Immigration Rules.  Again, while Mr West did not abandon his application to
amend the grounds to add this as a challenge, he accepted that he had no
answer to Mr Malik's response that such a ground would have been bound to
fail as a result of the Court of Appeal authority of Qongwane [2014] EWCA
Civ 957 and in particular the point made at [32] by Sir Stanley Burnton as
follows:

           "32.     Furthermore, if a decision is lawfully made to remove
           at the same time as a decision to refuse leave claimed on
           Article 8 grounds, there is likely to be no sensible reason for
           a review to be carried out separately from the consideration of
           the claim for leave. In such circumstances, paragraph 353B will
           not apply. In any event, the factors referred to in that
           paragraph are likely to have been considered in the rejection of
           the Article 8 claim. It would be unnecessary for the decision
           maker to refer to those factors again, other than the statement
           that there are no exceptional circumstances justifying a
           decision that removal is not appropriate."

Lord Justice Underhill at [40] also noted:

           "Para. 353B is not very well drafted, but it seems to me clear,
           reading it as a whole, that its essential purpose is indeed to
           identify specific points which will weigh in the balance against
           the exercise of the discretion not to remove a migrant, or to
           qualify the effect of factors that might otherwise weigh in its
           favour. Thus the point of heads (i) and (ii) is to make clear
           that (in short) bad character/conduct and non-compliance with
           conditions must always count against the exercise of the
           discretion. As for head (iii), the point surely being made is
           that time spent in the UK after the adverse immigration decision
           ought (at least generally) only to count in the migrant's favour
           if his or her reasons for not leaving were beyond their control.
           I think this point worth making because I have observed a
           tendency for migrants or their advisers to treat the facts that
           they have committed no criminal offences or have complied with
           all conditions as if that created some kind of presumption in
           favour of non-removal "under para. 353B". That is not the right
           approach. Para. 353B is not a kind of mandatory check-list of
           the same character as (albeit less comprehensive than) the old
           para. 395C. I do not say that good character or compliance with
           conditions are wholly irrelevant to an exercise of the
           discretion in question. But it is not the purpose of para. 353B
           to ensure that they are considered; and they are hardly likely
           to be significant factors by themselves given the exceptional
           nature of the discretion as explained by Sir Stanley Burnton at
           para. 24 of his judgment."

The Decision referred expressly to the consideration of exceptional
circumstances. The absence of express reference to the factors in paragraph
353 cannot result in any error in the Decision, in light of Qongwane and
even had I admitted the application to add this as a ground, which I do
not, I would have dismissed it.

       Ground (1)

Ground (1), as argued by Mr West, included two connected elements.  The
first was whether the applicant had a free-standing right, regardless of
the impact of  R (Ahmed) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1070, to indefinite leave
to remain as a result of the respondent's guidance dated 3 April 2017,
which it was claimed gave clear instructions to decision makers to grant
periods of indefinite leave to remain based on lawful continuous residence,
even where there were breaks in continuous lawful residence. Even if the
examples given at page [377] of the appellant's bundle, internal page [16]
of [43] of the guidance, contradicted the law as now understood in Ahmed,
they bound the respondent at the time of the Decision.

The second element in relation to continuous lawful residence related to an
inconsistency in the respondent's refusal to treat as counting towards
continuous lawful residence the later period of 20 days immediately prior
to his application of 20 October 2016, but to count an earlier break of six
days between 15 and 22 March 2012.  Mr West referred to this earlier period
as the 'concession' referred to by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara and asserted
that the inconsistency was irrational.

On the point of the free-standing right as a result of the respondent's
2017 policy, I accept Mr Malik's submissions that the examples given by Mr
West and referred to above are taken out of context and cannot be fairly
said to result in continuous lawful residence, as opposed to a break being
'disregarded' (the distinction highlighted by the Court of appeal in R
(Ahmed) v SSHD (para 276B - ten years lawful residence) [2019] UKUT 00010
(IAC), referred to above.  The examples given state:




           "Example 1

           An applicant has a single gap in their lawful residence due to
           submitting an application 17 days out of time. All other
           applications have been submitted in time, throughout the 10
           years period.




           |Question    |Would you grant the application in this case?|
|Answer      |Grant the application as the rules allow for |
|            |a period of overstaying of 28 days or less   |
|            |when that period ends before 24 November     |
|            |2016.                                        |


           Example 2

           An applicant has 3 gaps in their lawful residence due to
           submitting 3 separate applications out of time. These were nine,
           17 and 24 days out of time.




       |Question    |Would you grant the application in this case?|
|Answer      |Yes. Grant the application as the rules allow|
|            |for periods of overstaying of 28 days or less|
|            |when that period ends before 24 November     |
|            |2016.                                        |


As Mr Malik pointed out, both examples follow, and are in the context of,
the earlier guidance, at page [376] of the appellant's bundle, internal
page [15], which states:

           "Gaps in lawful residence

           You may grant the application if an applicant:

               . has short gaps in lawful residence through making previous
                 applications out of time by no more than 28 calendar days
                 where those gaps end before 24 November 2016

               . has short gaps of residence on or after 24 November 2016
                 but leave was granted in accordance with paragraph 39E of
                 the Immigration Rules

               . meets all the other requirements for residence."

It is perfectly possible, as Mr Malik submitted, that somebody may have
gaps in lawful residence of no more than 28 days before 24 November 2016 or
otherwise which fall to be disregarded under paragraph 39E of the
Immigration Rules on or after 24 November 2016, where those gaps are
sufficiently in the past that they might be disregarded and the applicant
also has a sufficient period of continuous leave. Put another way, the
examples given are not inconsistent with the authority of Ahmed, and the
respondent did not err in failing to grant indefinite leave to remain based
on a freestanding right under the respondent's policy.

Dealing with the second issue of the gap in lawful residence of 6 days from
15 March 2012 and 21 March 2012, I do not regard the respondent's failure
to treat this in the Decision as breaking continuous lawful residence, as
meaning that the respondent erred in law in treating the later period, in
2016, as breaking continuous lawful residence.

Reading the reference in the Decision to the earlier break in context, at
internal page [2] of [20], there is a recitation of a lengthy immigration
history beginning with lawful entry in May 2007.

The Decision refers to the fact that on 15 March 2012, the applicant
withdrew his appeal and his appeal rights were exhausted on 21 March 2012,
followed by further events in a chronology, and a reference later in the
Decision at internal page [4] of [10] to the appellant having only 9 years,
4 months and 17 days' residence which was considered to have been lawful
and continuous.  In making that later statement, there was no reference to
the earlier 2012 break being 'conceded' as not breaking continuity of
lawful residence. What had occurred was that the respondent had discounted
the earlier 2012 break in error, which had a knock-on effect in calculating
the period of continuous lawful residence, which the respondent has since
accepted was an error.  That was not as the result of a positive decision
to waive the earlier break.  In making the earlier error, the respondent
did not err in law, on the basis of irrationality, in considering correctly
the more recent break of 20 days in 2016. By analogy with example of
mistake and whether mistakes may lead to a legitimate expectation, all the
circumstances must be considered (see: R (Begbie) v Department Of Education
& Employment [1999] EWCA Civ 2100). It is not the case that a mistaken
promise will never have legal consequences. It may be that a mistaken
statement will, even if subsequently sought to be corrected, give rise to a
legitimate expectation, whether in the person to whom the statement is made
or in others who learnt of it, for example where there has been detrimental
reliance on the statement before it was corrected. But, as in Begbie, that
is not this case. The respondent has never accepted that the applicant has
had a sufficient period of continuous lawful residence, and an initial
error as to the earlier break in lawful residence does not mean that the
respondent should repeat the error a second time.

For the above reasons, judicial review on ground (1) is also refused.

In summary, the application for judicial review is refused on all grounds.




Application for Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

There is not any application for permission to appeal to the Court of
Appeal, but in the event, I have considered it and I refuse it for the
reasons I have already refused the application for judicial review.

Costs

The applicant is ordered to pay the respondent's reasonable costs, to be
assessed, if not agreed.


                       J Keith
                  Signed:


                             Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




             Dated:    19 December 2019







                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/5723/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice








            The Queen (on the application of Mr Arifuzzaman Rana)


                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent




                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Keith


Having  considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  Mr  M  West,
instructed by Liberty Legal Solicitors, on behalf of the applicant and Mr  Z
Malik, instructed by the  Government  Legal  Department  on  behalf  of  the
respondent at a hearing at Field House, London on 13th December 2019


It is ordered that


     1) The judicial review application is dismissed in accordance with the
        judgment attached.


        Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

     2) There is not any application for permission to appeal to the  Court
        of Appeal, but in the event, I have considered it and I  refuse  it
        for the reasons I have already refused the application for judicial
        review.


        Costs


     3) The applicant shall pay the respondent's reasonable  costs,  to  be
        assessed if not agreed.




                       J Keith
                  Signed:


                             Upper Tribunal Judge Keith




             Dated:    19 December 2019






      Applicant's solicitors:
      Respondent's solicitors:
      Home Office Ref:
      Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      -----------------------------------------------------------------------
      -------
       Notification of appeal rights


      A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review
      is a decision that disposes of proceedings.


       A party may appeal against such a decision to the Court of Appeal  on
      a question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to
      the Upper Tribunal  for  permission,  at  the  hearing  at  which  the
      decision is given. If  no  application  is  made,  the  Tribunal  must
      nonetheless  consider  at  the  hearing  whether  to  give  or  refuse
      permission to appeal (rule 44(4B) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008).


      If  the  Tribunal  refuses  permission,  either  in  response  to   an
      application or by virtue of rule 44(4B), then  the  party  wishing  to
      appeal can apply for permission from the Court of Appeal itself.  This
      must be done by filing an applicant's notice with  the  Civil  Appeals
      Office of the  Court  of  Appeal  within  28  days  of  the  date  the
      Tribunal's decision on permission to appeal was sent (Civil  Procedure
      Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


