

                                    [pic]
                                                 JR/5466/2018 & JR/4567/2018
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)
                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR

                                                             23 October 2019

                                   Before:

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL

                         __________________________

                                  Between:

                                  THE QUEEN
                           (on the application of)
                                AUMAS & MAMAS
                                                                  Applicants
                                   - and -

                        IMMIGRATION OFFICER, HEATHROW
                                                            First Respondent
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                           Second Respondent
                         __________________________

      Baldip Singh, instructed by Amnesty Solicitors, for the Applicant

     Zane Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department, for the
                                 Respondent

                        Hearing date: 1 October 2019
                         __________________________

                                  JUDGMENT
                         __________________________

JUDGE BLUNDELL:

1. The applicants are dual Syrian/Sudanese nationals who were  born  on  10
   June 1999 and 14 January 2001 respectively.  They seek  judicial  review
   of: (i) the decisions made by the first respondent on 2  April  2018  to
   cancel their leave to enter the United Kingdom and  (ii)  the  decisions
   made by the second respondent on 8 May 2018 to  affirm  the  Immigration
   Officer's decisions on Administrative Review.


2. The claim form identified only the Secretary of State as the  respondent
   but the challenges brought  were  evidently  to  the  decisions  I  have
   identified above.  I  am  satisfied  that  no  prejudice  is  caused  by
   directing under rule 9(1) that the Immigration Officer  be  added  as  a
   respondent and I do so direct.


Background
3. The applicants are brothers.  Their father is MS  and  their  mother  is
   RMS.  On 31 May 2017, the father made an application for entry clearance
   as a Tier 1 (Investor) Migrant, under paragraph 245EB of the Immigration
   Rules.  The mother applied for entry clearance as the Family Member of a
   Relevant Points Based  System  Migrant,  under  paragraph  319C  of  the
   Immigration Rules.  The applicants  and  their  three  younger  siblings
   (aged 13, 8 and 7 at the date of the decisions under challenge)  applied
   for entry clearance as the children  of  relevant  PBS  Migrants,  under
   paragraph 319H of the Immigration Rules.  Those  applications  were  all
   successful, and entry clearance was granted on  3  October  2017,  valid
   until 3 February 2021 in each case.

4. The applicant's father is also a dual Syrian/Sudanese national.  He is a
   businessman who has invested substantial sums in the UK.   He  also  has
   significant business interests in  Kuwait  and  is  required  to  travel
   regularly as a result of his business interests.  Both  applicants  wish
   to study in the UK, ultimately with  a  view  to  entering  the  medical
   profession.  Their parents are fully supportive of their aspirations.

5. The applicants arrived in the UK with their father on 25  October  2017.
   All three left the UK five days later and then  returned  on  2  January
   2018.  The applicants were enrolled at a boarding school in Oxfordshire.
    They started term on 5 January 2018.   Their  father  left  the  United
   Kingdom again.  On 16 March 2018, they left the UK to  spend  half  term
   with their family in Kuwait.  They returned on 2 April 2018, arriving at
   Heathrow Airport.  They  were  questioned  by  Immigration  Officers  at
   Heathrow Terminal 3, following  which  they  were  issued  with  notices
   entitled Notice of Cancellation of Leave to Enter.   For  reasons  which
   will become apparent, I need not set out the terms of those notices.

6. On 10 April 2018, the applicants sought  administrative  review  of  the
   first respondent's decisions.  The Secretary of State responded  to  the
   applications on 8 May 2018.  She maintained the decisions  made  by  the
   Immigration Officers but she amended the reasons given.  (These  amended
   decisions confusingly bear the date 2 April 2018 but Mr Malik  confirmed
   on instructions that they were the  amended  decisions  which  had  been
   'backdated').  The two amended decisions  are  in  materially  identical
   terms.  The decision in  respect  of  the  first  applicant  is  in  the
   following terms:

         You have presented a  United  Kingdom  biometric  residence  permit
         number RG 384 8388 which had effect as leave to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom  on  3  October  2017  but  I  am  satisfied   that   false
         representations were employed or material facts were not  disclosed
         for the purpose of obtaining the leave, or there has  been  such  a
         change of circumstances in your case which has removed the basis of
         your claim to admission.  I therefore cancel your continuing leave.
          I  therefore  cancel  your  leave  to  enter  in  accordance  with
         paragraph 321A(1) of the Immigration Rules.


         In order to qualify for this leave one of the requirements  as  per
         paragraph 319H(f) was for both of the  applicant's  parents  to  be
         lawfully present (other than as a visitor)  in  the  UK,  or  being
         granted entry clearance  or  leave  to  remain  (other  than  as  a
         visitor) at the same time as the applicant or one  parent  must  be
         lawfully present (other than a visitor) in the UK and the other  is
         being granted entry clearance or leave to remain (other than  as  a
         visitor) at the same time as the applicant.


         Since the grant of your leave until your most recent arrival  on  2
         April 2018 your father has spent only seven days in the UK  from  a
         total of two visits.  Your mother during this same period has  only
         spent a total of four days having arrived on 25 October 2018 and by
         your admission lives in Kuwait.


         In your Visa Application Form you stated you would be  residing  at
         [London, W6], the same address  as  provided  by  your  mother  and
         father.  However, you have been enrolled as a full-time student  at
         [~], an international boarding school  since  5  January  2018  and
         residing at [Oxford, OX3].


         Therefore taking the above into account it would appear  that  your
         mother's leave was obtained in order to facilitate  your  leave  to
         enter the UK to attend boarding school  as  she  returned  back  to
         Kuwait after  a  mere  four  days  in  the  UK.   Furthermore  your
         circumstances since the issue of your entry clearance have  changed
         as a result neither of your parents residing with you in the UK and
         therefore you attend and reside at a boarding school full-time.


7. The first applicant applied for another Administrative Review on 22  May
   2018,  which  was  ultimately  refused  on  25  June  2018.   Pre-action
   correspondence between was concluded on 11 June 2018,  with  the  second
   respondent maintaining the decisions under challenge.


8. Claims for  judicial  review  were  issued  on  13  August  2018  (first
   applicant) and 2 July 2018 (second applicant).  Judge Pitt directed that
   the claims should be linked and anonymised.  Judge Bruce granted limited
   permission to apply for judicial review on 12 March 2019. She considered
   it arguable that the decisions under  challenge  misconstrued  paragraph
   319H of the Immigration Rules insofar as they required the sponsor to be
   continuously present in the UK and, further, that it was  arguable  that
   there had been no change of  circumstances  because  the  leave  of  the
   parents had been left undisturbed.  She did not consider the grounds  to
   be arguable insofar as they related to paragraph  321A(2),  because  the
   decisions under challenge did not invoke that provision.

Legal Framework
9. Paragraph 319H is in Part 8 of the Immigration Rules and appears under a
   sub-heading of Children of Relevant Points Based System  Migrants.   The
   paragraph contains the requirements for  entry  clearance  or  leave  to
   remain.  Sub-paragraphs (b) and  (f)  are  both  relevant.   Those  sub-
   paragraphs provide as follows:

         (b)  The applicant must be the child of a parent who has, or is  at
           the same time being granted, valid  entry  clearance,  leave  to
           enter or remain, or indefinite leave to remain, as:
           (i)    a Relevant Points Based System Migrant, or
           (ii)   the partner of  Relevant Points Based System Migrant.
                or who has obtained British  citizenship  having  previously
                held indefinite leave to remain as above.


         (...)


         (f)  Both of  the  applicant's  parents  must  either  be  lawfully
           present (other than as a visitor) in the UK,  or  being  granted
           entry clearance or leave to remain (other than as a visitor)  at
           the same time as the applicant or one parent  must  be  lawfully
           present (other than as a visitor) in the UK  and  the  other  is
           being granted entry clearance or leave to remain (other than  as
           a visitor) at the same time as the applicant, unless:
           (i)     The  Relevant  Points  Based  System  Migrant   is   the
                applicant's sole surviving parent, or
           (ii)   The Relevant Points Based System Migrant parent  has  and
                has had sole responsibility for the applicant's  upbringing,
                or
           iii)  There  are  serious   or   compelling   family   or   other
                considerations which would make it desirable not  to  refuse
                the application and suitable arrangements have been made  in
                the UK for the applicant's care.

10. I need not set out much of the  Immigration  Act  1971.   It  is  common
   ground that the applicants held leave to enter, as  conferred  by  their
   entry clearance, when they left the United Kingdom  on  16  March  2018.
   Equally, it is common ground that they held leave  to  enter  when  they
   returned to the UK  on  2  April  2018.   The  Immigration  Officers  at
   Terminal Three were nevertheless  entitled  (under  paragraph  2A(2)  of
   Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act) to examine the applicants for  the  purposes
   of establishing, inter alia, "whether there has been such  a  change  in
   the circumstances of his case, since  that  leave  was  given,  that  it
   should be cancelled".  In the event that they were satisfied that  there
   had been such a change, section 10B of the 1971 Act gave the Immigration
   Officer power to cancel that leave.

11. Paragraph 321A of the Immigration Rules provides the grounds upon  which
   leave to enter or remain which is in force is to be cancelled at port or
   while the holder is outside the United Kingdom.  It provides that  leave
   is to be cancelled when, inter alia, "there has been such  a  change  in
   the circumstances of that person's case since the leave was  given  that
   it should be cancelled".


12. The leading authority on  the  cancellation  of  leave  under  paragraph
   321A(1) is  SSHD  v  Boahen  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  585;  [2010]  INLR  632.
   Pitchford LJ (with whom Thomas and  Mummery  LJJ  agreed)  considered  a
   number of interlocking provisions in that case.  At [36]-[40], under the
   sub-heading "Change  of  Circumstances",  Pitchford  LJ  considered  the
   correct approach to paragraph 321A(1).  At [37], he said this:

         [37]     The context  of  the  illustrations  in  the  guidance  is
         important. What is envisaged  is  that,  while  the  visa  holder's
         intention may remain to  enter  for  the  authorised  purpose,  the
         factual basis upon which the visa  purpose  was  founded  has  been
         undermined. Accordingly, leave to enter to take up  employment  may
         have been undermined by withdrawal  of  the  offer  of  employment;
         leave to enter for study may have been undermined by withdrawal  of
         sponsorship; or leave to enter as a child for settlement  may  have
         been undermined by the permanent departure of the  child's  sponsor
         from the UK. In other words, had the entry clearance  officer  been
         aware of these eventualities, he would not have issued the visa for
         the purpose he did, however genuine the application was. There  is,
         in my opinion, no underlying premise to  these  examples  that  the
         change of circumstances must be permanent, nor  is  there,  in  any
         event, a true comparison to be made between the examples given  and
         Mr Boahen's case, in which the visa holder had, on the immigration
         officer's finding, evinced an intention to visit for purposes other
         than that authorised. The only legitimate analogy lies, in my view,
         in the judgment of the probable effect of the circumstances as they
         have turned out to be upon the mind of an entry  clearance  officer
         considering the original  application.  It  is  legitimate  to  ask
         whether,  if  the  entry  clearance  officer  had  known  that  the
         applicant  would  use  the  visa  for  purposes  other  than  those
         authorised, whether  mistakenly  or  deliberately,  he  would  have
         issued it. In the light of the development  with  which  the  chief
         immigration officer was faced in Mr Boahen's case, the question she
         had to consider was whether the entry clearance should continue, or
         the visa holder should be required to make a  further  application.
         Consideration  of  cancellation  on  the  ground   of   change   of
         circumstances required an assessment from the  immigration  officer
         of all the circumstances  including,  for  example,  whether  there
         remained a continuing legitimate  purpose  for  the  visa  holder's
         visits with which the visa holder could and should be entrusted for
         the remainder of the period of validity. The purpose of  the  power
         of cancellation is to ensure proper immigration  control,  and  the
         use of a visa by a visa national  for  a  visit  whose  purpose  is
         unauthorised is, on the face of it, a serious matter.
         [emphasis supplied]

13. The Secretary of State has published guidance on  the  General  Grounds
    for Refusal in Part 9 of the Immigration Rules.  The  relevant  section
    for present purposes is section 3 of 5; Considering Entry at  UK  Port,
    version 29, valid from 11 January 2018.  At page 59 of  that  guidance,
    under the sub-heading Change of Circumstances, the following appears:


         When a passenger's circumstances have changed since their leave  to
         enter or remain was given, you must consider whether the change  is
         great enough to justify you cancelling the  leave  under  paragraph
         321A(1) or V9.2.  For example, when a passenger with leave to enter
         for employment has had their offer of employment withdrawn.


Submissions
14. The grounds which were originally settled by counsel (not Mr Singh)
    advanced five challenges to the respondents' decisions.  They are
    helpfully summarised at [3] of those grounds, in the following way:


             i) R has unlawfully misapplied the Immigration Rules at
                paragraph 319H(f);
     ii) R misdirected himself in finding that cancellation was justified
         under paragraph 321A(1);
           iii) R's decision contains material factual errors;
     iv) R has unlawfully failed to discharge the children duty as contained
         in section 55 BCIA 2009;
             v) R's cancellation decisions are tainted by procedural
                unfairness.

15. The third of  these  grounds  was  abandoned  by  Mr  Singh  during  the
   hearing.  As pleaded, the ground was based  on  a  suggestion  that  the
   respondents had erred in concluding that  the  applicants'  parents  had
   spent seven days (in the case of the father) and four days (in the  case
   of the mother) in the UK since they had been  granted  entry  clearance.
   In Mr Malik's skeleton, it  was  submitted  that  this  calculation  was
   entirely accurate, and that the error was to be found  in  the  grounds,
   which took account of time the father had spent  in  the  UK  after  the
   decisions under challenge.   At  my  request,  Mr  Singh  took  specific
   instructions  on  this  point  and  accepted   that   the   respondents'
   calculations were correct.


16.  The  fifth  ground  was  also  abandoned  and  I  propose,   in   those
   circumstances, to say very little about it.  In reliance  on  the  Upper
   Tribunal's decision in Fiaz [2012] UKUT 57 (IAC); [2012] Imm AR 497,  it
   was originally submitted that the respondents had erred  in  failing  to
   consider whether it would be more appropriate to curtail the applicants'
   leave,  rather  than  cancelling  it  with  immediate  effect.    Having
   considered Mr  Malik's  response  to  this  ground,  however,  Mr  Singh
   accepted that it could not prosper.

17. Developing the remaining grounds, Mr Singh submitted  as  follows.   The
   crux of the applicants' case concerned the respondents' construction  of
   paragraph  319H(f).   The  respondents  had  erred,  he  submitted,   in
   concluding that this paragraph required both parents  to  be  physically
   present in the United Kingdom.  The intention behind the  paragraph  was
   simply to ensure that the parents were permitted to be in the UK.    The
   applicants' father was a businessman operating in a  global  market  who
   was required to travel extensively.  It  was  understandable,  in  those
   circumstances, that the children would be enrolled at boarding school in
   the UK.  The parents were not required to be in the UK because the first
   applicant was over eighteen at the date that they returned to the UK and
   he could be the responsible adult for his brother.  The respondents were
   aware of the family's circumstances and should have  been  cognisant  of
   the fact that the father  was  a  high  net  worth  individual  who  was
   required to travel.  The respondents' decisions were not in keeping with
   the purpose of the  legislation.   The  applicants'  parents  should  be
   permitted to depart from the United Kingdom freely without concern about
   their children.  The Rules did not impose a  requirement  of  continuous
   residence and the respondents had been  wrong  so  to  conclude.   Mahad
   [2009] UKSC 16; [2010] 1  WLR  48  required  the  Tribunal  to  adopt  a
   sensible construction of the Rules and it did not further their  overall
   purpose to require the children and the parents always to be together in
   the UK.  To adopt the opposite construction was to overlook  the  nature
   of the world and the need for  international  businessmen  such  as  the
   father  to  travel  extensively.   The  proper  construction  was   that
   'lawfully present in the UK' meant nothing more than 'has leave to enter
   or remain in the UK'.


18. In developing ground two, Mr Singh submitted that  the  respondents  had
   erred in concluding that there had been such a change  of  circumstances
   that cancellation was justified.  The Entry Clearance Officer  had  been
   aware of the intentions of the sponsor.  I asked Mr  Singh  whether  the
   Visa Application Forms and associated paperwork were to be found in  any
   of the bundles filed in this judicial review.   He  confirmed  that  the
   applications had not been  lodged  and,  in  fact,  that  there  was  no
   evidence of what had been provide to the ECO.  In those circumstances, I
   sought to explore with Mr Singh what were said to be  the  circumstances
   presented to the ECO and to the Immigration Officer at  Terminal  Three.
   Mr Singh confirmed on instructions that the ECO had been told  that  the
   family  home  would  be  at  [London  W6].   He   confirmed   that   the
   circumstances presented to the IO were as follows.  The  address  at  So
   Sienna Apartments  was  no  longer  available.   Due  to  the  delay  in
   processing  the  entry  clearance  applications,  the  family  had  been
   required to change their plans and they were not able to relocate to the
   UK en famille as they had hoped.  The  parents  had  remained  with  the
   applicants' siblings in Kuwait until 13 June 2018.  There was  no  fixed
   family address in the UK when the applicants returned to the UK in April
   2018.  When the father had visited the UK on business, he had stayed  in
   hotels.  On any rational view, submitted Mr Singh, there  had  not  been
   such a change of circumstances that it was  appropriate  to  cancel  the
   applicants' leave to remain.


19. In relation to ground four, Mr Singh  submitted  that  the  respondents'
   decisions had failed to take account of the applicants'  best  interests
   as a primary consideration.  At the date of the  decisions,  the  second
   applicant was a minor and the disruption to his education had  not  been
   taken into account.  The respondents could have made further enquires of
   the parents, and would then have understood that the family  did  intend
   to relocate to the UK as a whole.  Had that been  understood,  it  could
   not rationally have been thought that there had been such  a  change  of
   circumstances that it was proper to cancel the applicants' leave.

20. I indicated to Mr Malik that I had read his skeleton and  did  not  need
   to hear from him.  He wished to address  me  briefly  nevertheless.   He
   submitted that "lawfully present in the United Kingdom" could  not  have
   the meaning contended for by Mr Singh because such a construction  would
   render paragraph 319H(b) of the rules otiose.  It  was  that  paragraph,
   and not paragraph 319H(f) which required the sponsoring parents to  have
   leave to enter or remain in a qualifying category.  The  requirement  in
   319H(f) was an additional requirement, the only sensible construction of
   which was that the sponsor should be physically  present,  and  lawfully
   so.  Had the Secretary of State intended the construction for  which  Mr
   Singh contended, she could very easily have achieved that  result,  just
   as she could have used plain words to exclude  third  party  support  in
   Mahad: [28] of Lord Brown's judgment refers.

21. Mr Malik also submitted that the witness statements in  the  applicants'
   bundle had not been before the  decision  makers.   In  any  event,  the
   relevant point in time was  when  the  decisions  under  challenge  were
   actually taken and it was clear - and accepted by the applicants -  that
   the parents were not in the UK at the material time.  According  to  the
   mother's witness statement, it was only in June 2018 that  she  and  the
   younger siblings relocated to the UK.

22. Mr Singh did not wish to respond to Mr Malik's submissions.

Discussion

23. Before turning to consider the grounds which were pursued by  Mr  Singh,
   I should note that it was agreed by counsel at the outset of the hearing
   before me that this was not a "precedent fact" case. It is  agreed  that
   the decisions taken by the respondents are to be reviewed on traditional
   public law grounds.

Ground One - Construction of Paragraph 319H(f)
24. The proper approach to the construction  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is
   well established.  In Odelola [2009] UKHL 25; [2009] 1  WLR  1230,  Lord
   Hoffman said that it was necessary to consider the language of the  Rule
   construed against the relevant background, which involved  consideration
   of the Immigration Rules as a whole and the function which they serve in
   the administration of immigration policy: [4].  In Mahad [2009] UKSC 16;
   [2010] 1 WLR 48, having cited what Lord Hoffman  had  said  in  Odelola,
   Lord Brown added at  [10]  that  the  Rules  are  not  to  be  construed
   strictly, as in the case of a statute  or  a  statutory  instrument  but
   "sensibly according to the natural and ordinary  meaning  of  the  words
   used".  In the same paragraph, he stated that the Secretary  of  State's
   intention in formulating the Rules was to be "discerned objectively from
   the  language  used,  not  divined  by  reference  to  supposed   policy
   considerations".


25. Applying that approach, I can dispose relatively shortly of  Mr  Singh's
   suggested construction of paragraph 319H(f).  He submitted that what was
   required by that provision was nothing more  than  that  the  sponsoring
   parent or parents had leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom.
   That submission is obviously wrong, for the reason given  by  Mr  Malik.
   It is paragraph 319H(b) which stipulates that the sponsoring  parent  or
   parents must have leave to enter or remain as a  relevant  PBS  Migrant.
   The plain and ordinary meaning of 319H(f), set in that  context,  is  to
   add an additional requirement.  The additional requirement is  not  that
   the sponsor has a lawful right to be present in the UK; it is that  they
   are (or will be) actually physically present in the UK.


26. That such a requirement appears in this context is wholly  unsurprising.
    The Rule governs the circumstances in which a child  will  be  admitted
   to, or permitted to remain in, the UK as the child  of  a  relevant  PBS
   Migrant.  The Rule applies to all children of PBS Migrants, in  whatever
   Tier the parent or parents are admitted.  As  is  clear  from  paragraph
   319AA, a relevant PBS Migrant is a migrant granted leave  as  a  Tier  1
   Migrant, a Tier 2 Migrant, a Tier  4  (General)  Student  or  a  Tier  5
   (Temporary Worker) Migrant.  Individuals  in  all  of  these  Tiers  are
   permitted to sponsor their children, amongst other  family  members,  in
   order that they can live together  in  the  United  Kingdom  whilst  the
   Relevant PBS Migrant studies, works or undertakes business activities.


27. Looking at the Rules more widely,  the  requirement  that  a  sponsoring
   parent is (or will be) actually present in the UK is to be  found  in  a
   number of other locations.  Paragraph 297 of the Rules requires that one
   or both  parents  be  'present  and  settled'  (or  being  admitted  for
   settlement on the same occasion).  Paragraph 310 is  in  similar  terms.
   In Appendix FM, the Relationship Requirements for Eligibility for  entry
   clearance as a child include a requirement, at E-ECC 1.6, that  "One  of
   the applicant's parents must be in the UK with limited leave to enter or
   remain...".  It is quite straightforward to discern the intention behind
   the Rules from the language used.  In common with the other Rules I have
   mentioned, paragraph 319H permits children who meet the requirements  of
   the Immigration Rules to remain with their parents  when  their  parents
   migrate to the UK on a temporary or permanent basis.  That reflects  the
   trite principle that the best interests of a child is  to  be  with  the
   parent or parents who are responsible for his upbringing.  In the  event
   that the parent or parents are elsewhere,  the  best  interests  of  the
   child are likely to be served by remaining with their  parents  in  that
   other country.


28. The Rules do make provision for some children to be  in  the  UK  whilst
   their parents or guardians are abroad, however.  Tier 4 of the PBS makes
   provision for Child Students.  In the case of  such  students,  however,
   paragraph  245ZZA(f)  provides  very  specific   requirements   (further
   developed at paragraph 245ZZE) for the  situation  in  which  "a  foster
   carer or a relative (not a parent or guardian) of the applicant will  be
   responsible for the care of the applicant".

29. Drawing these threads together, the position adopted in the  Immigration
   Rules is clear from the language used.  When a child is admitted to  the
   UK, the default position is that his or her parent(s) or  guardian  must
   be present in order to care for the  applicant.   Where  the  parent  or
   guardian is not present, there are specific and detailed requirements in
   the Immigration Rules to ensure that the best interests of the child are
   protected.  What  is  not  envisaged  by  the  Rules,  on  any  sensible
   construction, is that a sponsoring parent  with  settlement  or  another
   form of leave should live in a country other  than  the  UK  whilst  the
   child  is  present  here.   The  safeguarding  rationale  behind   these
   provisions is self-evident.  It is imperative, for example, that a child
   in the UK should have a parent (or, in the case of a  Child  Student,  a
   foster carer or relative) to  take  immediate  responsibility  for  that
   child in the event of medical or other emergency.

30. Mr Singh also submitted that the respondents  had  erred  in  construing
   paragraph 319H as requiring the sponsoring  parent  to  be  continuously
   present in the UK. I readily accept that there is no such requirement in
   paragraph  319H(f).   That  provision  requires  consideration  of   the
   circumstances obtaining at the  time  that  the  application  for  entry
   clearance or leave to remain is made, and a decision  is  made  at  that
   time on the circumstances described.  The paragraph could not contain  a
   requirement of continuous residence in the UK, since the decision  maker
   makes a decision on eligibility for entry clearance or leave  to  remain
   at a single point in time.  The difficulty with the submission  is  that
   the respondents did not construe paragraph 319H in the way suggested  by
   the applicants.  What the respondents asked themselves,  and  what  they
   were required to ask  themselves,  was  whether  the  circumstances  had
   changed to such an extent from those described to the ECO  that  it  was
   proper to cancel the  applicants'  leave.   That  was  not  to  construe
   paragraph 319H(f) so as to require continuous residence on the  part  of
   the sponsoring  parent;  it  was  to  consider  the  question  posed  by
   paragraph 2A(2) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act and paragraph  321A(1)  of
   the Immigration Rules in the manner required by her published policy.

31. Submissions were made in the grounds and by Mr Singh before me that  the
   Immigration Rules under which the  father  was  granted  leave  did  not
   require him to be continuously resident in the United  Kingdom.   Again,
   considering paragraph 245EB, I readily  accept  that  to  be  the  case.
   Again, however, that does not assist the  applicants.   Whether  or  not
   there was any such requirement, what the respondents  were  required  to
   consider was whether there had been such a great change of circumstances
   since the entry clearance was given that it was  appropriate  to  cancel
   the applicants' leave to enter.  Their father was free to travel  as  he
   wished whilst retaining his leave to enter throughout.   Unless  he  was
   outside the UK for more than two years[1], or unless his travel impinged
   upon his ability to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules in  a
   future application for leave to remain, it was entirely permissible  for
   him to travel as he did.  In the event that such travel was legitimately
   considered to represent a change of  circumstances  in  the  applicant's
   cases, however, it necessarily begged the question  posed  by  paragraph
   2A(2) of Schedule 2 to  the  1971  Act  and  paragraph  321A(1)  of  the
   Immigration Rules.


32. In the circumstances, ground one is not made out.  The  respondents  did
   not misconstrue the Immigration Rules  under  which  the  applicants  or
   their father were granted entry clearance.

Ground Two - Change of Circumstances
33.  By  this  ground,  it  is  submitted  that  the  respondents  erred  in
   concluding that there had been  such  a  change  of  circumstances  that
   cancellation under paragraph  321A(1)  was  appropriate.   As  Mr  Singh
   accepted before me, however, the  respondents'  decisions  can  only  be
   challenged on public law grounds.  It is not submitted, as I  understand
   it, that the respondents misdirected themselves in law in their approach
   to paragraph 321A(1).  The submission Mr Singh is  constrained  to  make
   is, instead, that it was irrational for the respondents to conclude that
   there had been such a change in circumstances that the leave  should  be
   cancelled.


34. At [54] of  the  grounds,  the  Tribunal  is  invited  to  consider  the
   question posed by Pitchford LJ at [37] of Boahen: had the  circumstances
   presented to the Immigration Officer been known to the  Entry  Clearance
   Officer, would the latter have made the decision she did?  In  order  to
   consider the ground in that way, it was necessary for me to explore with
   Mr Singh what had been said to the ECO and what had  been  said  to  the
   Immigration  Officer  at   Terminal   Three.    That   exercise   proved
   unnecessarily difficult because I  do  not  have  the  applicants'  Visa
   Application Forms or transcripts of the interviews which took  place  at
   Terminal Three.  As Mr Malik noted, the witness  statements  which  were
   prepared for this hearing were not before the decision makers.

35. On instructions, however, Mr Singh was able to confirm that it had  been
   stated in the Visa Application Forms that the family  intended  to  live
   together in the UK at the [London, W6].  A deposit  had  been  paid  for
   that property.  Their applications for  entry  clearance  had  not  been
   considered as swiftly as they would have liked, however, and it had been
   necessary to 'stagger' the arrival of the family so as  to  ensure  that
   the education of each of the children was not unduly  disrupted.   As  a
   result, the applicants had been brought to the UK  by  their  father  in
   January 2018 and placed in the boarding school in Oxfordshire.  He  left
   the UK shortly thereafter and the rest of the family remained in Kuwait.
    The applicants then completed half a term of  school  and  returned  to
   Kuwait to be with the rest of the family.  I asked Mr Singh whether  the
   family home was still So Sienna Apartments when the applicants  returned
   to the UK in April 2018.  I understood him initially to submit that  the
   property was still available at that stage.  When I asked whether  there
   was evidence which confirmed that to be the case, Mr Singh  needed  time
   to take instructions.  When he returned, he confirmed that the So Sienna
   Apartments address was not available to the family in  April  2018;  the
   delay in processing the visa applications meant that  it  had  not  been
   taken up by the family.  Mr Singh confirmed that  there  was  no  family
   address in the UK in April 2018, and that  the  applicants'  father  had
   stayed in hotels when he was in the UK.


36. In the grounds and in Mr Singh's oral submissions, much  is  said  about
   the fact that  the  applicants'  father  is  required  by  his  business
   interests to travel.  The fact  that  he  does  so  could  not,  it  was
   submitted, amount to a sufficiently serious change of  circumstances  to
   justify cancelling the applicants' leave.  I agree, and  insofar  as  it
   was submitted by Mr Malik  (at  [22]-[24]  of  his  skeleton)  that  the
   respondents' decisions were justified  simply  on  the  basis  that  the
   Relevant Points Based System Migrant (the father) was out of the UK when
   the  applicants  returned  on  2  April  2018,  I  do  not  accept  that
   submission.  The Immigration Officer was not reconsidering the  decision
   of the Entry Clearance Officer to assess whether or not the requirements
   of paragraph 319H were met.  Paragraph 2A(2) of Schedule 2 to  the  1971
   Act does not entitle an Immigration Officer to perform such an  exercise
   and paragraph 321A(1) does not entitle an Immigration Officer to  cancel
   leave on the basis that the Immigration Rule under which leave was given
   is no  longer  met  for  some  reason.   The  Immigration  Act  and  the
   Immigration Rules could have provided a power on this basis but they  do
   not do so, and the  enquiry  required  by  the  relevant  provisions  is
   necessarily more nuanced.  There is every reason  for  a  more  flexible
   approach, not least the fact that sponsors (whether in the UK under  the
   PBS or otherwise) might need to travel.


37. The point can be illustrated with a short example from a different  part
   of the Immigration Rules.  It is a requirement of  Appendix  FM  of  the
   Immigration Rules that a sponsoring spouse is present and settled in the
   United Kingdom.  The first of those words obviously bears the meaning  I
   have set out in considering ground one.  Suppose that an individual  was
   granted entry clearance on the basis that all of the requirements of the
   Immigration Rules - including the presence of the sponsor in  the  UK  -
   were satisfied.  That individual enters the UK and she and  the  sponsor
   set up a home together in this country.  One year after the entry of the
   visa national, the sponsor's mother falls ill in another country and the
   couple travel there to be with her.  She passes  away  whilst  they  are
   there and they attend the funeral.  The British national stays on for  a
   little longer to deal with her estate whilst the visa  national  returns
   to the UK to resume her life here.  It would plainly be absurd  for  the
   Immigration Officer to cancel her leave on the basis that the sponsor is
   not physically present in the UK at the point of her return.  As I  have
   said, a more flexible and nuanced approach is  necessarily  required  in
   order to decide whether there has been such a  change  of  circumstances
   that  the  leave  should  be  cancelled.   It  could   not,   in   these
   circumstances, sensibly be suggested that the factual basis  upon  which
   the visa purpose was founded has been undermined, as Pitchford LJ put it
   at [37] of Boahen.

38. But the change of circumstances in this case was  not  simply  that  the
   applicants' father was out of the UK when they returned from  half  term
   in Kuwait.  He was not in the UK and he had spent virtually no  time  in
   this country since  being  granted  entry  clearance.   The  applicants'
   mother and siblings remained in Kuwait at that time  and  there  was  no
   family home in the UK.  There was no one in the UK  to  look  after  the
   applicants, therefore, and there was nowhere for them  to  live  in  the
   event that there was a problem at school which prevented them  remaining
   there.  Asking the question posed by Boahen, the  answer  could  not  be
   clearer.  If the ECO was told that there would  be  no  parent  lawfully
   present in the UK and no family home in this  country,  entry  clearance
   would obviously have been refused.  Had the ECO concluded otherwise,  he
   or she would have undermined the safeguarding rationale which  underpins
   the Immigration Rules, as discussed above.


39. I do not lose sight of the fact that the first applicant  was  an  adult
   when the applicants  returned  to  the  UK  in  April  2018.   Mr  Singh
   understandably emphasised this, and submitted that this was not  a  case
   of young children who needed to be looked after.  I can accept that  but
   it is by no means a complete answer to the question of whether there had
   been such a change of circumstances that cancellation  was  appropriate.
   The respondents had a  statutory  duty  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
   welfare of children in the UK and there is no evidence before me to show
   that there were any  adequate  mechanisms  in  place  to  safeguard  the
   welfare of the second applicant in the event that there was an emergency
   which necessitated his leaving boarding school.  Mr Singh submitted that
   the respondents should have made enquiries before reaching the decisions
   they did but he was not able to suggest how such  enquiries  might  have
   shed a different light on  the  stark  circumstances  disclosed  to  the
   Immigration Officer; there was no parent or family home in the UK.


40. In the circumstances,  I  conclude  that  the  decisions  taken  by  the
   respondents on 2 April 2018 and 8 May 2018 were rational.  As  is  clear
   on the face of the decisions, they were not simply  made  on  the  basis
   that the applicants' father was temporarily outside the UK on  business.
   There was,  instead,  a  holistic  consideration  of  all  the  relevant
   circumstances in order to decide whether there had been such a change of
   circumstances that it was necessary to cancel the extant leave to enter.
    In light of the circumstances which were presented to  the  Immigration
   Officer, it was entirely rational to conclude that there had been such a
   change of circumstances.

Ground Four - Best Interests of the Second Applicant
41. By this ground, it is submitted that  the  respondents  failed  to  take
   proper account of the  best  interests  of  the  second  applicant,  who
   remained a minor at the date of the decisions under  challenge.   It  is
   submitted in particular that the  respondents  failed  to  consider  the
   disruption  to  the  second  applicant's  education,  and  that  further
   enquiries could have been made before cancelling their leave.


42. Mr Malik accepts as he must, at [34]-[35]  of  his  skeleton,  that  the
   respondents neglected in either decision to make reference to  the  best
   interests of the child or to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
   Immigration Act 2009.  Citing AJ (India) [2011] EWCA  Civ  1191;  [2011]
   Imm AR 10, however, he submits that the absence of any such reference is
   not fatal to a decision; what matters is the substance of the  attention
   given to the overall wellbeing of the child.  Adopting that approach, Mr
   Malik submits that the decisions were inevitable.

43. As will already be apparent, I consider that to be  correct.   It  would
   have been preferable, to my mind, if the decision-maker had undertaken a
   best interests assessment in respect of the second  appellant,  weighing
   relevant matters for and against the cancellation of  leave.   Had  that
   taken place, however, the respondents would have considered  the  damage
   to the second applicant's recently-commenced education  in  the  UK  but
   would inevitably have concluded that his best interests were to be  with
   his parents.   As  I  have  sought  to  demonstrate,  that  safeguarding
   presumption underpins the Immigration Rules as a whole.  In the case  of
   children who are sent to boarding school in the UK, there are  different
   safeguards  which  must  be  satisfied.   In  the  case  of  the  second
   applicant, there were no parents,  no  family  home  and  no  identified
   foster carer.  Had a detailed best  interests  assessment  taken  place,
   either on 2 April or 8 May 2018, the outcome would inevitably have  been
   the same.

44. I add this.  The question before the Immigration Officer  and  then  the
   Secretary of State was not whether these two  students  should  ever  be
   allowed to remain in the United Kingdom.  It  was  whether  the  factual
   basis upon which their entry clearance was granted had  been  undermined
   or whether the ECO would have granted entry clearance if  she  had  been
   aware of the circumstances in April 2018.  For the reasons I have given,
   I come to the  clear  conclusion  that  the  decisions  reached  by  the
   respondents were lawful and rational when they concluded that there  had
   been such a change of circumstances that  it  was  appropriate  at  that
   point in time to cancel their leave  to  enter  as  the  Children  of  a
   Relevant  Points  Based  System  Migrant.   That  did  not  prevent  the
   applicants making a future  application  for  entry  clearance.   Either
   applicant would have been at liberty to return to Kuwait  and  to  apply
   for entry clearance under Tier 4 of the Points Based System.  As I  have
   explained, those applications could have been made even if their parents
   wished to remain in Kuwait.  What they could  not  do  was  to  continue
   residing in the UK as the children of a  relevant  PBS  migrant  in  the
   circumstances I have considered above.


45. In the circumstances, this application for judicial review is refused.


                                  ~~~~0~~~~


                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/5466/2018
                                                                JR/4567/2018
                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice



                                  THE QUEEN
                           (on the application of)
                                AUMAS & MAMAS
                                                                  Applicants
                                   - and -

                        IMMIGRATION OFFICER, HEATHROW
                                                            First Respondent
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                           Second Respondent



                    Before Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  Mr  Singh,  of
Counsel, instructed by Amnesty Solicitors, on behalf of  the  Applicant  and
Mr Malik, of Counsel, instructed by  the  Government  Legal  Department,  on
behalf of the Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on  1  October
2019, it is hereby ordered that:

Order
The application for judicial review be dismissed.


Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal
There having been no application, permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
Appeal is refused because there is no arguable error of  law  in  the  Upper
Tribunal's decision.

Costs
The applicants shall pay the respondent's  costs,  to  be  assessed  if  not
agreed

       Signed:         [pic]


                                    Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell




        Dated:         23 October 2019




Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
--------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


                           -----------------------
[1] In which case the leave would lapse under Article 13 (4) of the Leave
to Enter and Remain Order 2000

