


                                    [pic]
   Upper Tribunal
   (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Case Number: JR/5283/2019


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


   |Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 24-26 February 2020                        |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH




                                   Between


                    THE QUEEN ON THE APPLICATION OF "AZ"
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and


                             KENT COUNTY COUNCIL
                                                                  Respondent


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                            Interested Party


      Covid-19 Protocol: This judgment was handed down remotely by
      circulation to the parties' representatives by email, release to
      BAILII and publication on the Courts and Tribunals Judiciary website.
      The date and time for hand-down is deemed to be at 10am on Thursday 26
      March 2020.


   Representation:
   For the Applicant:       Mr T Lay, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
   solicitors
   For the Respondent: Mr S Knafler QC, Counsel instructed by Invicta Law
   solicitors
   The Interested Party did not attend and was not represented


   Anonymity Direction: Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
   Rules 2008
   The Applicant is to be referred to as "AZ".  Unless and until a Tribunal
   or court directs otherwise, the  Applicant  is  granted  anonymity.   No
   report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or
   any member of his family.  This direction applies,  amongst  others,  to
   both parties.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
   contempt of court proceedings.


                                  Judgment


   Introduction


    1. In these proceedings, the Applicant who I  refer  to  throughout  as
       "AZ" challenges the assessment of his age by  the  Respondent  local
       authority.  In short summary, the Applicant  contends  that  he  was
       born in 2001 (1380 in the Afghan calendar) and  is  now  aged  about
       nineteen years old.  The Respondent assesses his age as about twenty-
       one years.   As will be evident from the  foregoing,  it  is  common
       ground that the Applicant is now an adult.


    2. Unusually in this case, what is challenged directly by the  judicial
       review application is not the original  age  assessment.   That  was
       conducted over two meetings on 15 and 24 June 2016 and concluded  by
       a decision also dated 24 June  2016  ("the  Age  Assessment")  which
       assessed the Applicant's age at that time as being seventeen  years.
       The Age Assessment was not challenged at  that  time.   It  is  also
       evident from the Age Assessment that it is common  ground  that  the
       Applicant was at the date of his arrival a child.  Accordingly,  the
       practical effect of the dispute between the parties as to age is the
       length of time during which the Applicant continues  to  be  offered
       leaving care support.


    3. On 22  November  2018,  the  Applicant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the
       Respondent requesting that the local authority carry  out  a  second
       age assessment.  That request was based on  a  psychological  report
       prepared by Dr Rachel Falk ("Dr Falk") to which I will  refer  later
       and observations of Ms Isobel Mehrabian ("Ms  Mehrabian")  contained
       in a witness statement.  I also deal with her evidence later in this
       judgment.


    4. That request was refused following the Respondent's  review  of  the
       Age Assessment which culminated in a decision dated 26 February 2019
       ("the Age Assessment Review") refusing to carry  out  a  second  age
       assessment.  Strictly, it is that decision which is under challenge.
        However, as will become clear from what follows, the effect of  the
       grant of permission in  this  application  is  to  revisit  the  Age
       Assessment notwithstanding  the  passage  of  time  since  that  was
       carried out.


    5. The issue for me to decide is what is the Applicant's date of birth.
        Although the proceedings are based on the Applicant's challenge  to
       the Age Assessment Review, neither party bears any burden of  proof.
       It is for the Tribunal to determine the Applicant's  date  of  birth
       and age on the available evidence (R (A) v LB  Croydon  [2009]  UKSC
       8).  As such, the relief sought in the Applicants claim form, asking
       that the Age Assessment Review be quashed and that the Respondent be
       ordered to carry out a second age assessment  is  inapposite.   That
       was recognised by Mr James Strachan QC (sitting  as  a  Deputy  High
       Court Judge) in his order  dated  30  September  2019.   He  granted
       permission on a single ground only as formulated  and  explained  as
       follows:


           "Permission is granted on one ground only, namely the contention
           that the Defendant's age assessment is wrong as  a  question  of
           fact (see para. 31(a)  of  Claimant's  Statement  of  Facts  and
           Grounds).  This is a question of  precedent  fact.   Whilst  the
           Claimant's  case  looks  weak  in  light  of   the   Defendant's
           assessment,  there  is  no   starting   presumption   that   the
           Defendant's  assessment  is  correct;  the   question   at   the
           permission stage is whether the material before the court raises
           a factual case which, taken at its highest, could  not  properly
           succeed in a contested factual  hearing: applying R(FZ) v London
           Borough of Croydon [2011] EWCA Civ 59  at  [6]-[9].   I  do  not
           consider that this high test for refusal of permission has  been
           met.  Although the Claimant is, even on his  own  account,  over
           the age 18, the Defendant appears to  accept  that  the  correct
           identification of his age is not academic (see  para.11  of  the
           Summary Grounds of Defence).
           I refuse permission to challenge the Defendant's own  assessment
           and subsequent review on any of the  Claimant's  other  grounds.
           For the reasons set out in the Defendant's Summary  Grounds  for
           Defence, the Claimant does not identify any arguable  basis  for
           impugning  the  conduct  of  the  Defendant's   assessment   and
           subsequent review in the way the Claimant seeks to do..."


       The Deputy Judge by that order also transferred the  proceedings  to
       this Tribunal as is common practice.  So it is that the  case  comes
       before me.


      PRELIMINARY ISSUES

    6. Before turning to the legal background and evidence, I deal  with  a
       number of preliminary issues which emerged  before  and  during  the
       proceedings.


    7. The Tribunal gave case management directions on  13  December  2019.
       Those were made by a Judge following a review of the case  file  and
       evidence and required  the  following  persons  to  attend  to  give
       evidence:


           a) The Applicant;
           b) Ms Mehrabian;
           c) Dr Falk;
           d) Melinda Veg.


    8. Following an application made by consent, a further order  dated  23
       December 2019 made provision for the attendance  of  two  additional
       witnesses on behalf of the Respondent -  Mr  Alex  Stringer  and  Mr
       Mario Silva.  Mr Stringer was one of the assessors who conducted the
       Age Assessment (the other being Ms Veg who was also the  Applicant's
       social worker for a short period)  and  Mr  Silva  was  one  of  the
       assessors who conducted the Age Assessment  Review.   I  mention  at
       this stage that it is not current practice of the Tribunal  to  hear
       from those who conduct the age assessments.  It is rarely helpful as
       an age assessment will generally speak for itself (particularly when
       coupled with notes of the  meetings)  and  the  social  workers  who
       conduct the assessments can rarely do more than  confirm  what  they
       observed or concluded at the time.  That is particularly so in  this
       case since the Age Assessment was carried out nearly four years ago.
        Nonetheless, because the Tribunal had sealed the consent  order  on
       this occasion in those terms,  I  agreed  to  hear  from  those  two
       gentlemen.


    9. As it was, Ms Veg was unable to attend  to  give  evidence.   I  was
       provided with a GP's note signing her off work from 5 to 26 February
       2020.  No issue was taken with this evidence.  Accordingly, I accept
       that she was unable to attend for medical reasons.


   10. I was also told that Dr Falk was  unable  to  attend  due  to  other
       commitments.  That was notwithstanding the directions  made  by  the
       Tribunal on 13 December 2019.  The Respondent asked me  to  issue  a
       witness summons.  For reasons I will come to when dealing  with  the
       substance of Dr Falk's evidence below, I indicated that  I  was  not
       prepared to issue that summons.  Nonetheless, because the Respondent
       was critical of both Dr Falk's failure to attend or engage with  the
       Respondent (which it said was disrespectful to the Tribunal and  the
       Respondent) and of the substance of her report, Dr  Falk  was  given
       the opportunity to provide comments in writing on both  aspects.   I
       will deal with her letter dated 26 February 2020 in response to  the
       directions made when I come to look at the medical evidence.


   11. Dr Falk's letter dated 25 February 2020 explained her  inability  to
       attend to give evidence and the criticisms made of  her  failure  to
       respond to the local authority  during  the  age  assessment  review
       process.  She has explained in relation to the proceedings that  she
       always had other commitments on the dates fixed for the hearing  but
       had not been told by the Applicant's solicitors of the dates of  the
       hearing until 22 January 2020 at which point she confirmed that  she
       was unavailable.  She had other personal commitments which she could
       not avoid on Monday and  Tuesday  and  professional  commitments  on
       Wednesday.  I am  satisfied  that  those  were  good  reasons  which
       explained  her  inability  to  attend  and  that  she  intended   no
       disrespect to the Tribunal by non-attendance.  Mr Knafler  similarly
       accepted Dr Falk's explanation in relation to the lack  of  response
       to the  local  authority.   Accordingly,  no  issue  now  arises  in
       relation to Dr Falk's non-attendance.


   12. Finally, by application dated 17 February 2020, the Applicant sought
       to adduce a psychological report written by Mr Robert Sellwood,  BSc
       (Hons), MSc, Cert.Ed, AFBPsS dated 14 February 2020.  On 20 February
       2020, I gave permission for that report to be  adduced.   There  are
       two matters which emerge from that report.   The  first,  concerning
       the substance of the report is dealt with in the section  concerning
       the medical evidence below. With the agreement of both  parties,  Mr
       Sellwood attended to give oral evidence on  the  third  day  of  the
       hearing.


   13. The second  matter  concerns  the  Applicant's  vulnerability.   The
       Applicant's solicitors referred AZ to Mr Sellwood  due  to  concerns
       about  his  capacity  to  provide  instructions  and  give  evidence
       following "serious concerns about the Applicant during a  conference
       on 23 January 2020".  Mr Sellwood concluded that there  was  nothing
       noted during his interview  and  assessment  to  indicate  that  the
       Applicant lacked capacity to participate in litigation or understand
       the ongoing  proceedings.   Mr  Sellwood  also  concluded  that  the
       Applicant had  capacity  to  give  evidence  and  be  cross-examined
       provided that certain measures were put in place "to take account of
       and  minimise  the  impact  of  his  working  memory   and   hearing
       difficulties".  Those measures were as follows:
           a) Using brief questions wherever possible
           b) Avoiding abstract terminology.   Concrete  imagery,  such  as
              pictures, will help [AZ] organise his thoughts
           c) Using open-ended questions wherever possible
           d) Ensuring [AZ] has heard  statements  and  questions  e.g.  by
              asking supplementary questions
           e) Allowing [AZ] additional time to respond while also providing
              prompts (additional time will probably be required for him to
              formulate  answers  although  this  increases  the  risk   of
              immediate memories decaying)
           f) Because his memory is weak, [AZ] may experience gaps  in  his
              understanding of questions, his recollection of his  previous
              answers, and his preparation of a  response  to  the  current
              question.  The interpreter  should  make  brief  bullet-point
              prompts and offer to remind him where appropriate
           g) Providing [AZ] with frequent breaks


   14. Mr Knafler agreed that those measures were sensible and appropriate.
        Notwithstanding that both parties agree that AZ is  now  an  adult,
       the vulnerability potentially identified by both Mr Sellwood and  Dr
       Falk indicated that special measures should be adopted.   Also,  for
       that reason, and notwithstanding the comments  made  by  the  Deputy
       Judge when granting permission, I did not consider it  necessary  to
       review the anonymity direction made in this case which is  therefore
       maintained.


   15. The Applicant was given regular breaks during his evidence either at
       my instigation or of one or other  party  or  at  his  request.   No
       complaint was made by Mr Lay about the manner of questioning  during
       AZ's evidence.  I did observe on a couple of occasions that  AZ  was
       not answering the question asked which might have been  due  to  him
       either misunderstanding that question or forgetting what he had been
       asked but such occasions were rare, and the  question  was  repeated
       for him when he asked.  Otherwise, I did not  observe  any  problems
       with AZ's understanding of the questions or his ability to answer.

      FACTUAL BACKGROUND


   16. AZ is a national of Afghanistan. He comes from Shamshapur,  District
       Surkhrod in Nangarhar province.  He arrived in  the  UK  on  23  May
       2016.  Due to the passage of time since the Age Assessment  (finding
       him to be an adult) and unusually in this case, his asylum claim has
       already  been  determined  and  refused,  on  16  May  2017.   Also,
       unusually, therefore, I have the benefit not only of  the  Secretary
       of State's view as to  the  claim  but  also  findings  made  by  an
       Immigration Judge.  The Applicant's appeal was dismissed  by  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge Turquet in a decision  promulgated  on  12  July
       2017 ("the Tribunal  Decision").   It  is  right  to  note  at  this
       juncture that the Applicant has been given a second right of  appeal
       following the acceptance by the  Secretary  of  State  that  further
       submissions made relying on Dr Falk's evidence in particular  amount
       to a fresh claim.  I understand that this appeal is on hold  pending
       the outcome of these proceedings.


   17. There are a number of inconsistencies in  the  Applicant's  evidence
       concerning not only his age but also the substance of his claim  and
       it is therefore appropriate to deal with the  detail  of  the  claim
       when I come to look at his evidence. In broad  terms,  however,  the
       Applicant says that his father and elder brother  were  killed  some
       years before he left Afghanistan whilst fighting  for  the  Taliban.
       He says that his paternal uncle who is a Taliban leader then  forced
       him to train for the Taliban, including not only  educating  him  in
       its ethos but also teaching him how to fire weapons.  He  also  says
       that he was forced to participate in at least  one  suicide  bombing
       attack but did not carry it out  and  managed  to  escape  with  the
       assistance of his brother-in-law who  arranged  his  travel  out  of
       Afghanistan. He fears that his uncle will once again recruit him  to
       the Taliban if he returns.


   18. The Applicant's journey to the UK was not a long one.  He  travelled
       by two plane flights to France.  He then  stayed  in  France  for  a
       couple of weeks with a second agent and was brought by that agent to
       the UK.  He arrived in the UK  a  matter  of  weeks  after  he  left
       Afghanistan.


   19. The Applicant claims to know his age and  year  of  birth  from  his
       mother who told him this and that it was important to remember  this
       information.  He also claims to know the ages of his  siblings.   In
       addition to the elder brother who  was  killed,  he  has  two  elder
       sisters, a younger sister and a younger brother.  He says  that  his
       mother had his date of birth and that of his siblings  written  down
       in a notebook.  He also says that he was vaccinated after his birth.
        He says that this could only have happened in his home  area  after
       US troops entered Afghanistan.


   20.  The  Applicant  says  that  he  has  had  two  Tazkiras   (identity
       documents).  The first was one which he says he saw about  three  to
       three and a half years before he left Afghanistan.  The  second  was
       obtained by his brother-in-law when the Applicant  left  Afghanistan
       in order to secure a passport.  The Applicant did not produce either
       document.


   21. As I have already indicated, the Age  Assessment  was  conducted  in
       June 2016. I will come to the detail of the Age  Assessment  in  due
       course.  However,  I  note  that,  on  arrival,  the  Applicant  was
       assessed in accordance with his claimed age  and  placed  in  foster
       care.  The Applicant then contracted malaria  within  days  and  was
       hospitalised.  Concerns were raised at that stage by hospital  staff
       in addition to the foster carer and the local authority whether  the
       Applicant was the age he was claiming to be or was older.  It was as
       a result of those concerns  that  he  was  age  assessed.   The  Age
       Assessment was not challenged at that time  and  the  Applicant  has
       therefore been treated in accordance with  his  assessed  age  since
       then.  As I have  already  noted,  the  Age  Assessment  Review  was
       conducted in February 2019.  I will come to that insofar  as  it  is
       necessary to do so in due course.


      LEGAL FRAMEWORK


   22. In R (A) v Croydon LBC [2009] UKSC 8 ("A"), the Supreme  Court  held
       that if, after assessment of a young person's age there  remained  a
       dispute between that person and a local authority, it is  ultimately
       for the Court to assess the  young  person's  age  as  a  matter  of
       jurisdictional fact.  At [26] - [27] of the judgment, Baroness  Hale
       expressed the basis of that decision as follows:


            "[26] The question whether a child is in need requires a  number
           of different value judgements...... where the issue is not, what
           order should the court make, but what service should  the  local
           authority provide, it is  entirely  reasonable  to  assume  that
           Parliament intended such evaluative questions to  be  determined
           by the public authority, subject to the control of the courts on
           the ordinary principles of judicial review.  Within  the  limits
           of fair process and "Wednesbury" unreasonableness there  are  no
           clear cut right or wrong answers.
            [27]  But the question whether  a  person  is  a  "child"  is  a
           different kind of question. There is a right or a wrong  answer.
           It may be difficult to  determine  what  that  answer  is.   The
           decision-makers may have to do their best on the basis  of  less
           than perfect or conclusive evidence.  But that is true  of  many
           questions of fact which regularly come before the courts.   That
           does not prevent them from being questions for the courts rather
           than other kinds of decision-makers"


   23. In relation to the manner in which the Tribunal should determine the
       issue whether a person is a  child,  the  following  passage  is  of
       relevance:


            "[33] The final arguments raised against such a  conclusion  are
           of a practical kind.  The only remedy  is  judicial  review  and
           this is  not  well  suited  to  the  determination  of  disputed
           questions of fact.  This is true but it can be  adapted  if  the
           need arises....That the  remedy  is  judicial  review  does  not
           dictate the issue for the court to decide or the way in which it
           should do so, as the cases on  jurisdictional  fact  illustrate.
           Clearly, as those cases also illustrate, the  public  authority,
           whether the children's  services  authority  or  the  UK  Border
           Agency, has to make its own determination in the first  instance
           and it is only if this remains disputed that the court may  have
           to intervene.   But  the  better  the  quality  of  the  initial
           decision-making, the less likely it is that the court will  come
           to any different conclusion on the evidence..."


   24. Lord Hope in his concurring judgment explained this further at  [51]
       as follows:


           "It seems to me that the question whether or not a person  is  a
           child... is a question of fact which must ultimately be  decided
           by the court. There is no  denying  the  difficulties  that  the
           social worker is likely to face in carrying out an assessment of
           the question whether an unaccompanied asylum seeker is or is not
           under the age of 18.  Reliable documentary  evidence  is  almost
           always lacking in such cases. So the process has to  be  one  of
           assessment.  This involves the  application  of  judgment  on  a
           variety of factors...But the question is not whether the  person
           can properly be described as a child....The question is  whether
           the person is,  or  is  not,  under  the  age  of  18.   However
           difficult it may be to resolve the issue, it admits of only  one
           answer.  As it is a question of fact, ultimately this must be  a
           matter for the court"


       As Baroness Hale also observed, though, "the better the  quality  of
       the initial decision-making, the less likely it is  that  the  court
       will come to any different decision upon the evidence."


   25. The Supreme Court was silent on the question of who bears the burden
       of proof. This issue was determined by the Court of  Appeal  in  the
       case of R(CJ) v Cardiff City Council [2011] EWCA  Civ  1590  ("CJ").
       There, the Court of Appeal held that in conducting an age assessment
       hearing, the court is exercising its supervisory jurisdiction and in
       so doing applying the rule of law.  Neither  party  is  required  to
       prove the precedent fact.  Neither party bears the burden of  proof.
       The role of the Tribunal is an inquisitorial one  to  decide,  on  a
       balance of probabilities whether or not the Applicant is a minor and
       what is his current age.  In so doing, it is open to the Tribunal to
       reach a different view from both the claimed age  and  the  assessed
       age.


   26. None of the above is disputed.   It  is  accepted  by  both  parties
       therefore that the Tribunal's task is to decide as a matter of  fact
       and on the balance of probabilities AZ's age  and  precise  date  of
       birth.  The Tribunal's function is an inquisitorial one with neither
       side bearing the burden of proof.  However, as was said by Pitchford
       LJ in CJ, at [21]:


           "a distinction needs to be made between a legal burden of proof,
           on the one hand, and the sympathetic assessment of  evidence  on
           the other.  I accept that in evaluating the evidence it may well
           be inappropriate to expect from the claimant conclusive evidence
           of age in circumstances in which he has arrived  unattended  and
           without  original  identity  documents.   The  nature   of   the
           evaluation of evidence will depend upon the particular facts  of
           the case."


   27. As such, and as set out by the Tribunal in  R  (AS)  v  Kent  County
       Council [2017] UKUT  00446  (IAC),  there  is  a  benefit  of  doubt
       principle which applies in the following manner:


           "[20]...application of the benefit of the doubt is nothing  more
           than an acknowledgement that age assessment cannot be  concluded
           with 100% accuracy, absent definitive documentary evidence,  and
           is in the case of unaccompanied asylum-seeking children who  may
           also have been traumatised, unlikely to be  supported  by  other
           evidence.  On that basis, its proper application is that  where,
           having considered the evidence,  the  decision  maker  concludes
           there is doubt as to whether an individual is over  18  or  not,
           then in those circumstances, the decision-maker should  conclude
           that the applicant is under 18.
            [21] Thus, the benefit of the doubt  is  not  of  use  where  a
           specific date or age has to be determined except insofar  as  it
           requires a sympathetic assessment of the evidence  as  indicated
           in CJ v Cardiff."


   28. In relation to the approach to assessing  the  evidence,  the  Upper
       Tribunal gave general guidance in R  (AM)  v  Solihull  Metropolitan
       Borough Council (AAJR) [2012] UKUT (IAC) (which  was  cited  by  the
       Court of Appeal with approval in Bedford CC v  GE  (Eritrea)  [2017]
       EWCA Civ 1521) as follows:


            "15. In the present case the evidence is wide ranging.  It  may
           therefore be appropriate to make some general observations about
           the impact of the evidence of various  sorts  and  from  various
           sources in this type of case.  First, we think that  almost  all
           evidence of physical characteristics is likely  to  be  of  very
           limited value.  That is  because,  as  pointed  out  by  Kenneth
           Parker J in R(R) v Croydon [2011] EWHC 1473 (Admin) there is  no
           clear  relationship  between  chronological  age  and   physical
           maturity in respect of most measurable aspects of such maturity.
            ....
            19.  Our second observation  relates  to  mental  maturity  and
           demeanour...  So far as demeanour is concerned, it seems  to  us
           that there may be value to  be  obtained  from  observations  of
           demeanour and interaction with others made over a long period of
           time by those who have  opportunity  to  observe  an  individual
           ongoing about his ordinary life.  But we find  it  difficult  to
           see  that  any  useful  observations  of  demeanour  or   social
           interaction or maturity can be made in the  course  of  a  short
           interview between an individual and a strange adult.  There  may
           of course be cultural difficulties  in  such  an  interview  but
           there are the ordinary social difficulties as well.
            20.  The asserted expertise of a social  worker  conducting  an
           interview is not in our judgement sufficient to counteract those
           difficulties.  A person such as  a  teacher  or  even  a  family
           member, who can point to consistent attitudes, and a  number  of
           supporting instances over a  considerable  period  of  time,  is
           likely to carry weight that observations made in the  artificial
           surroundings of an interview cannot carry.
            21.  Reactions from the individual's peers are also  likely  to
           be of assistance if they are available.  We do not suggest  that
           other young people are qualified specifically to  give  evidence
           about the age of a colleague  of  theirs,  nor  should  they  be
           encouraged to do so. But those who work  with  groups  of  young
           people see how they react with one another and it  seems  to  us
           likely that evidence of such interaction, if available, may well
           assist  in  making  an  age  assessment,  particularly  if   any
           necessary allowances for cultural differences can be made.
            22.  Thirdly, we have, like others,  used  the  phrase  "expert
           evidence" as a description of the evidence of the social workers
           called to support the claimant's case.  It  is,  however,  worth
           pointing out that expert evidence  has,  as  such,  no  specific
           place in Tribunal procedure.  In court proceedings, governed  by
           rules of evidence, however tenuous they  may  now  be  in  civil
           cases, the person demonstrating qualifications as an  expert  is
           thereby entitled to give evidence which  may  contain  opinions,
           and may be based  on  hearsay.   Neither  opinion  evidence  nor
           hearsay evidence is excluded from Tribunal  proceedings.   There
           is therefore no specific status for  an  expert.   Nevertheless,
           witnesses are tendered on the basis of their expertise,  and  we
           accept that what they have to say may be more  or  less  helpful
           according  to  their  expertise.   But  in  our  judgment,   the
           assistance they can give us is even more closely linked to  what
           it is that they have to say, and their basis for saying it."


   29. Further guidance was provided by Alexandra Marks  QC  sitting  as  a
       Deputy High Court Judge in R (on the application of GE  (Eritrea)  v
       Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  and  Bedford  Borough
       Council [2015] EWHC 1406 (Admin) ("GE (Eritrea)") as follows:


            "[73]      Like the Tribunal in AM v Solihull, I am unconvinced
           of the value of observations of demeanour made  during  a  short
           interview between an individual and strange adults.  People  can
           behave in a formal interview in a way  that  is  very  different
           from their normal behaviour, perhaps because they  are  nervous,
           afraid, intimidated  or  simply  want  the  experience  to  end.
           Despite the purported expertise of the social worker leading the
           interview in this case, there seems to me to have  been  lacking
           an appropriate level of insight, sensitivity and judgment [...].
           In my  view  it  would  normally  be  unsafe  to  reach  an  age
           assessment  largely  based   on   an   interviewee's   behaviour
           (including a purported  reluctance  to  share  information)  but
           particularly so in this case.
            [74] The same  applies  to  physical  appearance.   The  Merton
           guidelines (as refined by FZ, and summarised in AS)  make  clear
           that assessors should take a history from the  interviewee,  and
           make an holistic assessment, taking all  relevant  factors  into
           account.  Physical appearance should never form a  major  reason
           for an age assessment yet GE's appearance seems to have  weighed
           heavily with the second  age  assessors,  as  evidenced  by  the
           summary of reasons they gave the Council."


   30. As that passage identifies, and I accept, an assessment of AZ's  age
       involves a holistic assessment of all the  evidence.   However,  the
       weight which is to be attached to each piece of evidence is  for  me
       to determine.


   31. Whilst there was some dispute  as  to  whether  social  workers  can
       really be termed  "experts"  in  relation  to  the  process  of  age
       assessment, the Applicant relying in this  regard  on  the  Scottish
       case of Petition of ISA, Re Judicial Review [2012] ScotCS CSOH  134,
       I do not consider it  necessary  to  determine  that  dispute.   The
       highest that the Respondent puts it is that social workers  fall  to
       be treated as experts because "[a]n expert axiomatically is a person
       whose qualifications and/or experience entitle them  to  express  an
       opinion about a matter in issue in the proceedings".  That is to  be
       distinguished from witnesses of fact who are not entitled to express
       an opinion.  There is no doubt that what is  helpful  evidence  from
       social workers is a matter of opinion and not  usually  fact  so  to
       that extent, they are experts.  However, I  did  not  understand  Mr
       Knafler to disagree that the weight to be placed on  their  opinion,
       as with any other evidence, is a matter  for  me  as  the  Judge  to
       determine.


   32. The parties also agreed that  credibility  of  the  witnesses  is  a
       relevant consideration.  In that regard, in GE (Eritrea), the Deputy
       Judge said this:


            "[28]      Given the impossibility of any decision maker  being
           able to make an objectively verifiable determination of the  age
           of an applicant who may be in the age range of, say, 16  to  20,
           it is necessary to take a history from him or her with a view to
           determining whether it is true. A history that  is  accepted  as
           true and is consistent with an age  below  18  will  enable  the
           decision maker in such a case to decide that the applicant is  a
           child. Conversely, however, an untrue history,  while  relevant,
           is not necessarily indicative of a lie as  to  the  age  of  the
           applicant. Lies may be told for  reasons  unconnected  with  the
           applicant's case as to his age, for example to avoid his  return
           to his country of origin. Furthermore, physical  appearance  and
           behaviour cannot be isolated from the question of  the  veracity
           of the applicant: appearance, behaviour and the  credibility  of
           his account are all matters that reflect on each other."


   33. The point that an untrue history is not necessarily indicative of  a
       lie as to age finds mention also in other cases.   For  example,  in
       MVN v London Borough of Greenwich [2015] EWHC 1942 (Admin), Picken J
       said this (referring to the Merton guidelines):


            "21
            ...
            (4)   General credibility is not to be determinative of age.  It
           is more likely that  a  young  person  who  tells  a  consistent
           account of his life which supports his claimed age will  be  the
           age he claims to be.   Conversely,  young  people  may  lie  for
           reasons unrelated  to  age  but  related  to  their  claims  for
           protection or the reasons they had to  leave  their  country  of
           origin.
            ...
            27.   It would, therefore, appear that the primary focus  is  on
           the credibility of the person's evidence concerning his  or  her
           age, but that it is permissible to have  regard  to  credibility
           more generally provided that, in  looking  at  credibility  more
           generally, the primary focus to which I  have  referred  is  not
           forgotten. In short, the difference between Miss  Luh  and  Miss
           Screeche-Powell is not as acute as it might at  one  stage  have
           appeared. This was effectively acknowledged by Miss Luh  in  her
           closing skeleton argument,  where  she  prayed  in  aid  various
           authorities which have dealt with the  correct  approach  to  be
           applied in  relation  to  credibility  assessments  when  asylum
           claims are made. Miss  Luh  explained  that  she  accepted  that
           general credibility needs to be factored into the evaluation  of
           the claimant made by the Court, but maintained (rightly,  in  my
           view) that there needs nevertheless to be care taken  so  as  to
           ensure that particular importance is afforded to the credibility
           of evidence in relation to age."


   34. I have the above principles firmly  in  mind  when  considering  the
       evidence in this case.


      EVIDENCE AND ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE

   35. I have bundles of evidence jointly agreed, tabbed  [A]  to  [I].   I
       have read the material contained therein  but  refer  only  to  that
       which is relevant to my assessment.  References below  to  documents
       are to pages within those bundles.

      The Applicant's Case


      AZ's evidence


   36. I have before me the following witness statements signed by AZ:
           . Undated ([I53-55]): in relation to his asylum claim;
           . 10 June 2017 ([I48-52]): concerning his asylum claim;
           . 9 November 2018 ([I36-47]): in support of  the  request  for  a
             review of the Age Assessment/further submissions for asylum;
           . 6 June 2019 ([I29-34]): in relation to second asylum appeal;
           .  29 October 2019  ([I20-22]):  in  relation  to  second  asylum
             appeal;
           . 19 November 2019 ([I16-19]): in relation to these proceedings;
           . 3 February 2020 ([I2-5]): in relation to these proceedings.


   37. AZ gave oral evidence via a Pashtu speaking interpreter.  He and the
       interpreter confirmed that they understood each other and there were
       no difficulties of interpretation in the course  of  AZ's  evidence.
       Although the Tribunal's interpreter was corrected on one occasion by
       AZ's own interpreter, the court interpreter accepted the  correction
       and no  further  difficulties  were  identified.   I  refer  to  the
       contents of the statements and AZ's oral evidence  only  so  far  as
       relevant.  I have however had regard to all the evidence given by AZ
       when reaching my decision.


   38. I begin with AZ's evidence about how it is that he  knows  his  age.
       He says that he was told by his mother before  he  left  Afghanistan
       that he was at that time aged fifteen years.  In his statement dated
       3 February 2020, he says this:


            "2.  I wish to confirm that I believe that I  am  currently  19
           years old.  I believe that I was born in 2001.   My  mother  has
           told me this and I have no reason to distrust her.  She told  me
           I was 15 before I left Afghanistan.
            3.   My mother told me that I was born during  the  hot  season
           and more precisely during the hottest  months.   This  would  be
           either 'Sarataan or Jawza' which are the equivalent of June  and
           July in the Georgian Calendar.
            4.   I remember, one day when I was a child  my  entire  family
           gathered at my  house  and  everyone  made  comments  about  the
           darkness of my skin.  They acknowledged that my skin was  darker
           than theirs.  My mother laughed and said that my skin is so dark
           because I was born during the hot season.
            5.   Another reason I know my year of birth is that  my  mother
           told me  that  I  was  born  the  year  the  Americans  came  to
           Afghanistan.  She told me that when I was a baby she took me  to
           the  hospital  in  Jalalabad  to  receive   vaccinations.    The
           Americans inoculated me and gave her advice about vaccinations.
            6.   I also remember that at home we had an orange  and  yellow
           vaccination card where dates were written.  This card  gave  the
           dates of my previous vaccinations and when I would  need  to  be
           vaccinated in future.  My mother used  to  have  a  notebook  in
           which she kept important information.
            7.   I remember seeing my Tazkira which is the Afghan  identity
           card.  What made me very excited was to see my  picture  on  the
           document.  I lived in a village and it was not  very  common  to
           see cameras or photographs.  I remember going to Jalalabad  City
           to get my photograph taken.  This photo appeared on my  Tazkira.
           This was very exciting.  I think that this  was  the  same  year
           that I left Afghanistan."


   39. There are a number of pointers as to dates in what  is  there  said.
       Dealing first with the year that the US entered  Afghanistan,  there
       has been no dispute to that being in late 2001.  That is  consistent
       with the Applicant's claimed year of birth.


   40. The Applicant has produced a letter dated 31 January  2020  from  Dr
       Ayesha Ahmad Ph.D, Lecturer in Global Health, St Georges  University
       London ([I7-9]).  Her letter refers to  four  documents.   None  are
       produced.   I  have  therefore  only  been  able  to  read  the  two
       electronic documents in full.  The first indicates that  a  national
       system of vaccination against polio in  fact  began  in  1994.   The
       second is a much  more  recent  document  which  suggests  that  the
       Taliban was opposed to vaccinations but has since permitted the  WHO
       to carry out vaccinations  in  its  occupied  regions.   Dr  Ahmad's
       letter reads as follows:


           "The historical challenges of conflict in Afghanistan created  a
           challenging context for immunization programs, with  significant
           further disruption in the late 1990s under the Taliban regime.
           Consequently,  in  2001,  the  Ministry  of  Public  Health   in
           Afghanistan needed to build a new healthcare system and  a  'new
           innovative mechanism of  contracting  out  delivery  of  primary
           health care services in Afghanistan, including immunization,  to
           non-governmental  organisations'  (Mugali  et  al,   2017)   was
           implemented.
           At  the  time  of  2001,  the  Ministry  of  Public  Health   in
           Afghanistan was working alongside UNICEF and  the  World  Health
           Organisation (WHO) (Gupta et al, 2011), which are  international
           organisations  and  would   have   included   non-Afghan   staff
           membership.
           Given the challenges of accessing healthcare due to the  effects
           of conflict, outreach  and  community  programs  were  the  most
           likely source of administering vaccinations to children in  hard
           to access areas due to poor infrastructure and  farming  regions
           such as Surkh-Rod district in Nangarhar province.
           In 2001, Nangarhar  was  the  main  province  where  vaccination
           programs   were   being   administered   in   combination   with
           international organisations, although the  vaccination  programs
           were also carried out all over Afghanistan.
            The following vaccines were provided:
           BCG (...to protect against tuberculosis) - administered as close
           to the time of birth as possible
            Measles - first dose given at 12-15 months of age
            TT2 - to protect against tetanus in children aged  7  years  or
       older.
            Diphtheria - given at 8, 12 and 16 weeks, and then again during
       infanthood.
            Polio - four doses at 2 months, 4 months, 6-18 months old and 4-
       6 years old.
           Vaccination programs  are  an  important  part  of  humanitarian
           health interventions during conflict, given  the  public  health
           concerns related to  unvaccinated  children  and  the  need  for
           international  assistance.   This  is  especially  the  case  in
           Afghanistan because vaccinations such as Polio  were  banned  by
           the Taliban, of which was only lifted in  September  2019  (RFE,
           2019),   and   thus   greater   assistance   from   humanitarian
           interventions were required to ensure babies and  children  were
           protected from preventable disease."


   41. I accept that this provides some support to the Applicant's  claimed
       year  of  birth.   However,  it  is  not  clear  that   "significant
       disruption" in the late 1990s meant that no such  vaccinations  were
       taking  place  (given  the  underlying  evidence  that  a   national
       programme was in place from 1994) and nor does her evidence  support
       an assertion that it would be the US carrying out  the  vaccinations
       in 2001.   It  would  perhaps  be  surprising  that,  following  the
       invasion in late 2001, they would be in  control  of  hospitals  and
       vaccinations within that year as AZ's evidence tends to suggest  but
       it may be simply that it was the international  organisations  which
       Dr Ahmad mentions who were carrying out the vaccinations.  That begs
       the additional  question  though  concerning  the  date  when  those
       organisations began to offer such vaccinations as Dr Ahmad says only
       that such programmes "were being administered" in Nangarhar in  2001
       and not when those started. That the US was in Afghanistan  when  AZ
       says he was vaccinated does not tell me either what age he was  when
       that occurred.  If vaccinations were not permitted  by  the  Taliban
       when he was born (if he were his assessed age), that does  not  mean
       that  he  was  not  vaccinated  later  when  the  US   had   entered
       Afghanistan.  However, I may be able  to  give  this  evidence  some
       limited weight in support of the Applicant's case.


   42. On the other hand, though, the only evidence that AZ was  vaccinated
       as he claims comes from him.  The  vaccination  card  has  not  been
       produced.  AZ told the assessors for the Age Assessment that he  had
       a BCG scar on his arm which might support his  case.   The  evidence
       whether he in fact had such a scar is conflicting.   Dr  Turvill  at
       [D/5] notes a scar which AZ attributed to a vaccination and which Dr
       Turvill says is  typical  of  this.   However,  the  initial  health
       assessment report at [D/77] indicates that AZ had  no  BCG  scar  on
       arrival.  Furthermore, according to a  letter  from  a  Dr  Githinji
       dated 20 June 2016 ([H/468]),  AZ  did  not  know  his  immunisation
       status and for that reason immunisations were considered  necessary.
       There is perhaps no conflict between the  health  assessment  report
       and Dr Turvill's report if AZ was in fact vaccinated in the UK after
       his arrival as Dr Turvill did not see AZ until  quite  recently.   I
       cannot tell from the medical notes whether any vaccinations were  in
       fact carried out in the UK.


   43. The other document to which the Applicant  refers  is  his  Tazkira.
       The Applicant's own evidence about that document is  unsatisfactory.
       AZ was asked about his Tazkira during the first  interview  for  the
       Age Assessment.  He said that it showed that he was born in 1380 and
       was aged fifteen years.  He said he saw  it  at  the  house  of  his
       brother-in-law's friend just before he left  Afghanistan.   However,
       he then clarified that he had seen another Tazkira which  said  that
       he was aged twelve years.  In answer to the question  why  he  would
       get a second Tazkira, he said it was "because it said I was 12 and I
       could not get a passport with this".


   44. AZ was asked about the Tazkiras during his oral evidence.   He  said
       that his age was in his  original  Tazkira  and  that  his  age  was
       fifteen years, but his sister's husband got the  second  Tazkira  to
       get the passport.   When he was asked by me to  clarify  whether  it
       was the original or second Tazkira (which I have  recorded  he  said
       was "fake") which gave his age as fifteen, he confirmed it  was  the
       original one and that he had seen that some three  years  before  he
       left.


   45. When AZ was asked during the first age assessment interview, how  it
       was that his brother-in-law could get a Tazkira stating that he  was
       a different age and whether anyone could do that, he said  that  was
       the case.  He clarified however  that  a  second  Tazkira  could  be
       obtained using a registration number  from  the  first  registration
       which would then show what age a person was on  a  particular  date.
       In other words, the second Tazkira was a replacement for the  first.
       It may be that some confusion has arisen as to  whether  the  second
       Tazkira was the same as the original  which  may  have  led  to  the
       answer that AZ gave orally.  However, that is  difficult  to  square
       with his answer to my question specifically querying whether it  was
       the first or second Tazkira which gave his age as fifteen.


   46. I also find AZ's evidence about the Tazkiras unsatisfactory  because
       even if it was the second Tazkira which gave his age as fifteen  and
       not the first, he says that the  first  Tazkira  was  obtained  some
       three to  three  and  a  half  years  before  he  left  Afghanistan.
       However, on his account, he was in a Taliban training camp three  to
       three and a half years before he left Afghanistan.


   47. I appreciate that this is not a point which was put to AZ and  there
       may be some explanation.  I would find it surprising if the  Taliban
       would present a minor in their charge to the authorities to obtain a
       formal identity document but that is not to say that  it  could  not
       happen.


   48. Nonetheless, the other conflicts in AZ's evidence as to the Tazkiras
       mean that I can give no weight to  this  aspect  of  his  case  when
       determining his age.  Neither Tazkira has been produced in evidence.




   49. Before leaving  the  Tazkira  issue,  I  also  record  Mr  Knafler's
       observation made during AZ's oral evidence that the  document  which
       his brother-in-law, [J], obtained for him whether it had  a  red  or
       green cover was not an Afghan passport.  As Mr Knafler pointed  out,
       therefore, it was difficult to see why [J]  needed  to  get  another
       Tazkira at all.


   50. Dealing then with what AZ's mother told him about his  age,  I  have
       already recorded what he says  in  his  witness  statement  dated  3
       February 2020.   During  the  first  age  assessment  interview,  he
       clarified that his mother looked at her notebook and  said  that  he
       was born in 1380 and "should remember this because [he] should  know
       this".   He says that she told him this before he  said  goodbye  to
       her and before leaving Afghanistan.  He said in  his  oral  evidence
       that his mother said that it was important for him to know his  age,
       but he did not say why.


   51. AZ also confirmed that notwithstanding the  asserted  importance  of
       his age, he did not bring a copy of the notebook in which his mother
       had recorded his and his siblings' years of birth nor  his  Tazkiras
       because he did not know they would  be  needed.  He  said  that  the
       documents with which he left Afghanistan were taken from him  during
       his journey by someone who appears from his description to have been
       an agent.


   52. It is not clear why AZ's mother would have told him that his age was
       important when he left Afghanistan.  It may be that she was aware of
       his age and what she told him was accurate.   Equally,  however,  it
       may be that she was aware that AZ would need to portray  himself  as
       of a certain age either during the journey or when he arrived at his
       destination for whatever reason.


   53. It was said by AZ for example, that the reason why [J] obtained  the
       second Tazkira was because the one he had gave his age as twelve and
       he would not have been able to obtain a passport to  travel  out  of
       Afghanistan unaccompanied by his parents at that age (see first  age
       assessment interview at [C/107].  Again,  it  may  be  that  AZ  was
       indeed fifteen or he may have been told to say that, both to support
       what was said to be on the second Tazkira or the  passport,  and  so
       that no questions would  be  asked  about  the  whereabouts  of  his
       parents.  Otherwise, I can see no reason why his mother  would  have
       thought it important for him to know  his  age  at  that  stage  (as
       compared perhaps with the time when he started school - see below).


   54. In relation to the year of his birth,  the  Applicant  relies  on  a
       statement from his solicitor signed on 18 February 2020 which  shows
       that the year 1380 equates to 21 March 2001 to 20 February 2002  and
       is therefore consistent with  the  Applicant  being  born  in  early
       summer 2001.  However, that too must be based  either  on  what  his
       mother told him or what he says was on his Tazkira.  If  his  mother
       thought it important that he should remember  that  he  was  fifteen
       when he left Afghanistan, she would no doubt ensure that he was also
       told and remembered the correct year for his birth.   Similarly,  in
       relation to consistency of age and year of birth in his Tazkira.


   55. There is a discrepancy in AZ's evidence as to the age  he  was  when
       his father and brother were killed.  He has said  consistently  that
       they were killed five years before he came to the UK.  He says  that
       he was then taken by his paternal uncle and trained with the Taliban
       for five years, three years at the  Madrassa  and  two  years  being
       trained how to use weapons.


   56. AZ was interviewed by the Home Office  in  relation  to  his  asylum
       claim on 24 April 2017.  The interview record appears at [E/118]  to
       [E/135].   At questions [19] to [21] the following exchange appears:


            "19. What level of education do you have?
            I went to a madrassa back home.
            20.  How long did you go for?
            3 years
            21.  So when did you finish attending?
           When my father died I was 13, my uncle stopped me going  to  the
           madrassa and he took me with him to train me using arms."


   57. The assertion that AZ was thirteen when his father and brother  were
       killed appears also in a human rights assessment  conducted  by  the
       local authority in April/May 2018 ("the  Human  Rights  Assessment")
       ([C21-50]).  I note in passing that the age  of  thirteen  would  be
       consistent with AZ still living with his family in his village  when
       he obtained his first  Tazkira  and  before  going  to  the  Taliban
       training camp.


   58. The Human Rights Assessment was  conducted  in  order  to  ascertain
       whether there would be any breach of the Applicant's human rights if
       the Respondent were to withdraw its support, as it did  with  effect
       from 27 July 2018.


   59. Mr Lay submitted that what the Human Rights Assessment there says is
       not clearly a further assertion by AZ that he was thirteen  at  that
       time and might be taken from the asylum interview  (which  was  also
       the basis for the finding  to  that  effect  in  the  asylum  appeal
       decision).    I do not accept that submission.  Read as a whole, the
       Human Rights Assessment  clearly  identifies  where  information  is
       taken from other sources, such as Home Office  records  or  from  Mr
       Mark Towse (then AZ's social worker). Where that is  not  the  case,
       the  Human  Rights  Assessment  indicates  that   [AZ]   "reported",
       "stated", "highlighted" or "informed".  Read in that context,  there
       is no reason to consider that the "reported" recorded at  [C/24]  in
       relation to the age AZ was when his father and brother  were  killed
       is other than direct evidence from AZ.


   60. I accept that in the first age assessment interview, AZ stated  that
       he was aged ten when his father and brother were  killed,  and  this
       was repeated in his witness statement  dated  10  June  2017.   That
       statement was written in response to the asylum refusal letter.   AZ
       claims that he did not say that he was thirteen years  old.   It  is
       though clear at [17(e)] of that statement that AZ is  able  to  make
       the connection between the age he was when his  father  and  brother
       died and his chronological age.  What he does not do is  to  explain
       how the error arose.   He did not correct the interview at the  time
       or immediately thereafter.  I also note that in his statement  dated
       9 November 2018, AZ says  at  [6]  ([I/37])  that  "when  my  father
       died... I can't remember exactly how old I was.  I think I was about
       10 years old but I can't be sure.  I have problems with  my  memory,
       particularly dates."


   61. When AZ was asked about the discrepancy between the two ages  during
       his oral evidence, he said that he  did  not  have  a  solicitor  or
       support worker with him at the asylum interview.  He was  asked  how
       that could have made a difference to him  telling  the  truth.    He
       said only that it would have made him "feel strong  to  have  people
       next to [him]". It was pointed out to him that  he  had  two  social
       workers with him at the Human Rights  Assessment  meeting  including
       Mark Towse with whom he had a good relationship.   He  did  not  say
       that he was not asked the question and  had  not  given  the  answer
       recorded.  He simply said that this did not mean  that  he  was  not
       thirteen.  He said that he could not read or  understand  the  Human
       Rights Assessment (even though he had solicitors at that time).




   62. AZ's attention was drawn also to the Age Assessment Review.  He  was
       asked at that time about his disclosure that he was  thirteen  years
       old when his father and brother died.   The  following  exchange  is
       recorded ([A/31]):


           "MS [Mario Silva]: You disclosed both to Home  Office  officials
           on 24/04/2017 and Human Rights Act assessors on 24/08/2018  that
           you were 13 years old in 2012.  That would mean that you are now
           between 20 and 21 years old.
           AZ: I might have said this, but when I  was  in  Afghanistan,  I
           don't know what is 2002 and 2012. I don't want  to  argue  about
           this anymore.
            MS: I found discrepancies and I would  like  to  give  you  the
       opportunity to respond.
           AZ: The Home Office and KCC will know  better  because  in  2016
           when that interview took place I was not feeling well.. it was a
           long interview and I don't remember the whole information that I
           shared with the Home Office (HO).  My Teacher knows that the  HO
           are conducting the substantive interview, there were no SWs  and
           Solicitor during that  time.   It  was  an  extremely  traumatic
           experience for attending the substantive interview at Mill  Bank
           as he was living in Sheerness changing  quite  a  few  buses  to
           reach Mill Bank.
           MS: You mention this information again in 2017 and then in  2018
           at your Human Rights interview.
           AZ: My teacher knows that in  2017  when  the  HO  conducted  my
           interview in Millbank there was not a solicitor  or  SW  at  the
           meeting.
            MS: In August 2018 you  relied  the  same  information  to  HRA
       assessor.
            AZ: OK that's fine then."


   63. There is some link between the age AZ says he was  when  his  father
       and brother died and his education in  Afghanistan.   AZ  was  asked
       about his education during the first age assessment interview.   The
       following exchange is recorded:


            "MV [Melinda Veg] - What age were you when you started school?
            AZ - Not really but I think I was 7.
            MV - So it is a guess, that maybe you were 7?
            AZ - No I was 7 because my mother wrote this information down.
            MV - So you are certain you were 7 when you started school?
            AZ - Yes I am certain.
            MV - So what age were you when you left school?
            AZ - I was 10 when my father and brother got killed"


   64. In his undated witness statement, AZ says that he  was  educated  at
       the local Madrassa.  In his statement dated 3 February 2020 he  says
       ([I/3]) that "I believe that I  passed  year  one  and  two  at  the
       Madrassa in approximately one year [although it  could  be  slightly
       more and slightly less].  As I said previously I left  the  Madrassa
       in Year Three after approximately 8 months.  That was the end of  my
       studies in Afghanistan". That evidence does not sit comfortably with
       what was said in the first age assessment interview about the length
       of time he spent in school.


   65. When it was put to AZ during his oral evidence that he was  thirteen
       when his  father  died  and  had  spent  five  years  thereafter  in
       Afghanistan, AZ replied "I respect your suggestion but I did not say
       I was thirteen years old and spent five years there.  I repeat again
       that I was ten years old.  I spent five years  which  reach  fifteen
       years old".  He was referred to his November 2018 statement at [13]
       ([I/37]) where he said that he could not remember how  long  he  had
       spent in the Taliban camp as "[t]here was no way of keeping track of
       time, like through a calendar, watch or a  mobile  phone".   He  was
       asked why he had said that when at other times he was clear that  he
       had been with his uncle for five years.  He  replied  that  he  knew
       when his father had passed away and he was  there  for  five  years.
       When asked how he knew that it was five years and not six or  seven,
       he replied that "I remember when I was seven years old,  I  went  to
       the Madrassa for three years.  At the end  of  three  years  in  the
       Madrassa, my father passed away.  I was ten years old. Then I stayed
       for five years and mother told me that I was aged fifteen years old,
       so I found out  that  I  stayed  for  five  years."  As  Mr  Knafler
       submitted and I accept the last of those answers had the  appearance
       of an answer being given by rote.


   66. As those answers make clear, the ages which the Applicant has  given
       hinge on the information he says was given to him by his mother when
       he went to school and the age she told  him  he  was  when  he  left
       Afghanistan together with an approximation  of  how  long  he  spent
       between those dates in education and in the Taliban  camp.   I  will
       come to the impact of that being the source later.  However, due  to
       the inconsistencies in the Applicant's accounts at various times,  I
       can give only very limited weight to his answers in this  regard  in
       any event.


   67. I turn then to the evidence  about  the  Applicant's  siblings.   He
       provides details of them in his statements but  those  do  not  deal
       with their  ages.   In  the  course  of  the  first  age  assessment
       interview,  AZ  provided  the  following  information   about   them
       ([C/91]):


            "[W] (sister - 22  years  old  living  in  Jalalabad  with  her
       husband)
            [M] (sister - 19 years old living in Kabul with her husband)
            [Q] (brother - two years older than me)
            Me
            [F] (brother - 8 years old living with mother)
            [A] (sister - 6 years old living with mother)"


   68. When I asked him to tell me  about  his  siblings  during  his  oral
       evidence, he volunteered the following information:


           "[F] was six to seven years when I left Afghanistan.  [H] was  5
           years.  [M] is older, 20-25 years.  [W] is  older  25-30  years.
           [Q] was the oldest.  He was around 30 years when he passed away"


       Re-examined on that point, by reference to what he had said  in  the
       first age assessment interview, he agreed that the ages he had given
       were rough estimations but were correct in terms  of  the  order  of
       age, in other words that [Q] was the eldest child.  He  was  adamant
       that he had never said that [Q] was only two years older  than  him.
       Based on what he said, it may be that he  meant  that  [Q]  was  two
       years older than his eldest sister although that would not work  out
       mathematically.  What I cannot discern from those ages though is any
       pattern which gives any indication of AZ's own age.


   69. In terms of his family, AZ was asked at length  about  contact  with
       his family.  He deals with this issue in his witness statement dated
       9 November 2018.  There he says the following:


            "68. I am very upset that I have not been able to make  contact
           with my family.  I tried to contact my mum  many  times,  but  I
           haven't been able to get hold of her.  I have asked  people  who
           have gone back to Afghanistan to try and find her, but they have
           not got back to me.  I only managed  to  take  with  one  of  my
           friends via Facebook to look for my mum and  he  said  that  her
           mother is not there.  When I left Afghanistan  my  mum  wrote  a
           phone number on a piece of paper, but when I arrived  in  France
           someone took my paper and  I  lost  it.   I  can't  talk  to  my
           father's side of the family because they are from the Taliban.
            69.  I haven't tried to contact my  brother  and  sisters.   My
           brother and sister are too  young.  Even  if  my  sister  is  an
           adult, I don't know how to contact her.   I  tried  to  find  my
           brother in laws through facebook, but I could not find them.   I
           am really worried about them.  I am worried that my uncle  tried
           to kill them.
            70.  I am really worried about my family and  what  might  have
           happened to them.  I think about them so  much  and  where  they
           might have gone to be safe.  It makes me feel really upset.  The
           Red Cross tried to chase my family in the  past  but  they  said
           they don't have the facilities there to trace  families  due  to
           the conflict.  I have asked them again to help me and I have  an
           appointment soon.
            71.  It is very difficult for me to trace them - I can't send a
           letter through the post.  The houses do not have numbers and  it
           is not simple like sending a letter in the UK.   There  are  not
           the facilities for doing this.  As I have said, I have tried  to
           find them on social media but I have had no success.   I  really
           want to find them so I know they are ok."


   70. There are some aspects of that evidence which I am unable to accept.
        AZ says that he was given his mother's number on a piece of  paper.
       He says that piece of paper was taken by the agent when  he  was  in
       France.  However, he also says that  the  contact  numbers  for  his
       mother, sister ([M]) and brother-in-law ([J]) were added to a mobile
       phone which he was given by his sister  when  he  left  Afghanistan.
       His brother-in-law taught him how to use it. AZ claims that  he  did
       not have a mobile phone before then when he was in Afghanistan.   He
       was unable to explain why the number would have been  written  on  a
       piece of paper if he had been given the number on a phone.


   71. The  evidence  about  what  has  happened  to  that  phone  is  also
       unsatisfactory.  AZ accepted that he had the mobile  phone  when  he
       arrived in the UK.  He says that he had it when  he  was  living  in
       Ashford but lost it there.  He was asked for how  long  he  had  the
       phone and he said he had it for "20-25 days".  Although he clarified
       that answer when he said he  had  the  phone  for  20-25  days  from
       Afghanistan to the UK, his journey to the UK  was  very  short  -  a
       matter of a couple of weeks.  He was asked why  he  could  not  have
       made contact with his family at that time.  He first said  that  was
       because he had not had a SIM  card  or  credit.   However,  he  then
       claimed that he lost the phone immediately after his arrival in  the
       UK when his belongings were taken from him in Dover.  He  said  that
       his belongings were handed to the family with  which  he  was  first
       placed, and he then discovered that his phone was  not  among  them.
       He was taken through that account in detail.  He  claimed  that  the
       police put the phone in a packet and that when he opened the  packet
       later the phone was gone.


   72. Mr Stringer was asked about the procedure in this regard during  his
       evidence.  He agreed that the belongings of an unaccompanied asylum-
       seeking child would be collected when processed and would be put  in
       a secure plastic bag and sealed.  Those would then be handed to  the
       attending social worker at the initial interview and the  bag  would
       be handed back to the child or taken with the child when transported
       to the placement.  The belongings would be transferred if there were
       a change in placement.


   73. AZ claimed that he complained to the foster carer about the loss  of
       his phone.  There is no documentary  evidence  in  support  of  that
       assertion.  There is though evidence at [H/714] that on 31 May 2016,
       AZ was asking his foster carer for a Lyca  SIM  card  for  a  "small
       Nokia mobile" which he had in his possession.  That  is  eight  days
       after his arrival.  AZ denied that this was the phone he had arrived
       with.  He said that this phone was a Nokia  and  the  phone  he  was
       given in Afghanistan was a Samsung.  When he was  asked  whether  he
       had obtained another mobile, he  answered  "No.  From  where  had  I
       another phone?".  He denied that he had asked for a  SIM  card.   He
       claims that he told his foster carer he  had  lost  his  phone.   He
       offered no explanation how she would be able to describe  the  phone
       if that were the case.  He then suggested  that  he  was  unable  to
       complain about the loss of  the  phone  because  he  did  not  speak
       English and his foster carer did not speak his language.


   74. AZ also claimed that he had spoken to Melinda Veg who was his social
       worker in this period to complain  about  the  loss  of  his  phone.
       There is no record of this.  There is instead at  [H/447]  a  record
       that, in relation to his belongings, he told Ms Veg that he did  not
       have a mobile phone on arrival.  When asked about  this,  AZ  simply
       replied "What should I say?  I can't say  anything".   Ms  Veg  also
       records (on 7 June 2016) that AZ was able to  communicate  in  basic
       English.


   75. I did not believe AZ's account about the loss of his  mobile  phone.
       Interestingly, AZ does mention not having all his belongings to  the
       assessors during his first age assessment  interview  but  the  only
       things which he specified were his watch which he said was given  to
       him by his foster carer, two pairs of trousers and two  tops.   That
       was the obvious time at which  he  would  have  mentioned  that  his
       mobile phone was missing if it was. Moreover, his explanation during
       oral evidence was fraught  with  inconsistencies  when  compared  to
       contemporaneous documents.  For whatever reason, I do  not  consider
       he is telling the truth when he says that he did not  and  does  not
       have a mobile phone.
   76. That has some correlation with AZ's evidence about contact with  his
       family.  AZ has confirmed that his mother and younger  siblings  are
       living in Kabul with [M] and her husband, [J].  His evidence that he
       was unable to contact his eldest sisters and was unable  to  contact
       his brothers-in-law via Facebook is inconsistent with what  he  told
       the age assessors during the first interview ([C91]).  There he said
       that he was in contact with [M]'s husband ([J]) (and  confirms  that
       his mother lives with [M] and [J]).  Yet in his second interview, he
       said that he last saw or spoke with his  family  in  the  "month  of
       Sawor" in "95, this 1395" ([G76]).  It is noted by  the  interviewer
       in the interview conducted on 24 June 2016 that this would equate to
       21  April  to  21  May  and  therefore  around  the  time  he   left
       Afghanistan.  Later in the same interview ([G77]), he denied  saying
       in the first interview that he had any contact with his  brother-in-
       law.


   77. AZ also told the assessors who conducted the Human Rights Assessment
       that he had been in contact with friends  in  Kabul  through  social
       media "about five months ago".   It is there noted  that  "[AZ]  did
       not discuss  further  whether  his  friends  disclosed  the  current
       situation and whereabouts of his family members in Kabul; especially
       his mother and younger  sister  who  were  living  with  his  eldest
       sister".


   78. When asked about contact with his family during his  oral  evidence,
       AZ confirmed that his family had mobile  telephones.   He  confirmed
       that his brother-in-law, [S], had a mobile phone  as  did  [J],  the
       brother-in-law who arranged his journey to the UK and who is a  taxi
       driver in Kabul.  He said that he had last spoken with [J] in around
       2017/18.  When the inconsistency in his evidence in this regard  was
       pointed out, AZ replied that "he had nothing".  He  was  asked  then
       how he had managed to contact [J].  He said that taxi  drivers  have
       contact with each other.  He managed to make contact with  a  friend
       on Facebook and asked him to contact [J].  He said that he was  told
       by this friend that [J] would make contact with him later that  day.
       He had contacted via "that guy's messenger", but it  was  not  going
       through.  AZ said when he spoke to [J], he had told him that he  had
       lost his mobile phone and contact number, but he said that  [J]  had
       not given him a contact number because he was busy with a passenger.
        AZ said that [J] said he would call back with the number but  never
       did.


   79. I do not accept that AZ has lost the ability to contact his  family.
       I consider it likely that AZ does not wish to admit to being able to
       do so because  such  contact  might  give  rise  to  evidence  which
       undermines his claim.  I note also that the Tribunal Judge who heard
       AZ's asylum appeal did not  accept  AZ's  evidence  in  this  regard
       either ([54] at [E/88]).


   80. AZ denied that he uses Facebook now.  He said that his  account  had
       been closed as he had forgotten the password.  He  did  not  explain
       how it is that he was able to use Facebook if, as is  his  evidence,
       he had never used the internet in Afghanistan nor had a mobile phone
       there and had to be taught by his brother-in-law to  use  the  phone
       which he was given.  It is conceivable that he has  been  taught  by
       friends or others whilst he has been in the UK but,  in  general,  I
       find this evidence difficult to accept.


   81. This brings me on to the information given to the local authority by
       AZ's foster carer, [K].  By way of background, AZ  was  accepted  as
       being his claimed age on arrival in the UK and placed immediately in
       foster care with [K].  As I have already noted,  AZ  then  fell  ill
       with malaria and was taken to hospital.   There  [K]  reported  that
       some of the consultants had expressed views that AZ was not the  age
       he claimed.  More worryingly, they  also  expressed  concerns  about
       AZ's background.  It was said that AZ had  told  them  that  he  had
       fought for the Taliban.   This  led  eventually  to  a  referral  to
       Prevent.


   82. [K] also told the local authority that she had  given  AZ  a  "small
       computer game console" so that he could play  computer  games.   She
       said however that "other young people at her home had told her  that
       [AZ] had used the console to access the Internet and  watch  violent
       videos of the Taliban and Americans fighting on  Youtube"  ([C/87]).
       AZ did not deny that he had accessed such videos but said that  this
       was when he was with [K] who had suggested that  they  put  American
       music on, and he had suggested that  they  play  Afghan  music.  His
       searches for that music had inadvertently brought up the  videos  of
       the Taliban and US forces.  When it was put to AZ that [K]  had  not
       known that the games console could access the internet, he then said
       that it was not on the games console but on the TV.


   83. This incident occurred within days of AZ  arriving  in  the  UK  and
       undermines his case yet further  in  relation  to  his  use  of  the
       internet and experience in that  regard.   I  also  concur  with  Mr
       Knafler's submission that there is no reason why [K]  would  lie  to
       the local authority.  If it was her actions which  had  led  to  the
       access to the videos, if anything, I would expect her to say nothing
       as it might lead to concerns  about  her  reliability  as  a  foster
       carer.


   84. In relation to what AZ told  the  consultants  at  the  hospital,  I
       accept, as he insisted several times in his evidence,  that  he  was
       unwell at the time.  As such, I accept  that  he  may  not  remember
       speaking  to  the  consultants.   He  denied   that   he   had   the
       conversations which were reported to the local  authority.   I  will
       come to those later in relation to the evidence contained in the Age
       Assessment.


   85. I turn finally to the details of the Applicant's  asylum  claim.   I
       make clear that it is not my function to make any findings as to the
       credibility of that  claim.   Mr  Lay  accepted  that  the  findings
       contained  in  the  Tribunal  Decision  have  some   place   in   my
       consideration; in line with the Devaseelan guidelines, they would be
       a starting point in a second appeal and to that extent, I  may  take
       them into account.  However, although I accept that what I record in
       relation to AZ's evidence about his asylum claim is something  which
       the Judge in his second appeal can take into account, none of what I
       say below as to the substance of the asylum claim binds the Judge in
       that second appeal.


   86.  Although  as  I  pointed  out  to  Mr  Knafler  during  his  cross-
       examination,  the  details  of  the  asylum  claim  are  of  limited
       relevance to  a  determination  of  AZ's  age,  I  accept  that  the
       Respondent was entitled to cross-examine as to that  detail  with  a
       view to establishing or undermining AZ's  credibility  (although  in
       line with the principles I have set out based  on  the  case-law,  I
       also accept that, just because AZ is not  credible  in  relation  to
       certain aspects of his account regarding the  claim  does  not  mean
       that he is not credible in relation to  others  or  as  regards  his
       age).


   87. For those reasons, I do not intend to deal  with  AZ's  evidence  on
       this aspect in as much detail as I do in relation to  the  foregoing
       issues.


   88. AZ was asked whether he had been recruited to the Taliban as some of
       his answers tended to suggest that his  uncle  had  been  trying  to
       recruit him but had not succeeded.  He said  that  he  was  training
       from which I infer he meant that he did not consider himself to have
       been recruited as yet.  I  do  not  place  weight  on  any  apparent
       contradictions in this regard. However, it was also pointed  out  to
       AZ that he had told a doctor in September  2017  that  he  had  been
       captured by the Taliban.   I  do  not  place  much  weight  on  this
       apparent inconsistency ([D/63]) as it appears only in a medical note
       and the doctor may have misunderstood  what  was  being  said.   The
       doctor's main interest would have been AZ's mental  health  and  not
       the causation.


   89. There was some contradiction in the evidence about what AZ was doing
       whilst in training.  He said for example that he spent  three  years
       receiving education about the ethos of the  Taliban  and  two  years
       learning to use weapons but when asked what he is reported  to  have
       said to the consultants about fighting for the Taliban said  he  was
       only helping with ammunition.  It was also pointed out to AZ that he
       had told the age assessors that he had seen fighting in  Afghanistan
       in real life ([C/88]) but had said that he was  "sitting  far  away"
       which was not consistent with helping with ammunition.  AZ said that
       he was just taking ammunition to them and then going back.


   90. There was much discussion  about  whether  the  Applicant  had  been
       involved in one or two suicide bombings.  The Judge when  dismissing
       his asylum appeal relied on the discrepancy in his evidence in  this
       regard as one of the reasons for finding  AZ  not  to  be  credible.
       AZ's evidence before me is that he had only  been  involved  in  one
       suicide bombing which he had not carried through  and  that  he  had
       managed to escape with  the  help  of  his  brother-in-law  [S]  who
       happened to be nearby in Jalalabad at the time because he studied at
       the university there.


   91. As Mr Knafler pointed out to AZ, when  he  was  interviewed  in  the
       course of the Prevent referral  ([H/699]),  he  did  not  mention  a
       suicide bombing at all.  That is perhaps understandable  as  he  may
       have thought that  such  disclosure  would  get  him  into  trouble,
       particularly given the nature of  that  intervention.   Although  he
       mentioned it in his asylum screening interview  ([E/147]),  he  says
       then that he left when he was told that he was going to be a suicide
       bomber.


   92. AZ told the assessors in the first age assessment interview that  he
       had been involved in two suicide bombings.  He says that his  mother
       was persuaded to allow him to go  back  with  his  cousin  after  he
       escaped the first bombing because his cousin apologised and that  he
       was then taken to register with the police but was not taken on  the
       first time because he looked too young and so his cousin shaved  him
       for two weeks after which AZ was allowed to join the  local  police.
       The point of AZ being  registered  with  the  local  police  was  to
       conduct another suicide bombing at the police  station  ([C/92-93]).
       In his oral evidence, AZ denied that any of this account  was  true.
       He then said that he did not remember.   He  then  reverted  to  his
       account that he was  involved  in  only  one  suicide  bombing.   He
       admitted that, in spite of the level of detail given,  he  "did  not
       think" that any of this was true and  that  nothing  here  happened.
       When he was asked if he had given the Council a lot  of  information
       that was not true, AZ said "No. He did not think so."


   93. AZ was also taken  through  his  asylum  interview  where  he  again
       provided a considerable amount of detail about  the  second  suicide
       bombing (see [Q96-104] at [E/129-130]).  The Applicant also repeated
       the account involving a second  suicide  bombing  in  his  statement
       dated 10 June 2017. It is undermining of AZ's  credibility  that  he
       has now admitted that none of this was true.


   94. Nor can this be blamed on AZ's previous  solicitors.   It  has  been
       asserted by AZ's current solicitors that  the  previous  solicitors,
       Mordens, failed to adequately prepare and translate the  Applicant's
       witness statement for his appeal hearing and failed in their conduct
       and client care responsibilities.  In particular, it is said that AZ
       never met the solicitor with conduct of his case and  dealt  instead
       with a Mr Khan who he says was an interpreter.  AZ says that Mr Khan
       intimidated him and that his witness statement  was  drafted  by  Mr
       Khan who told him what to say. The inference from this is  that  any
       inconsistencies in the Applicant's  claim  lie  with  that  firm  of
       solicitors.


   95. Mordens solicitors have investigated the complaint and have rejected
       it.  An issue was raised during the hearing before me as to  whether
       the previous solicitor's file contained any attendance  notes  which
       would show whether AZ met only an interpreter or also the  solicitor
       with conduct.  I was told  that  the  file  as  transferred  to  the
       current solicitors did not contain any attendance notes.  A  request
       was made for those but at the time of writing  this  judgment,  none
       have been disclosed and  I  infer  therefore  that  none  have  been
       received.   As  I  say,  however,   the   responsibility   for   the
       inconsistencies cannot be laid at the previous solicitor's door  not
       least because most arise from AZ's own account at various times  and
       not primarily from the witness statements.  Further, it is  now  the
       "short statement" to which AZ refers  in  his  asylum  interview  at
       [Q116-117] ([E/131]) in which reference was only made to one suicide
       bombing which was drafted by Mordens and  is  now  said  to  be  the
       truthful one  (as  compared  with  what  he  told  the  Home  Office
       interviewer).


   96. Other inconsistencies in the Applicant's claim  were  identified  by
       the Respondent, for example, concerning the whereabouts of the other
       two suicide bombers who the Applicant now says were dropped  off  in
       another part of Jalalabad and not in the square where he  was  left.
       He now says they were about 2km away from him and yet  AZ  continues
       to assert that he heard the blast and saw people running  away  from
       those blasts.


   97. I do not place much weight on  the  Respondent's  challenge  to  the
       account that AZ's brother-in-law happened to have a bag with him  in
       which he is said to have put the suicide vest and that  he  disposed
       of it.  That may be an unusual way to deal with a suicide vest which
       is primed to explode. However, the real issue with this part of AZ's
       account is, as was noted by the previous  Judge,  the  extraordinary
       coincidence of what is said to have occurred (see  51  at  [E/87]).
       What did strike me about this part of AZ's evidence though  was  his
       willingness to give a lot of information about this event (even when
       that was not sought).


   98. The other inconsistency in AZ's account concerns his departure  from
       Afghanistan.  AZ said that  after  his  brother-in-law  rescued  him
       after the suicide bombing incident, he stayed in  Kabul  only  about
       two to three weeks.  That  is  as  compared  with  eight  months  as
       recounted in the  first  age  assessment  interview.   Although  the
       "eight to nine months" answer given (at [C/93])  is  from  the  time
       that AZ said (at that time) that he had been  taken  to  the  police
       station by his cousin and leaving Afghanistan, he said that  it  was
       only about two days from when he had returned to the police  station
       and when he was rescued by his brother-in-law so that cannot account
       for the discrepancy.


   99. The Applicant also gave a peculiar reply to  a  question  about  the
       training camp.  Mr Knafler asked him the best and worst thing  about
       it. As  to  best,  he  answered  "nothing";  that  is  unsurprising.
       However, he said that the worst thing was "being taught  bad  things
       against the government - such as that the Afghan government is a  US
       puppet- and that there  were  foreign  fighters  involved  with  the
       Taliban".  That struck me as an odd  response  given  the  traumatic
       experiences which AZ is said to have suffered there.  I accept  that
       AZ's mental health condition may have some bearing and I  will  come
       on to that when dealing with the medical evidence below.


  100. I accept that the Applicant's account when referred to  Prevent  was
       accepted as being truthful by the  intervention  provider  from  the
       Home Office  who  was  discussing  AZ's  background  in  Afghanistan
       ([H/338]).  However, that apparent support for AZ's case has  to  be
       looked at in the context of no or little information about  what  AZ
       said to that person.  I note for example that there is some  limited
       detail provided to the Respondent by the Prevent Officer recorded at
       [H/322] which indicates that AZ is said to have told her that he was
       in the Taliban camp for four years  whereas  he  says  it  was  five
       years. I do not place weight on that discrepancy but given the  lack
       of information about the  account  which  AZ  gave  to  the  Prevent
       officer or the Channel team, neither do I place any positive  weight
       on their assessment as to the truthfulness of his account, not least
       because he has since admitted that some of his account at least is a
       fabrication.


  101. I accept that just because part of an account is not  truthful  does
       not mean that the whole of it is a lie.  I  also  accept  that  just
       because a young person's account of the facts making up  his  asylum
       claim are not accepted as credible, does not mean  that  he  is  not
       credible as to age.  However, the inconsistencies in  AZ's  evidence
       go beyond his asylum claim and also relate to  his  age.   For  that
       reason, I can give very little if any weight to his evidence.


    Ms Mehrabian


  102. Ms Mehrabian has provided a letter dated 8 November 2018 ([C/17-18])
       which underpins the request for a second age  assessment.   She  has
       also provided a further letter dated 28 October 2019 ([I/23-25]) and
       witness statement signed on 7 June 2019  ([I/26-28]).   She  adopted
       those as her evidence. Ms Mehrabian has had regular contact with  AZ
       since his arrival in the UK.  As such, her evidence is deserving  of
       careful consideration.


  103. Although not dealt with in her  written  evidence,  I  was  able  to
       ascertain from my own questioning what experience Ms  Mehrabian  has
       by way of interaction with young people which may have a bearing  on
       the weight to be attributed to her evidence.  In her letter dated  8
       November 2018, she explains only that she began  volunteering  as  a
       teacher at Appledore Reception Centre, Cranbrook  ("Appledore")  and
       that she is now a trustee and teacher  at  Kent  Kindness  Maidstone
       ("KKM").  KKM is a  registered  charity  set  up  to  support  young
       unaccompanied asylum-seeking children and refugees in the  Maidstone
       and surrounding area.  She also says that she is a qualified  sports
       teacher with twelve years' experience teaching physical education.


  104. In  her  oral  evidence,  Ms  Mehrabian  expanded  on  her  relevant
       experience.  She is married to an Iranian man and  spent  six  years
       living with him in Iran.  During that  period,  she  taught  at  the
       British  Council.   She  said  that  she   taught   Embassy   staff,
       schoolchildren and university students from the age  of  fifteen  to
       sixty years old.  She then spent ten  years  running  a  residential
       language school which was owned by a German  company  and  therefore
       comprised children from Germany including "quite  a  few"  immigrant
       children.  The children/young  persons  were  aged  from  eleven  to
       nineteen years old.  She also has  her  own  children  who  are  now
       adults.


  105. Ms Mehrabian began teaching at  Appledore  in  December  2015.   She
       taught there on Monday and Wednesday mornings and sometimes  covered
       for others.  The age range there was from sixteen to eighteen years.
        The work of that reception centre has since been moved to  Millbank
       reception centre.


  106. Ms Mehrabian has worked at KKM since  its  inception  in  May  2016.
       KKM provides help with housing, paperwork, medical appointments  and
       other such services in collaboration with bodies  such  as  the  Red
       Cross, Refugee Council, CORAM and  social  services.   Meetings  are
       held weekly on a Friday.  On paper, KKM  is  responsible  for  young
       persons aged sixteen to nineteen  but  Ms  Mehrabian  said  that  it
       continues to support boys who were within that age  range  when  KKM
       was set up and who are now beyond that age.


  107. I begin with Ms Mehrabian's evidence as to why she thinks that AZ is
       his claimed age.  In her November 2018 letter, she speaks  generally
       about the changes in physique which can be observed in  boys  moving
       to  adulthood.   She  talks  of  "growth  spurts".   She  says  that
       "[f]requently a YP will appear loose limbed and a typically gangling
       youth will have poor coordination at this time.  As time goes by the
       muscles strengthen and catch up".


  108. In relation to AZ, she says this ([C/18]):


           "What I do know is this that AZ arrived at the reception  centre
           as a very undernourished YP in spring of 2016 so  I  have  known
           him for nearly 3 years now.  On arrival  he  presented  as  very
           loose limbed, even to the  point  of  waddling,  as  he  walked.
           Noticing this stage of physical development, and because  of  my
           experience of working with young people, this led me to  believe
           that AZ was very young.  In my opinion I would not have put  him
           older than 15 years old.  His  behaviour  in  other  areas  also
           reinforced this opinion."


       She continues as follows:


           "Over the months I have regularly seen AZ at our weekly drop  in
           centre in Maidstone.  I have watched him grow in height and  his
           physique has strengthened..."


  109. Ms Mehrabian's witness statement is focussed on AZ's  health  issues
       and I do not need to deal with that here as it is contained  in  the
       medical evidence which I consider below.  In  her  letter  dated  28
       October 2019, she says the following:


           "AZ has needed constant encouragement and reassurance.  He still
           has difficulty sleeping and  that  impacts  on  his  ability  to
           concentrate at college but he perseveres and this academic  year
           he has progressed to an IT course at college.  Escorting him  to
           and from London appointments I have become aware  of  his  hyper
           vigilance and increased stress levels when in confined  or  over
           crowded places.  In my opinion he remains a very vulnerable  YP.
           I am saddened that the isolation of his formative years  impairs
           his ability to socialise or  form  close  friendships  with  his
           peers,  as  they  too  could  be  a  source   of   support   and
           encouragement".


  110. Ms Mehrabian was asked about the changes she had observed during the
       time she had spent with AZ.  In relation to his emotional and social
       behaviour, although she said that he had  become  better  at  making
       decisions for himself, she also  said  that  he  continued  to  need
       support and reassurance. She gave as an example the  extent  of  the
       communication between her and AZ prior to the hearing to ensure that
       he could travel to the Tribunal. In essence,  as  she  confirmed  in
       response to a question from me, her evidence was that  socially  and
       behaviourally, there had been little change in  AZ.   She  described
       him as "fragile and vulnerable".  He panics in  certain  situations.
       She would have expected a development of robustness over four  years
       for a young person of his age (or the age she believes  him  to  be)
       but had observed no such change.


  111. As I pointed out to Mr Lay in the course of  his  submissions,  that
       evidence does not assist with the assessment of AZ's  age.   It  may
       well point to vulnerabilities as indicated by the  medical  evidence
       to which I will come but, given AZ's own case  that  he  is  now  an
       adult albeit a  younger  one  than  assessed,  the  lack  of  change
       demonstrates only that he is lacking in resilience and not  that  he
       has matured.


  112. It was evident from Ms Mehrabian's evidence that her focus is on the
       physical changes which she considers have occurred.  This  was  most
       striking when, after having been asked  a  number  of  questions  in
       chief about emotional and social changes, she asked if she might now
       be permitted to give evidence about physical developments.


  113. In chief, Ms Mehrabian pointed  to  her  experience  as  a  physical
       education teacher.  She said that "at this age"  boys  can  only  do
       twenty minutes strenuous activity as otherwise physical  damage  can
       occur.  When asked how that fitted  with  AZ's  own  activity  as  a
       cricket player (and by all accounts a good one), she  insisted  that
       although a cricket match obviously lasts longer than twenty minutes,
       the spurts of activity do not.


  114. Ms Mehrabian expanded on what she said in her written evidence about
       physical changes.  She described the changes as being like a  puppet
       on a string where a younger person will flop as if let go whereas an
       older person as muscles develop will remain upright.  She said  that
       this was the change  she  had  observed  in  AZ.   She  was  however
       constrained to accept that her observations that  AZ  had  grown  in
       height were not  borne  out  by  the  evidence  (see  in  particular
       description of height measurements in the Age Assessment  Review  at
       [A/33-34]).  Although as Ms Mehrabian pointed out, this shows a loss
       in height at certain times, she accepted that he had not  apparently
       grown.


  115. The changes in height measurement show why such measurements  cannot
       generally be relied upon.  Whilst I accept Ms  Mehrabian's  evidence
       that such inaccuracies can  depend  whether  a  person  is  standing
       straight and on the person's posture and gait, that does not support
       her evidence because the first measurements were carried out in 2016
       and the reduction in height occurred between those and when  AZ  was
       measured in 2019.  Based on what she says, the measurements in  2016
       should have  been  lower.   As  such,  I  am  unable  to  accept  Ms
       Mehrabian's evidence that  AZ  appears  taller  because  he  is  now
       standing straighter as his muscles and tendons have developed.


  116. I note also that Ms  Mehrabian  offers  no  evidence  or  supporting
       research as to when such changes tend to take place  in  adolescents
       in any event nor to what extent such changes might  be  impacted  by
       environmental or cultural differences.   She did accept in  response
       to a question whether a young  person  could  be  expected  to  grow
       between the ages of fifteen and  nineteen  that  young  people  from
       "different tribes and areas  grow  at  different  ages".   She  also
       accepted that "some are leggy" and "some  are  compact".   She  also
       said that "boys who come from  Nangarhar  are  often  of  a  smaller
       stature".  I am not clear of the source  for  that  latter  comment.
       Those comments in any event do not assist me in determining AZ's age
       based on his height growth.


  117. I accept that, on a purely physical observation comparison, AZ  does
       appear to have  "filled  out"  (see  for  example  photograph  taken
       shortly after arrival at [H/246] as compared with the  Applicant  as
       he appeared before me).  However, I was told that AZ  has  taken  to
       going to the gym since he developed mental health problems. He  also
       plays cricket.  As was also noted in the course  of  Ms  Mehrabian's
       evidence, AZ was suffering from malaria shortly after he arrived  in
       the UK from which he has now recovered.  That might  have  had  some
       impact on his physique.


  118. Ms Mehrabian herself accepted that she might be  "over-invested"  in
       AZ but not that she was biased in his favour.  I accept that she was
       doing her best to give honest evidence about her opinions.  However,
       she also accepted that she believed AZ to be the age he  claimed  to
       be because she had no reason to doubt him and needed to support him.
        I do not intend any criticism of her evidence in  that  regard.   I
       would expect someone in her position as essentially a support worker
       to adopt that attitude.  However, there is then a need  for  her  to
       provide evidence beyond AZ's own assertion in order for me  to  give
       weight to her view.


  119. Ms Mehrabian also accepted that  the  young  people,  including  AZ,
       think of her as a mother figure.  That is consistent  with  his  own
       evidence (see 63 at [I/45]).  Although Ms Mehrabian said  that  she
       actively discouraged the  young  people  seeing  her  as  a  "mother
       figure" (by insisting that they call her "Izzie" or "teacher"),  she
       admitted that "she would have to be callous" not to  have  a  strong
       emotional attachment to AZ due to his vulnerabilities.


  120. Ms Mehrabian accepted that she had  not  read  the  "Age  Assessment
       Guidance" published by ADCS (see [F/63-129]).  She accepted that she
       had no expertise in age assessment although she knew  of  others  in
       the age assessment process. She said that she might  have  read  the
       Age Assessment "back in the day".  She could not give evidence about
       who had said what at that time.  Mr Knafler's point is  that  others
       thought AZ to be his assessed age.  I will come to that when I  look
       at the age assessment.  Ms Mehrabian did volunteer  that  two  other
       teachers at Appledore had thought AZ  to  be  the  age  he  claimed.
       There is no evidence from those persons.


  121. Overall, although I accept that Ms Mehrabian  presented  her  honest
       views as to AZ's age, I am unable to place weight on them.  Although
       I accept that she has experience of dealing with  young  persons  of
       all ages and different cultures over the years  and  therefore  that
       she ought to be well placed to offer an opinion deserving of weight,
       in the end her evidence is focussed largely if not entirely on  AZ's
       physical presentation and what she sees as physical changes (not all
       underpinned by the other evidence in any event) and  her  acceptance
       that what AZ has told her about his age is  true.   She  offered  no
       evidence, for example, of observing AZ's interaction with his  peers
       during the KKM meetings or other evidence as to behavioural  changes
       which might impact on the question of age.


    Other Evidence


  122. I had no evidence either from Ms Mehrabian or elsewhere as  to  AZ's
       interaction with other young persons, either of the age he claims or
       his assessed age.  At [H/144] there is reference  to  AZ  moving  to
       independent living accommodation in Sheerness with "his best friend"
       but I did not have any evidence from or about this young person, his
       age or the relationship between him and AZ.


  123. Although I was not specifically referred to it, there is a letter of
       support from Sarah Perkins (undated) at [I/35].  AZ stayed with  her
       from May 2019 as part of the "Refugees at Home scheme".  She  speaks
       of his "friendly and caring nature" and the efforts he has  made  as
       the guest of her and her partner.  He helps  around  the  house  and
       cooks meals for her and her partner.  He also helps with  gardening.
       He also does shopping.  She speaks of AZ's cricket prowess  and  his
       progress in his IT course at college.  The statement  is  supportive
       of AZ's application to stay in the UK but does  not  deal  with  his
       age.


      Medical Evidence


  124. I have already mentioned that AZ suffered from malaria shortly after
       his arrival.  Other than the evidence emerging from the  consultants
       on  that  occasion  and  possible  implications  for  his   physical
       appearance at the time, that has no bearing on the age issue. I come
       to the evidence of the consultants when I turn to look  at  the  Age
       Assessment.


  125. AZ is also said to suffer from hearing problems in  his  right  ear.
       As it has some relevance to the report of Mr Sellwood with  which  I
       deal below, it is appropriate to consider what is  said  about  this
       condition. It was dealt with mainly in evidence  from  Ms  Mehrabian
       who, in her written statement outlines the treatment  which  AZ  has
       received for this.  She expanded on this in oral evidence as she had
       attended appointments with AZ.  Subsequently, and on the last day of
       the hearing,  the  Applicant's  solicitors  disclosed  some  medical
       evidence about it  which  dates  back  to  March/April  2019.   That
       corroborates Ms Mehrabian's evidence that AZ was thought to  have  a
       cholesteatoma in his right ear  which  would  require  surgery.   Ms
       Mehrabian said that a polyp had subsequently been removed from  AZ's
       ear.  It was then expected that he would undergo surgery and had  an
       appointment booked but that was cancelled.


  126. AZ attended a later appointment by himself in late 2019 at which the
       surgeon said that he would not carry out the operation.  A review is
       booked in April 2020.  Ms Mehrabian inferred in  her  oral  evidence
       that AZ had been fobbed off by the surgeon because she was not  with
       him.  However, her evidence is that presently no surgery is planned,
       and the documents do not establish the provisional diagnosis made in
       April 2019.  I do not accept Ms Mehrabian's assertion therefore that
       AZ has the condition  which  was  provisionally  diagnosed  or  that
       surgery will necessarily happen.  As such, whilst I accept  that  AZ
       has reported problems with his ears for some time and there  may  be
       some hearing loss, the cause and degree is not  established  on  the
       evidence.  In any event, any hearing deficiency has no relevance  to
       age save as regards a possible explanation for the contradictions in
       the test results observed by Mr Sellwood.


  127. The other issue of medical concern is AZ's mental  health.   I  have
       AZ's  medical  records.    The  first  reference  to  mental  health
       problems is in February 2017 when AZ attended the GP with Mr  Towse.
       The GP notes advocate a referral to mental health  services  if  the
       mental health team support this.  There is  a  record  in  a  report
       dated December 2017 at [H/362-372]  that  AZ  was  assessed  by  the
       Community Mental Health Team.  The outcome is reported as follows:


           ".. they did not deem him reaching threshold for  their  service
           as his low mood & feeling is specifically related to his  asylum
           situation rather than an on-going/under-laying condition.   They
           advised him seeking counselling, but [AZ] felt that  there  were
           enough people offering him support & to talk to, so he  did  not
           wish to do this.   [AZ]  has  been  prescribed  anti-depressants
           though, which are being review with his GP."


       According to the report of Dr Turvill at  [D/1-19],  the  assessment
       there referred to took place in September 2017.   According  to  the
       letter from AZ's current GP at [D/20],  when  referring  AZ  to  the
       mental health team  again  in  November  2018,  the  anti-depressant
       medication was not prescribed as recommended.


  128. I was also told that AZ had tried  to  hang  himself  following  the
       refusal of his asylum claim.  Ms Mehrabian gave evidence about  this
       although it appeared to be second-hand hearsay as she said  that  Mr
       Towse had told her co-trustee, Ms Hillier, who had in turn  told  Ms
       Mehrabian that this had happened but that AZ had "been  talked  down
       by another boy".  However, although Dr Falk mentions AZ telling  her
       about his thoughts to do this in August/September 2017, I  can  find
       no evidence in the medical notes that he went so far as  to  attempt
       suicide. As  I  have  already  noted,  there  was  a  mental  health
       assessment at that time but  apparently  generated  by  the  earlier
       referral by the GP.  There is  a  possible  suggestion  of  suicidal
       ideation reported at [D/60-62] in  a  report  dated  16  June  2017,
       apparently written by Amanda Geary at KKM, but that report ends with
       reference to a AZ saying that he no longer wished to see a GP,  that
       he had a good weekend and had  been  playing  cricket.  Although  AZ
       speaks about  his  mental  health  in  his  witness  statements  and
       mentions an incident of self-harm in 2018, there is no  mention  let
       alone any detail of any suicide attempt.


    Report of Dr Falk


  129. Dr Falk is a Health Care Professionals Council  ("HCPC")  Registered
       Clinical Psychologist, specialising  in  trauma  and  attachment  in
       children and adolescents.  Her report  which  appears  at  [D/22-59]
       dated 24 October 2018 contains her full CV so I do not need  to  set
       that  out.   Her  report  also  contains  an  appropriately   worded
       declaration as an expert.  I also note that I do not have any expert
       evidence from the Respondent  to  contradict  Dr  Falk's  diagnosis.
       Whilst I take note of the criticisms made of her report,  therefore,
       I have no expert evidence which undermines her conclusions.


  130. In general, Dr Falk's evidence is not something on which I  need  to
       make any firm findings.  It was accepted for  the  purposes  of  the
       hearing before me that AZ is vulnerable.  Dr Falk has  diagnosed  AZ
       as suffering from PTSD.  That is  confirmed  by  the  report  of  Dr
       Turvill in her report dated 27 November 2018 (although I  note  that
       Dr Turvill bases her conclusions largely on Dr Falk's assessment and
       so her report does not really add to the evidence).  Whether  AZ  is
       suffering from PTSD though is something which  goes  or  may  go  to
       support the credibility of his protection claim.  It is  of  limited
       value to the issue of AZ's age.  Dr Falk's evidence (and  the  other
       medical evidence) is a matter largely for the Judge dealing with the
       second asylum appeal.


  131. However, I do  make  some  observations  about  Dr  Falk's  evidence
       insofar as it has a bearing  on  the  issue  for  me  to  determine.
       First, Dr Falk met with AZ only on one occasion for about three  and
       a half hours.  That conflicts with what Ms  Mehrabian  says  in  her
       statement dated 22 November 2019 ([I/13]) that  she  attended  "both
       appointments" with Dr Falk and that those were over a period of  ten
       hours.  It is possible that Ms Mehrabian is confusing Dr  Falk  with
       Dr Turvill as Dr Turvill assessed AZ on two occasions.


  132. Second, although Dr Falk did have access to the GP records, she  did
       not, as Mr Knafler points out, have access to the health and  social
       care  records  which  include  monitoring  of  AZ's  mental   health
       condition over time.  In her letter dated 26 February 2020, Dr  Falk
       accepts that  she  may  not  have  had  those  records.   She  makes
       reference to the referral to the mental  health  team  in  September
       2017 to which I have alluded above at [127].  I accept however that,
       through no fault of her own, Dr Falk  may  not  have  been  given  a
       complete picture of AZ's mental health history over time.


  133. Third, I make no  criticism  of  Dr  Falk's  methodology  not  least
       because I have no expert evidence which would allow  me  to  do  so.
       Insofar as it is necessary for  me  to  do  so,  therefore,  I  give
       appropriate weight to Dr Falk's conclusion that AZ is suffering from
       PTSD, moderately severe depression and moderate anxiety  subject  to
       three caveats.


  134. First, the description of AZ's presentation at [3.5] of  the  report
       is not at all consistent with what  I  observed  of  AZ's  behaviour
       during the hearing before me.  He displayed no signs of being  upset
       and did not become emotional  when  describing  events  which  would
       clearly have been traumatic.  Nor did he shirk from providing detail
       of his experiences, often volunteering  more  information  than  was
       sought.


  135. That tends to undermine what is said by Dr Falk  at  [4.70]  of  her
       report where she describes an inability to recollect past  traumatic
       events and dissociation.  I appreciate that a court setting is  very
       different to attending  an  appointment  with  a  psychologist  and,
       however informal the Tribunal seeks to  be,  the  formality  of  the
       setting may impact on AZ's behaviour.  He may also  try  to  provide
       more information to the Tribunal because he thinks that this is what
       is required.  That contrasts though with Dr Falk's  assessment  that
       AZ would not be able to recollect exact details of traumatic  events
       when  placed  in  stressful  situations  ([4.101])  and  that   such
       stressful situations might include court hearings ([4.96]).


  136. That brings me on to the second caveat.  Although Dr Falk  did  say,
       at [4.80] that she had considered  and  discounted  the  possibility
       that AZ was feigning or  exaggerating  his  psychological  symptoms,
       what she there says about his account does not sit comfortably  with
       what she records about his account.  She says that his story was not
       feigned or exaggerated  and  that  there  may  be  yet  more  to  be
       disclosed. However, the record of AZ's account as appears at  [4.21]
       of her report  is  inconsistent  with  his  previous  account  to  a
       significant degree.  She says that  "a  number  of"  the  "traumatic
       events" have been previously summarised.


  137. However, there is one startling difference concerning  AZ's  account
       to Dr Falk that, whilst at the Taliban training camp, he was  forced
       to witness executions by beheading, including an incident  where  he
       witnessed his own uncle beheading a police officer.  Dr Falk must be
       aware that this in particular is not evidence which appears in  AZ's
       previous evidence as she has seen the previous Tribunal decision and
       AZ's witness statement.  Nonetheless, she accepts at face value that
       AZ suffered the trauma which he claims without  any  questioning  of
       it.  She also mentions AZ's "dangerous journey into Europe".   I  am
       not clear what she means by that. Whilst I accept that  AZ  was  (or
       says he was) brought to the UK via two agents, he arrived in the  UK
       within a  couple  of  weeks  after  leaving  Afghanistan.   He  left
       Afghanistan by plane, arrived in France after taking two flights and
       then stayed with another agent for a couple of weeks in that agent's
       house before being brought to the UK.  Whilst I do not downplay  the
       distress of a young person leaving his family behind, in  comparison
       with the arduous journeys taken by many asylum seekers, AZ's journey
       can hardly be described as "dangerous".


  138. The extent to which there are inconsistencies  in  AZ's  account  of
       past events is a matter which more directly concerns  the  Judge  in
       the second asylum appeal.  However, the acceptance  by  Dr  Falk  of
       AZ's account at face value does undermine to some extent her opinion
       as to possible exaggeration of symptoms.  I appreciate that, even if
       he is exaggerating his account, that does not necessarily mean  that
       AZ is exaggerating his psychological symptoms.   Dr  Falk  does  say
       that she had "no reason to believe that [AZ]  was  over  emphasising
       his symptoms when answering this questionnaire".  Nonetheless,  that
       the diagnosis is based even to  some  limited  extent  on  AZ's  own
       reporting coupled  with  Dr  Falk's  acceptance  of  that  reporting
       without any qualification, does reduce the weight I can give to  her
       conclusion (particularly now that we know that AZ has made  up  some
       parts of his account).


  139. Dr Falk also makes some observations about memory.  I  have  already
       noted that the inability or unwillingness to recall past events does
       not coincide with what I observed of AZ's evidence.  This brings  me
       on to the final caveat which concerns the report of Mr Sellwood  who
       was specifically asked to address any problems  of  memory.   Before
       moving on to his written and oral evidence, I deal finally with what
       Dr Falk has to say about the Age Assessment.


  140. Dr  Falk  very  frankly  accepts  that  she  has  no  experience  of
       completing age assessments and  that  it  is  outside  her  area  of
       expertise to comment on age.  She notes a number of strengths to the
       Age Assessment, concerning location and procedure.   She  makes  two
       criticisms.  First, she says that the Age  Assessment  relied  quite
       heavily on physical appearance.  Whether it did or did not do so  is
       a matter for me.  Second, she says that it  relies  on  observations
       which misunderstand how trauma and PTSD can  present.   Following  a
       citation from the Age Assessment concerning AZ's level of confidence
       and that there was  no  change  in  his  demeanour  when  discussing
       earlier traumatic life events, Dr Falk makes the following comment:


           "[4.76]...I believe that this could be misjudgement of  symptoms
           of PTSD, as discussed above.  It is very  likely  and  plausible
           that [AZ] may have been quite dissociated, in order  to  protect
           himself psychologically, and come across as emotionally cut  off
           due to being in a threatening situation, recalling incidents  of
           trauma, terror and abuse.  Furthermore,  I  believe  this  could
           have contributed to the age assessors mistakenly concluding that
           [AZ] was reacting in a mature manner and therefore  impacted  on
           their final assessment and conclusions regarding age."


  141. I accept as Dr Falk says in her letter dated 26 February 2020  that,
       notwithstanding her lack of expertise in age assessments, it is open
       to her to offer alternative explanations based on her own experience
       of trauma victims which might explain  AZ's  demeanour  as  observed
       during the age assessment interviews.  I have already accepted  that
       the setting in which AZ offers evidence as  to  his  experience  may
       impact on his demeanour and presentation as what Dr Falk says  about
       his presentation before her does not accord with what I observed.  I
       accept that her alternative explanation is deserving  of  weight  as
       someone with experience of trauma victims.


  142. However, as Dr Falk herself says, what she is doing  is  offering  a
       possible explanation for the difference  between  AZ's  presentation
       when she assessed him in late  2018  and  when  the  age  assessment
       interviews were carried out over two years' earlier.   It  seems  to
       me, as a  matter  of  common  sense,  that  this  might  equally  be
       explained by the passage of time and  that  AZ  was  not  exhibiting
       signs of trauma then but might be now.  That is consistent  with  AZ
       being rejected for treatment by mental health services when  he  was
       referred in mid to late 2017.


  143. In any event, whether AZ was traumatised at  the  time  of  the  Age
       Assessment and was concealing it tells me only that he is vulnerable
       based on his past experiences and not whether he  was  an  adult  or
       child at the relevant time.  I will come on to this when I  turn  to
       look at the Age Assessment.


  144. Dr Falk also offers her own "tentative observations" as to age based
       on demeanour.  She says the following:


            "4.77      I note again that I do not  have  expertise  in  age
           assessments; however, as I have been invited to comment and  can
           draw on my experience of  working  with  adolescents  and  young
           adults I am prepared to offer my tentative observations. I noted
           that [AZ] presented as quite unsure of  himself  and  seemed  to
           draw on Ms Mehrabian for a great deal of support.  I was  struck
           by how he needed to draw on her to explain some aspects  of  his
           life (i.e. his current living conditions), and about the stories
           they told where Ms Mehrabian had to advocate for [AZ] (i.e. when
           he had to visit the Home Office building).  I was also struck by
           his somewhat nave view of right and wrong when  discussing  his
           peer behaviour in college.  I personally wondered if this was an
           indication that he may be younger than his currently assessed 19
           years."


  145. Whilst I do not suggest that Dr Falk was  there  offering  any  more
       than her provisional view as to age, that is itself based solely  on
       AZ's demeanour  during  one  relatively  short  interview.   I  have
       already made the observation that AZ's behaviour  on  that  occasion
       did not accord at all with his presentation  before  me  although  I
       accept that there may be other reasons for that.  Due to the limited
       nature of the evidence on which Dr Falk's view is based and her lack
       of experience of assessing age, though, I cannot give weight to  her
       opinion in that regard which is in any event only  expressed  to  be
       tentative.


      Mr Robert Sellwood


  146. As I have already noted,  an  application  was  made  to  adduce  Mr
       Sellwood's report  late.   I  permitted  the  Applicant  to  do  so.
       Although Mr Knafler indicated that he did not wish to  cross-examine
       Mr Sellwood, the Applicant wished to call him, and I considered that
       his evidence might be of assistance to me.  In the event, Mr Knafler
       did ask Mr Sellwood a number of questions.   I  found  his  evidence
       highly informative and interesting in general terms but  of  limited
       relevance to the issue which I have to determine.


  147. Mr Sellwood is a Chartered Psychologist.  His relevant experience is
       set out in his report and I do not need to repeat it.   Mr  Sellwood
       was  instructed  by  the  Applicant's  solicitors  to  assess   AZ's
       cognitive  functioning.   He  assessed  AZ  in  the  company  of  Ms
       Mehrabian on 3 February 2020 over the course of three  hours.   Some
       of the assessment was conducted with the benefit of the  interpreter
       who however had to leave after  just  over  two  hours  and  so  the
       remainder of the assessment was conducted  without  an  interpreter,
       but Mr Sellwood did not encounter any difficulties arising from that
       (see [58] and [59] of his report).


  148. The results obtained from Mr Sellwood's tests are as follows:
               . AZ's scores based on the Perceptual Reasoning Index are  90
                 if he is his claimed age and 92 if he is his assessed  age.
                 If he is his claimed age, his score is as high as or higher
                 than 25% of adults of that age (19).  If he is his assessed
                 age, his score is as high or higher than 30%  of  that  age
                 (21).  In either event, the scores are not consistent  with
                 cognitive deficit, being well above the DSM-5 score  of  70
                 +/-  5  which  indicates   intellectual   disability.   The
                 confidence levels in relation to the index scores  are  84-
                 97% in relation to claimed age and 86-99%  in  relation  to
                 assessed age.
               . The DMS-5  measure  also  did  not  indicate  any  learning
                 disability.
               . AZ was assessed though as having "significant difficulties"
                 with working  memory.   Mr  Sellwood's  oral  evidence  was
                 predominantly concerned with this area.


  149. Working memory is not the same as  either  short-term  or  long-term
       memory.  Mr Sellwood describes it in his  report  in  the  following
       way:


            "92. Working memory is that part of  our  memory  where  recent
           information is stored and organised i.e. what we have just  seen
           or heard and how we intend to respond.  This aspect of memory is
           transitory, with  information  decaying  within  a  few  seconds
           unless it is rehearsed or re-organised.  Consequently, attention
           skills are closely bound up with working memory."


  150. Mr Sellwood offered as  a  potential  explanation  of  AZ's  working
       memory difficulties, his hearing problems.   He says in  his  report
       that this "might have affected his ability to attend to and  process
       auditory  material."   I  have  already  drawn  attention   to   the
       recommendations made by Mr Sellwood for the taking of evidence  from
       AZ in light of the working memory problems which he found to exist.


  151. Mr Sellwood admitted that he was not an expert in working memory but
       that his areas of expertise included models of working  memory.   He
       accepted that once a question was answered, working memory had "done
       its job" and that the brain then "dips into long-term memory".


  152. Mr Sellwood also accepted that it was difficult  to  reconcile  AZ's
       working  memory  difficulties  with  his  "impressive  progress"  in
       particular in the English language.  He did not though  know  enough
       about how language is learnt to draw any conclusions from that.


  153. When asked whether AZ's ability to  carry  out  everyday  tasks  was
       consistent with having working memory problems, Dr Sellwood  pointed
       out that it would depend on the task in  hand;  some  tasks  are  so
       routine that they do not use working  memory  at  all  (for  example
       driving a familiar route).  He accepted though that if the  evidence
       shows that AZ came to the UK and rapidly  learnt  self-care  skills,
       social participation and educational functioning "from scratch",  he
       would want to look further at the results.  He had been surprised in
       light of the other test results that AZ was  not  able  to  remember
       number sequences sufficiently except  to  the  extent  of  parroting
       them.  He accepted that the test results were not easy to reconcile.




  154. Mr Sellwood admitted that he did not have  medical  evidence  as  to
       AZ's hearing problems.  He also accepted that he had identified this
       only as a possible explanation for  the  inconsistency  between  the
       working memory scores and the other test results.   There  might  be
       other environmental considerations such as noise outside the room.


  155. Mr Sellwood had not read the age  assessment  interviews.   He  said
       that in any event the fact that AZ was able to answer  questions  as
       recorded on paper would not necessarily provide any firm  indication
       as to the state of his working memory.  It might  be,  for  example,
       that AZ was rehearsing the information and had taken time to provide
       answers.  Even in terms of his evidence to the  Tribunal,  which  Mr
       Sellwood was not present to hear, he said that  AZ  might  still  be
       able to answer questions confidently and speedily depending  on  the
       length of the questions and how much information those contained.


  156. Mr Sellwood confirmed that he had not tested AZ's long-term  memory.
       He agreed that, provided AZ retained the question for long enough to
       answer it, the answer would depend  on  his  long-term  memory.   He
       added that the question also would go  into  AZ's  long-term  memory
       after a few seconds.  He also said that working memory  difficulties
       affect a person's ability to understand the  question  and  marshall
       the answer  and  would  not  explain  inconsistencies  in  long-term
       memory.   He did however  explain  that  there  is  a  link  between
       working memory and long-term memory  in  terms  of  organisation  of
       information storage in long-term memory.   He  said  that  "internal
       reorganisation will suffer if there is a working memory disability".
        He had not however tested AZ for longer term memory  problems.   He
       also said that if AZ  had  a  weak  working  memory  as  the  scores
       suggest, that would be a constant and would  have  also  existed  in
       2016.  As Mr Sellwood said, "it seems to be how you are wired".


  157. As I have already noted, Mr Sellwood's evidence is of limited  value
       to  me.   If  and  insofar  as  the   Applicant's   case   is   that
       inconsistencies in AZ's account can be  attributed  to  his  working
       memory problems, I did not  understand  Mr  Sellwood's  evidence  to
       provide much support to that theory.  He said himself  that  he  had
       been surprised by the apparent contradiction in results between  the
       reasoning tests indicating no cognitive deficiency and  no  learning
       difficulties and those concerning working memory.   The  most  which
       can be taken from the evidence is that AZ might have difficulty with
       number sequences which might explain the inconsistencies as  to  his
       siblings' ages but even then the inconsistencies in his evidence are
       not said by AZ himself to be due to any  lack  of  comprehension  of
       questions at the time but, in that instance at least, a denial  that
       he said as is recorded.


    The Respondent's Case

      The Age Assessment and Age Assessment Review


  158. Although strictly the judicial review application challenges the Age
       Assessment Review, the main focus of the Applicant's case is the Age
       Assessment itself which was not challenged when it was  carried  out
       in 2016.  That is therefore also the main focus of my attention.   I
       consider that and  the  Age  Assessment  Review  together  with  the
       written and oral evidence of Mr Alex Stringer who  was  one  of  the
       assessors for the Age Assessment and the written and  oral  evidence
       of Mr Mario Silva who was one of the assessors who conducted the Age
       Assessment Review.


  159. Mr Stringer's witness statement is dated 24 October 2019 and appears
       at [G36-37].  He is a HCPC registered social worker who  has  worked
       in social care since 2005.  He obtained a Masters degree  in  Social
       Work in 2008.  In addition to working with children, adolescents and
       families in the UK, he has also  undertaken  volunteer  work  abroad
       with refugees and children.  At the time of the Age  Assessment,  he
       was a Senior Practitioner in the Service for  Unaccompanied  Asylum-
       seeking Children.  As he explains, he was the  second  assessor  for
       the Age Assessment,  the  lead  social  worker  being  Ms  Veg,  and
       therefore his main responsibility was to take notes of the meetings.
        However, he and Ms Veg would  discuss  the  assessment  before  and
       after the  meetings.   Understandably,  he  does  not  remember  the
       precise detail of what was  discussed  but  confirmed  the  position
       based on his experience of what he does generally.


  160. I found Mr Stringer to be an honest and  impressive  witness  within
       the constraints of the evidence he could give after all  this  time.
       He was very measured in his responses and  I  was  assisted  by  his
       experience and observations.
  161. Mario Silva de la Iglesia is a HCPC registered social  worker.   His
       statement dated 21 October 2019 is at [G/116-117].  Mr Silva  joined
       Kent  County  Council's  Unaccompanied   Asylum-Seeking   Children's
       Service in July 2016 and moved to the 18+ Care  Leavers  Service  in
       January 2018.  He holds a BA (Hons) degree in Social Work.   He  has
       experience  of  working  with  children  of   all   ages   including
       unaccompanied asylum-seeking children and care leavers.  He confirms
       that he carried out the Age Assessment Review.


  162. I found Mr Silva's evidence less helpful.  That is not to say that I
       doubted the truthfulness of what he said or that he  does  not  have
       relevant experience.  However, his input in this case was simply  to
       assess the Age Assessment against the further  information  and  for
       that reason I was not much assisted by his views which were  in  any
       event limited.


  163. Although I did not receive oral evidence from her, I have a  written
       statement from Ms Melinda Veg dated  21  October  2019  ([G/87-88]).
       She was the lead age assessor and was  also  AZ's  allocated  social
       worker from 24 May 2016 to 6 July 2016.  As with  Mr  Stringer,  she
       has no accurate recollection of events in 2016 and had  to  rely  on
       records from that time.  She sets out the basic procedures  followed
       none of which are in dispute.


  164. The notes of the interviews for the Age Assessment appear at  [C/74-
       107] in relation to the first interview on 15 June 2016  and  [G/73-
       86] in relation to the second interview on  24  June  2016.  I  have
       already referred to some of those notes as they relate to AZ's case.
        The  Age  Assessment  itself  appears  at  [C/51-65]  and  the  Age
       Assessment Review at [A/23-42].


  165. The conclusions of the Age Assessment are as follows [C/66]:


           "[AZ] arrived in the UK on the 23rd May 2016 when he was seen by
           the duty Social worker who agreed for him to be accommodated  in
           foster care due to his claimed age of 15.
           [AZ] was hospitalized few days after arrival into  the  UK  with
           malaria and ear infection.  He was admitted  to  William  Harvey
           Hospital and later on transferred to St Mary Hospital in London.
           While in hospital [AZ] made a disclosure to a doctor  who  spoke
           his first language that he used to be a member of  the  Taliban,
           had a  Kalashnikov  and  fought  the  Americans.   Due  to  this
           disclosure  the  foster  carer  gave  immediate  notice  on  the
           placement.  The disclosure was also  communicated  to  the  Home
           Office who has requested an age assessment to be  completed.   A
           Prevent referral has also been made.
           Upon discharge from hospital [AZ] was accommodated at  Appledore
           while awaiting age assessment.
           [AZ]'s foster carer was of the view that there was a probability
           that [AZ] was older than his claimed age of 15.  The  consultant
           at St Mary Hospital also commented that she believed [AZ] to  be
           post pubescent male.
           Appledore is a placement for newly arrived unaccompanied  asylum
           seeking young people between the ages of 16-18.
           Observations made by Appledore staff group  raised  no  concerns
           that he would be too young or vulnerable for the  placement  and
           they also did not raise any concerns that he  would  present  as
           someone who is significantly older therefore not for  their  age
           remit.
           Appledore commented that he settled in  very  quickly  and  they
           observed him to be a confident young person who has made friends
           and settled in very well.
           [AZ] confirmed that he settled well  in  and  raised  no  issues
           apart from saying that he found Appledore to be a boring place.
           One of Social worker assistant were of the  view  that  [AZ]  is
           likely to be 16-17 years old, the other Social worker  assistant
           were of the view that he is likely to be 16-17 years of age.
            The assessors involved in this age assessment were of the  view
       that:
               - [AZ] appears to be a fully developed, post pubescent  male.
                 Whilst the assessors are mindful that physical  development
                 can vary based on lots of different factors, they were also
                 of the view that [AZ]'s physical and  social  presentations
                 were not consistent with a 15 years old child as he  claims
                 to be and were most consistent with a young  adult,  likely
                 at least 17 years of age and possible  older  and  a  young
                 adult.
               - [AZ]'s  level  of  confidence  and  presentations  are  not
                 consistent with expected behaviours  and  presentations  of
                 someone who has suffered such traumatic life experiences as
                 he stated that  he  did.   His  emotional  and  behavioural
                 development, demeanour and  general  presentations  do  not
                 appear consistent with  his  stated  age  of  15  but  more
                 consistent with a  young  person  who  is  quite  confident
                 interacting with adults and asking for his needs to be met.
                  He was observed to be very consistent in his presentations
                 throughout the age assessment and no change was observed in
                 demeanour when talking about those earlier  traumatic  life
                 events such as uncle trying  to  force  him  to  engage  in
                 fights and even to blow himself up in  a  suicidal  attack.
                 [AZ] presented as  a  mature  and  resilient  young  person
                 during the age assessment process.
               -  There  was  a  question  raised   about   [AZ]'s   general
                 credibility.  He was observed to be changing and  adjusting
                 his story as  and  when  questions  asked  to  clarify  his
                 information, also he would  deny  giving  some  information
                 when it was clearly recorded that he  did  and  there  were
                 also different accounts given by foster  carer  and   young
                 person about an event which took place at the foster home.
              The consultant at the hospital considered [AZ] to be  a  post
              pubescent male, also one  of  the  social  worker  assistants
              queried that he could be  an  adult.   However  he  has  been
              considered to be appropriately  place  at  Appledore  by  the
              majority of the involved professionals.
              Therefore the assessors agreed to consider him to be a  child
              however due to our concerns about  the  credibility  for  his
              account and the  observations  of  his  physical  and  social
              presentation, behaviours and emotional presentation also  his
              claimed age being questioned, the assessors  were  unable  to
              accept him to be his claimed age of 15 years.  On  the  basis
              of the information [AZ]  given  to  us,  also  based  on  his
              presentations  and  the  observations  provided  by  involved
              professionals, the assessors involved in this age  assessment
              consider him to be 17 years of age.
              Given that [AZ] does not know his  full  date  of  birth  the
              assessors decided to keep 1st of January and change the  year
              to reflect our decision on his age.
              [AZ] therefore has been assessed to be 17 years of age with a
              DOB 01/01/1999"


  166.  I begin with the information provided to the assessors  by  others.
       As the assessors accepted,  the  out  of  hours  social  worker  who
       interviewed [AZ] on arrival indicated on the report that  [AZ]  "may
       be older" than his claimed age of  fifteen  but  nonetheless  placed
       [AZ] in foster care "as there is a fine line  between  being  foster
       care age of 15 or suitable for the Reception Centres from the age of
       16".  The events which led to the Age Assessment are the disclosures
       which [AZ]  is  said  to  have  made  to  consultants  when  he  was
       hospitalised with malaria and the report of his foster  carer,  [K],
       concerning You Tube material which [AZ] was said to be watching.


  167. [K] herself believed [AZ] to be older than  his  claimed  age.   She
       told the assessors that "physically [AZ] presents as older than  his
       stated age (with full beard development and chest hair) but he has a
       baby face". [K] took into account that those physical features might
       be due to cultural differences but stated that whilst she could  not
       say that he was definitely older, there was "a probability".


  168. [K] described feeling very uncomfortable when she attended  hospital
       with him.  She said that staff in  the  paediatric  unit  questioned
       whether he was really fifteen and looked at her "strangely" when she
       said he was.  She considered that the staff did not believe this  to
       be the case.  Of course, all that is based on  physical  appearance.
       I also take into account, as reported at [H/398] (and  as  therefore
       known to the age assessors) that  [K]  was  a  "fairly  new"  foster
       carer, this was only her fourth placement and she had no  experience
       of age assessments.  She had in any event only been  caring  for  AZ
       for a matter  of  days  before  he  contracted  malaria.   I  accept
       therefore that weight cannot be placed on her opinion.


  169. I also note that one of the  consultants  with  whom  Ms  Veg  spoke
       indicated that AZ was a "post pubescent  man  who  can  be  anywhere
       between age 15 to 25".  Although that does of  course  give  as  the
       lowest possible age, the age which AZ claimed to be, I cannot  place
       weight on what is reported as said by the consultant in any event as
       I have no information about his or her  reason  for  providing  that
       view.


  170. It was when AZ was hospitalised that he is said  to  have  disclosed
       that he fought for  the  Taliban  to  a  consultant  who  spoke  his
       language.  AZ  says  he  does  not  remember  doing  so.   Whilst  I
       recognise that he was ill and might not remember and therefore I  do
       not draw any adverse inferences from his claim  not  to  recall  any
       such conversation, I am satisfied that it did occur as  what  he  is
       said to have told the consultant is broadly consistent with his core
       claim and the consultant could not be aware of it unless AZ had told
       him.


  171. The views of staff members at Appledore are ones on  which  I  place
       more weight as those appear to have been formed over time, albeit  a
       short period prior to the  Age  Assessment.   They  also  take  into
       account AZ's interaction with others. Ms Flo  Zoltan,  a  member  of
       staff at the Appledore reception centre, is reported  to  have  made
       the following comments ([C63]):


           "During the first week or so after placement in Appledore,  [AZ]
           appeared a bit out of place but with the next few days he became
           more sociable with  the  other  young  people  and  became  more
           relaxed.   It  makes  him  look  like  he  enjoys  at  Appledore
           surrounded by other young people.
           On admission  [AZ]  appeared  as  he  is  thinking  that  he  is
           naturally in control of everything and everywhere he  goes.   He
           was adamant  to  comply  with  his  medication  and  to  receive
           instructions from a female but as per the culture he comes  from
           that is not something of surprise to  us  as  many  other  young
           people came to the Centre with the same attitude.
           It took planning and arrangement of 2 meetings on the  same  day
           with the assistance of an interpreter to clarify with  [AZ]  the
           policies and procedures at Appledore and to make him  understand
           and  accept  that  he  has  to  follow  the  instructions  given
           regarding compliance with his medication for  cerebral  malaria,
           the fact that he  is  able  to  start  Ramadan  only  after  his
           medication finish, he needs to attend his  classes  and  regular
           indoors and outdoors activity.
           Later on [AZ] learnt to obey rules and he seems a changed  young
           man, he attends all his activities on time and he seems to enjoy
           it.  He also became the first to greet  staff  and  other  young
           people around, is keen to help when needed and he seems to enjoy
           his stay in Appledore.
           [AZ] continues to take close care of his appearance and is  keen
           to do his laundry.  He cleans his room.
           [AZ] seems to be a totally changed man, he seems happy,  have  a
           nice word for everyone all the time, participates in  activities
           with joy and seems motivated with his activities.  He also seems
           very happy that he was chosen by the Sissinghurst  Cricket  Club
           to play for them as they consider him skilled and gifted.
           Do not know how those changes took place but it seems that  [AZ]
           is a changed person, a very positive person."


       Ms Zoltan confirmed with  Ms  Veg  that  she  believed  [AZ]  to  be
       appropriately placed at Appledore.  Appledore was a reception centre
       for those aged sixteen to eighteen years.


  172. Ms Zoltan's views are largely confirmed by others.   Ms  Sara  Tong,
       also a member of Appledore staff commented as follows ([C63-64]):


           "[AZ] is 186cm  [should  probably  read  168cm]  and  he  weighs
           58.6kg.  He is of medium build.  On his  arrival  he  had  thick
           curly hair and strong stubble growth, plus hair that was visible
           around his neck and chest area.  He also has  quite  hairy  arms
           and legs.   However  approximately  one  [sic]  after  being  at
           Appledore he had shaved his hair off, removed his beard and also
           removed the hair that was on his neck and chest  area.   He  has
           visible Adam's apple and slight acne.  He  has  a  medium  voice
           tone which appears to get a little high if he  is  agitated.   I
           have observed that he appears  to  be  a  very  confident  young
           person.
           I observed that he settled in very quickly and did not  seem  at
           all shy or disorientated with  his  new  surroundings.   I  have
           observed on one occasion that several young people from the same
           ethnic group were listening to him while he was talking.
           After one week of being at Appledore I have observed  that  [AZ]
           interacts well with his peers  -  especially  those  of  Afghani
           community.  He seems to spend the majority of his free  time  in
           his room socialising with them.
           As per observation, [AZ] interacts with adults/staff  as  though
           he is their equal but he does not  seem  to  consider  male  and
           female staff as equal.  I am saying this based on my  experience
           when I asked him to take his medication he looked straight at me
           and turned  over  without  responding  despite  his  ability  to
           understand English to know what I asked for.  When a male  staff
           member came in the room and I spoke to  him  he  then  responded
           verbally refusing to take his medication and stating that he  is
           keeping Ramadan.
           He does not appear to be shy when he talks to  adults  but  does
           not approach adults in conversation only seek  interaction  when
           he needs something.
           When he needs something he expects to have it then and there  as
           per today case when he requested a dvd to watch  in  the  lounge
           and the reception was closed  as  the  security  was  performing
           checks.  He insisted that he have the  dvd  'now'  and  was  not
           happy when I advised him that when he needs something  or  being
           given something he needs to say 'Please may I have'  and  'thank
           you'.  [AZ]'s response was 'Well I want a film!'
           He seems to be quite a confident young person, able to  maintain
           eye contact.  Although he was observed to laugh  and  joke  with
           his peers I have not observed the type of humour that [AZ]  has.
           His dress sense appears to be very basic, jogging bottoms and t-
           shirt with prayer cap (I have frequently observed  [AZ]  wearing
           his prayer hat throughout the day).
           [AZ] appears to be responsible for  his  personal  hygiene.   He
           takes his clothes to be laundered regularly  without  prompting.
           He appears able to carry out tasks without  prompting.   I  have
           not observed him on the young people's kitchen as  yet,  however
           when he has been in the dining room he cleans his  space  around
           him.
           On the first day of arrival [AZ] was very  quiet,  however  this
           quickly changed to being quite confident and at  ease  with  his
           peers and his surroundings.  I have  observed  that  [AZ]  is  a
           quite dominant young person and he is also appearing to be quite
           demanding in his approach to adults.  Over the first week I have
           observed [AZ} has settled well in both his interactions with his
           peers and also his behaviour.  I observed to begin with that  he
           was a little demanding when he spoke  to  staff  -  however  now
           appears to be a lot more respectful in his approach."


  173. Ms Siobhan Power, a social worker assistant, provided the  following
       observations ([C/64]):


           "[AZ] has visible long dark hair growth on his  chest.   He  has
           thick hair growth on his arms.  [AZ] has a dark  shaving  shadow
           that is clearly visible.  He speaks with a medium tone voice.  I
           observed [AZ] to have a developed Adam's apple but that was  not
           visible at all times during our meeting.
           [AZ] advised  me  that  he  has  two  really  close  friends  at
           Appledore centre and that he gets along well with them.   I  did
           not observe him to interact with any of his peers as we were  in
           a private meeting room during the interview with him.
           [AZ] was really polite, friendly and welcoming to me when I  met
           with him.  He spoke to me with confidence, answered  all  of  my
           questions without hesitation and appeared  comfortable  chatting
           with me.  [AZ] smiled a lot throughout the meeting.  He  appears
           to be a pleasant young person.  He had relaxed body language and
           made excellent eye contact, laughed a  few  times  and  appeared
           generally relaxed and at ease.
           [AZ] has confirmed that he has not ever had to do any cooking or
           laundry for himself before but that he is now being taught these
           skills at Appledore.  He  is  receiving  his  10  pocket  money
           weekly at the center but has not yet spent any of the money  and
           is instead saving it.
           [AZ] appears to be well focused in wanting to learn English  and
           to create a positive future.
           I do not believe [AZ] to be his claimed age of 15 years old.  It
           is my opinion that based on my observations of [AZ] that  he  is
           age 17 to 19 years old."


  174. Ms Rosie Ryan, a social  worker  assistant,  offered  the  following
       comments ([C/64]):


           "[AZ] is a young male claiming to be from Afghanistan, he is  of
           a medium build.  [AZ] has evidence of facial growth and a  clear
           shaving shadow and he has thick eye brows  and  a  hairy  chest.
           [AZ] does not appear to have a visibly prominent  Adam's  apple,
           he speaks in a medium tone voice.  [AZ] is  claiming  to  be  15
           years old.
           [AZ] informed me that he has made good friends in Appledore  and
           he appears as a rather confident young person.
           During the visit [AZ} engaged well with both  myself,  colleague
           Siobhan and  the  interpreter.   He  seemed  very  confident  in
           talking to us seems as though he had never met any of us before.
           [AZ] informed us that he has some very good friends at Appledore
           and that he has no issues with the other residents of Appledore.
            He was able to make good eye contact when speaking to me.  [AZ]
           informed us that he is  participating  in  English  classes  and
           enjoying these.
           It appears that [AZ] is able to look after  his  hygiene  as  he
           appeared clean and in clean clothing.   When  discussing  living
           with other YP in the community  and  living  independently  [AZ]
           stated that he is unable to cook or wash his clothes as of  yet,
           however they are assisting him with this at Appledore.   He  was
           unsure whether he would go living in the  community  with  other
           YP.  He is also unsure of the English money other than  the  10
           note.  I believe this to be however because he  hasn't  had  the
           chance to use these skills whilst living in Appledore.
           [AZ] reports having good friends at Appledore which suggests  he
           is liked by others at the centre.  He seemed very confident  and
           was happy to answer the questions asked of him.
           It is my opinion that based on  my  observations  [AZ]  is  post
           pubescent, he has a clear shaving shadow and a hairy  chest  and
           thick eye brows.  It seems socially he  mixes  well  with  other
           young  people  in  the  centre.   This  suggests  that   he   is
           appropriately placed at Appledore.  I believe [AZ] to  be  16-17
           years old."


  175. For understandable reasons (based on the passage of time), I have no
       written or oral evidence from those persons.  Their evidence is  not
       the subject of a sworn statement and has not been tested  by  cross-
       examination.  I am also aware that these comments were made  only  a
       short while after AZ's arrival in the UK.  As such, Ms Zoltan and Ms
       Tong would only have had the opportunity to observe AZ for  probably
       no  more  than  a  couple  of  weeks.   Ms  Power's  and  Ms  Ryan's
       observations appear to be based on a meeting rather  than  observing
       AZ over a period.  I also note some similarity  of  wording  between
       their comments.  Nonetheless, I consider the comments of  Ms  Zoltan
       and Ms Tong in particular to be of assistance and relevant  as  they
       appear to be the only evidence I have about AZ's  interactions  with
       others, in particular his peers and adults at the reception  centre.
       They are therefore  evidence  on  which  I  can  place  some  weight
       notwithstanding the form which that evidence takes.


  176. Whilst not all of the comments made suggest that AZ is older than he
       claims, some does.  I am prepared to  accept  that  evidence  of  AZ
       being demanding and impatient might in fact be evidence pointing  to
       immaturity rather than maturity.  However, the ease  with  which  he
       adjusted and his confidence dealing with both his peers  and  adults
       is, in my view, an indicator  of  maturity  (as  the  age  assessors
       noted).


  177. I have already mentioned Dr Falk's criticism of the  Age  Assessment
       based on AZ's physical presentation and demeanour.  I do  not  share
       her view  that  the  Age  Assessment  focussed  unduly  on  physical
       presentation.  I accept that it is one factor but the Age Assessment
       notes the unreliability of physical factors and,  although  some  of
       the comments from others (particularly the hospital consultants) are
       also based primarily if not entirely on physical presentation, other
       observations are, as I have just noted, based on other factors which
       are relevant.


  178. I note what Dr Falk says about demeanour but, having  seen  AZ  give
       evidence before me, I share the views of those who  observed  AZ  in
       2016 about his confidence and ability to challenge, rather than  the
       opinion of Dr Falk  that  AZ  is  a  shy  young  person  lacking  in
       confidence.  He did not become emotional or  distressed  during  his
       evidence.  That may be explicable by the reasons which Dr Falk gives
       - his mental health problems.  However, as I have already  observed,
       she considered that AZ would find it difficult to give evidence in a
       court hearing about his experiences whereas  I  observed  quite  the
       opposite. I do not place any great weight on my own observations.  I
       am no expert and I did not see AZ in a variety of settings or over a
       lengthy period.  However, he did give evidence for a good few hours.




  179. Mr Stringer was asked to comment on Dr  Falk's  report  regarding  a
       possible explanation for AZ's demeanour and her comment  about  AZ's
       age.  Mr Stringer gave a very full answer to  this  which  impressed
       me, and I therefore record it as I have noted it in full:


           "It depends on perspective.  In relation to  the  report  of  Dr
           Falk, she is not an age assessor and I am not a qualified health
           professional.  I have experience of working  with  young  people
           with mental health problems.  In  my  experience,  the  kind  of
           presentation I remember witnessing is not typical of what I have
           experienced.  That doesn't mean it doesn't happen.  I  have  had
           the unfortunate experience of asking children about abuse.  I am
           alive to children normalising or dissociating.  Even  when  that
           is happening, it is unusual for a young  person  not  to  change
           demeanour.  It is not usual for a young person to yawn  and  not
           be engaged.  You would see some change in body language such  as
           looking down or looking  into  the  distance.   Sometimes  there
           would be no recollection.  You might get to the point where  you
           believe something happened and the young person  can't  remember
           anything.  That is not what happened here"


       Although Mr Stringer was obviously not  able  to  remember  the  age
       assessment interviews after this time with any specificity, I accept
       his evidence that, based on what was said in the notes, he was  able
       to remember something about the interview itself.


  180. Mr Lay suggested that it was inappropriate for the age assessors  to
       make observations to  AZ  about  his  demeanour  as  they  did  (see
       [C/100]).  I disagree.  As  Mr  Stringer  said  and  I  accept,  the
       assessors should share such observations in order to allow the young
       person to provide comment or explanation.  It is evident  from  AZ's
       response that he was given the opportunity to and did respond to the
       age assessors' comments.  In any event, AZ's demeanour was  not  the
       only reason for the assessors' conclusions as to age.


  181.  The other factor relied upon by  the  age  assessors  is  AZ's  own
       credibility.  I do not need to  deal  with  the  views  of  the  age
       assessors in this regard, first, because I heard  AZ  give  evidence
       and I am able to form my own views and, second, because, due to  the
       passage of time since  the  Age  Assessment,  there  has  been  more
       information and evidence which bears on this question.  This is  not
       a standard  judicial  review  where  my  consideration  of  the  Age
       Assessment is based on information which the assessors  did  or  did
       not take into account (although of course if they failed to consider
       some information it may influence the weight to be  given  to  their
       views).  However, in any event, the assessors did take into  account
       evidence about AZ's background, family  history  and  circumstances,
       his education, journey to the UK and specifics of his claim.  All of
       those matters were relevant to the overall assessment.


  182. In that regard, Mr Lay suggested  that  the  questioning  about  the
       watching of inappropriate You Tube videos was either  irrelevant  or
       possibly oppressive.  He suggested to Mr Stringer at one point  that
       by asking questions about that when the assessors did in the  course
       of the first interview at [C/75], Ms Veg was distracting AZ from the
       chronology he was trying to give.  I  disagree.   The  paragraph  in
       question appears at the point in time when Ms Veg was explaining  to
       AZ why the age assessment was considered necessary, AZ had  answered
       few if any questions other than to confirm  his  name  and  that  he
       understood who the others were at  the  interview.   Similarly,  the
       series of questions about that incident at  [C/87]  follow  directly
       from a line of questions about internet use.  That was relevant  not
       only to credibility as Mr Stringer pointed  out  but  also  to  AZ's
       background and issues such  as  contact  with  his  family.   As  Mr
       Stringer said in his  evidence,  that  AZ  continued  to  deny  this
       incident when [K] had no reason to lie about it, raised an issue  of
       wider credibility.  Another example which Mr Stringer gave  was  the
       inconsistency concerning AZ's contact with his family when he denied
       saying previously that he had been in contact.  As Mr Stringer  also
       explained by reference to the videos issue arising in the second age
       assessment interview, the Respondent owed a  duty  of  care  to  the
       young person and he considered that Ms Veg was trying to explore the
       issue for that reason also.


  183. One point which struck me arising from the Age  Assessment  was  not
       relied upon by either party but, since it appears  in  the  evidence
       before me, I mention it.  That is the reaction which AZ had when  he
       was told that his age had been assessed as older than claimed.  That
       appears in most detail in the notes of  the  second  age  assessment
       interview at [G/84].  AZ's immediate reaction upon being  told  that
       he was being assessed as seventeen was to say "[i]f you  are  making
       me 17 then it is better you put me back in Afghanistan".  He refused
       to accept the assessment saying "[i]t is because you have come to  a
       very high conclusion".


  184. Whilst I can understand AZ being upset at not being believed whether
       he was an adult or a child, his reaction appears to me  to  disclose
       an understanding of the importance of age and the treatment which he
       would receive.  It is also behaviour  which  shows  his  ability  to
       challenge and discloses some maturity.  The same can be  said  about
       the quite sarcastic remark made in response to the comment  made  by
       Ms Veg that AZ did not appear to be physically older based on having
       to work as he said that he had not worked.  AZ replied "I  was  also
       not lying down in flowers or in a park.  I have  also  been  through
       all of this".  That is, as Mr  Stringer  noted,  a  robust  reaction
       which also suggests some insight and therefore indicates  a  certain
       maturity of thought.


  185. Whilst on the subject of AZ's understanding of why assessment of his
       age might have some importance to his treatment in the UK, I mention
       also a point which arose in the Human Rights  Assessment  concerning
       the support which AZ would receive going forward.  The Human  Rights
       Assessment was carried out because the Respondent was about to cease
       supporting AZ.  AZ was told that he might be able to claim  "Section
       4 support" from the Home Office in  certain  circumstances  but,  as
       appears at [C/41], AZ refused to do so  because  he  said  that  "it
       would mean that he was in agreement to  return  to  his  country  of
       origin".  Whilst the nature of  Section  4  support  may  have  been
       explained to him by his support worker or legal adviser and he might
       have been told of the  consequences,  that  awareness  is  something
       which indicates a mature thought process.  I note  though  that  the
       Human Rights Assessment was conducted in April/May 2018 when even on
       the Applicant's own case he was approaching adulthood.


  186. Turning  then  briefly  to  the  Age  Assessment  Review,  Mr  Silva
       indicated that he had carried out two such reviews and he  explained
       the process as being to  look  at  what  was  in  the  original  age
       assessment and the new information provided to ascertain whether the
       new information might lead to a conclusion  that  the  age  assessed
       should be significantly  higher  or  lower.   As  I  understood  his
       evidence, Mr Silva did not agree with the proposition  that  it  was
       part of his function to consider whether anything had  "gone  wrong"
       with the initial assessment.


  187. Mr Silva was asked about his  reliance  in  footnotes  on  published
       research about the ages at which puberty was reached.  He said  that
       he relied on the lack of growth in height only as an  indication  of
       the factual position because Ms  Mehrabian  had  said  that  AZ  had
       grown.


  188. In relation to credibility, Mr Silva said that he  did  not  have  a
       view of AZ's credibility himself.  His attention was  drawn  to  the
       following part of the Age Assessment Review ([A/38]):


           "Dr Falk advises that 'trauma affects the ability to recall  and
           order events in a sequential manner'; however [AZ]'s credibility
           during  the  age  assessment   was   not   questioned   due   to
           inconsistencies with  his  narrative  but  by  his  attempts  to
           deceive assessors.  For example, age assessors noted  that  [AZ]
           denied that  he  was  watching  violent  videos  at  his  foster
           placement despite his  foster  carer  providing  evidence.   The
           assessors concluded that  he  was  changing  and  adjusting  his
           story".


  189. Mr Silva was constrained to accept that this was not a citation from
       the Age Assessment and that the assessors did not actually say  that
       AZ had deceived them.  However, I do not think that this  adds  much
       to the evidence for me, first, because the overall conclusion of the
       age assessors is  that  AZ  was  not  telling  the  truth  which  is
       tantamount to an allegation of deception, and,  second,  because  AZ
       now admits that he lied  about  certain  matters  (for  example  the
       second suicide bombing) and, as I have already  said,  whether  AZ's
       account is credible is a matter which I  have to consider  based  on
       the totality of the evidence and not simply what is relied  upon  in
       the Age Assessment or Age Assessment Review.


  190. I consider that I am able to place weight on the Age  Assessment  in
       particular.  As I have observed, the assessors took into account the
       opinions of others who, albeit over a short period, had been able to
       see AZ interacting with peers and adults.  Appledore was for sixteen
       to eighteen years old and AZ does not claim to be much younger  than
       the youngest official age for those  accommodated  there.   However,
       his behaviour in challenging and adapting does appear to me,  as  it
       did to the assessors to be indicative of a certain maturity.


      Other Evidence


  191. I have been provided with a witness  statement  of  Andrea  Courtier
       dated December 2019.  She was  not  called  to  give  evidence.   Ms
       Courtier is a Senior Personal Adviser for South  East  Care  Leavers
       Team 1.  She has a BTec National Diploma in Social Care  and  a  NVQ
       Level 3 in Children and  Young  People.   She  has  eighteen  years'
       experience working with young people including asylum seekers  as  a
       personal adviser and twenty months' experience as a Senior  Personal
       Adviser.


  192. Ms Courtier's  only  involvement  in  this  case  is  that  she  was
       allocated the role of AZ's personal adviser from 19 to 28 March 2018
       whilst Mr Towse was on secondment within Kent County  Council.   She
       does not say in her statement that she met with  AZ  at  that  time.
       She says that the only time she met him was  on  12  September  2018
       when she conducted a welfare check shortly after  AZ  ceased  to  be
       supported by the Respondent.  As such, the  apparent  dispute  about
       her involvement as set out in the witness statements of  AZ  and  Ms
       Mehrabian is not a dispute at all.

  193. Ms Courtier records that, during her visit, AZ said the following to
       her:


           "[3]...It was at this point he told me the following -  'When  I
           came to the UK, I had malaria, and was in hospital.   They  took
           blood and did some tests, and the Doctor said that they  thought
           I was 29 years old. I told him that I was only 15'"


       Ms Courtier goes on to say that she passed that information on to Mr
       Silva also indicating her view that AZ was older than he claimed  to
       be.  She does not say on what that was  based  other  than  that  it
       arose from her "years of  experience  working  with  asylum  seeking
       young people".  I do not doubt that Ms Courtier genuinely holds  the
       view she has expressed but given her limited involvement with AZ and
       that she does not provide any reasons in support  of  that  view,  I
       give it no weight.


  194. The extent to which Mr Silva relied  on  Ms  Courtier's  comment  is
       limited - it certainly was not central - and in any event, as I have
       already observed, it is for me to ascertain age  based  on  all  the
       material.   This  is  not  a  standard  judicial  review   exercise.
       Moreover, the main focus of the evidence is the Age  Assessment  and
       not the Age Assessment Review.


  195. Somewhat unusually in this case, I was not given evidence and AZ was
       not asked about his  independence  skills  in  the  UK  although  Ms
       Mehrabian did give some limited evidence about these.  That the  Age
       Assessment did not deal with these matters perhaps arises  from  the
       timing of it and that it was not challenged at that  time.   It  was
       not until after the Age Assessment, as I understand it, that AZ  was
       moved into Appledore and thereafter  to  independent  accommodation.
       However, some of the social care  records  do  point  to  AZ  having
       adapted well when he had to  live  unsupported.   For  example,  the
       Respondent drew attention at [H/238] to the record of a  CLA  review
       meeting conducted on 19 December 2016 which  AZ  attended  with  his
       allocated caseworker at that time and which sets out  the  following
       information:


           "[AZ] has been living in independent accommodation in Sheerness.
           His independence skills are good.  He can travel alone and
           manages this well - to and from solicitor's appointments.
           He is enjoying and his behaviour and attitude has changed to
           positive.  He is happy there and is getting on well with the
           other house mates.
           [AZ] manages money well and his self-care is good.  The house is
           clean and the boys all work together to keep it that way.
           [AZ] has a fixed penalty notice to pay for cigarettes litter
           dropping and he has not means to pay full and if he does pay in
           time the amount will go up.
           [AZ] is offering 20 towards the penalty fee and asking social
           services to pay rest on loan to him, which he will pay in agreed
           instalments.  SW would put a request to her manager for a loan
           of the rest amount of fees to [AZ]."


  196. I recognise that what is there recorded differs from Ms  Mehrabian's
       evidence that AZ is so vulnerable that, as she explained, she had to
       make very detailed arrangements with him to travel  to  the  hearing
       with her.  However,  the  extract  is  supported  by  other  similar
       observations  in  the  records  more  generally  about  AZ's  coping
       abilities whilst in the UK.  What is there said  also  accords  with
       what was observed whilst AZ was in Appledore  and  what  Ms  Perkins
       says about AZ's independence skills whilst living with her  and  her
       partner in May 2019 (see [123] above).


  197. Of course, that AZ is able to live independently now is unsurprising
       given that he has been in the UK for nearly four years and  even  on
       his claimed age is an adult.  However, that  he  had  the  level  of
       independence indicated by what is said in the CLA review as early as
       December 2016 is some indication of maturity.  I accept though  that
       he was obliged to live independently due to the  assessment  of  his
       age and he was therefore forced to cope whether he found it easy  to
       do so or not.


  198. Finally, under this heading, I deal with the Tribunal  Decision  (of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet) promulgated on 12 July  2017  (at
       [E/74-92]).  Mr Lay accepted that I  could  take  into  account  the
       Judge's findings so far as relevant as this decision  has  not  been
       set aside. I have already noted that  the  Applicant  has  a  second
       asylum appeal and nothing I say about Judge  Turquet's  decision  is
       intended to or could bind that second Judge.


  199. Judge Turquet found AZ not to  be  credible  in  his  core  account.
       Certain parts of that account were not challenged by  the  Secretary
       of State, such as that he is the nationality he claims and that  his
       uncle was a member of the Taliban.  However, the  remainder  of  the
       account was not accepted, and the Judge found it not to be credible.
        That has some limited bearing on  AZ's  credibility  which  I  have
       already rejected for the reasons given at [38] to [101] above.


  200. In relation to AZ's age, the Judge said this ([E/84]):


            "39. The Appellant was age assessed on 12.5.2016  as  being  17
           and having a date of birth as 1.1.1999.  This would give him  an
           age of 18 at the date of the decision and the  hearing.   I  was
           mindful of the Appellant's age.  Although he is now 18,  he  was
           under 18 when he arrived in the UK and when he was  interviewed.
           The Appellant gave his evidence in a very confident way.  I note
           that  the  assessors  noted  his   level   of   confidence   and
           presentations and were unable to accept him to  be  his  claimed
           age of 15.  Based  on  his  presentations  and  the  observation
           provided by involved professionals he was considered  to  be  17
           years of age.  One of the Social Workers  had  queried  that  he
           could be an adult and a hospital Consultant had considered  that
           he was post-pubescent.  I am not an expert in age assessment but
           there was nothing at the hearing to indicate that he was younger
           than the age he was assessed to be, which is 18 at the  date  of
           hearing."

  201. I do not place weight on the Immigration Judge's finding  of  itself
       as that is based largely on the Age Assessment  and  other  evidence
       which I have to consider.


      DISCUSSION OF FINDINGS AND EVIDENCE: ASSESSMENT OF AGE

  202. The question of AZ's age and date of birth is not a binary one based
       on preferring the evidence of one party over that of the other.   It
       is a matter of precedent fact to be determined on all  the  evidence
       before me considered holistically.


  203. Doing the best that I can on the evidence presented  to  me,  I  now
       turn to draw together my findings on that evidence and  to  consider
       the central issue of AZ's age and date of birth.


  204. I note in this regard that I was not invited to  find  that  AZ  was
       other than either his claimed age or his assessed age.   I  was  not
       asked to conclude either that AZ was younger than he claimed  to  be
       or that he was older than he was assessed  to  be.   Neither  was  I
       asked to find that he was between those two ages although  I  accept
       that I could do so if the evidence pointed  to  those  alternatives.
       Accordingly, though, the parties ask me to consider whether  AZ  was
       born in 2001 (as he claims) or in 1999 (as assessed).


  205. I begin by making the very obvious point that AZ cannot know himself
       when he was born.  He can only know based on what he has  been  told
       since his birth.  To that extent, he relies on what he was  told  by
       his mother and what he says appeared on one or other of the Tazkiras
       which he claims to have had but does not produce.


  206. I have already discounted AZ's case concerning the Tazkiras  due  to
       inconsistencies in his evidence about them.  In fact, on  one  view,
       his evidence would support the assessed age or suggest  that  he  is
       even older than the assessed age.   As  such,  I  cannot  place  any
       weight on that factor in favour of his claimed age.


  207. I do not place weight either on what AZ says  he  was  told  by  his
       mother.  I accept that the giving of a year of birth of 1380 and the
       seasons to which AZ refers support his claimed age  and  approximate
       time of year of birth.  However, I do not  accept  that  his  mother
       would have told him out of the blue that he was aged  fifteen  years
       just before he left Afghanistan and that it was important for him to
       remember that (and his year of birth) other than to ensure  that  he
       would repeat those facts to others.  I was not told for example that
       birthdays were important to AZ's family and/or routinely  celebrated
       or that it was his birthday shortly before he left which might  have
       been a reason for his mother to tell him his age  at  that  time.  I
       accept that his mother may have said what AZ  recounts  and  AZ  may
       well  have  believed  what  she  said.  However,  there  are   other
       contradictions in his account which lead me to doubt that  this  was
       genuinely his age at that time.


  208. First, as I have indicated, the timing of events in  Afghanistan  is
       confused.  AZ has been inconsistent about the age he  was  when  his
       father and brother were killed and the age he was therefore when  he
       went to the Taliban camp. There are more minor inconsistencies about
       the time he was in education before being taken by his uncle to  the
       Taliban camp.  Other evidence such as the  obtaining  of  the  first
       Tazkira also does not sit comfortably with AZ being twelve years old
       at a time three to three and a half years before coming to the UK.


  209. Second, I do not accept, if this is what the Applicant  is  arguing,
       that any confusion as to dates  has  anything  to  do  with  working
       memory problems.  Mr Sellwood's evidence does not suggest that there
       is, generally, a link between working memory problems and  long-term
       memory. Furthermore, although on occasions, AZ has said that he does
       not  remember   ages   and   dates,   he   has   generally   offered
       straightforward  answers  when  asked  about  what  age  he  was  at
       particular times and how long he spent, for example, in the  Taliban
       camp. Unfortunately, his evidence between various accounts has  been
       inconsistent and cannot therefore be relied upon.


  210. Third, in spite of that, I do accept that AZ himself  probably  does
       not know how long he spent in the Taliban  camp  if  indeed  he  was
       there at all (which appears to be doubted in the Tribunal Decision).
        As he says, there were no calendars or  watches  there.   I  accept
       that is quite likely to be the case.  As such, he  could  only  know
       how long he had been there based on what his mother told  him  which
       brings me back to the problem of reliance  on  that  one  source  of
       evidence where she would have every reason for telling  him  to  say
       that he was a particular age at the point in time when he  was  just
       about to leave Afghanistan.


  211. Looking at AZ's evidence as a whole, I consider it more likely based
       on that evidence, that he was aged  thirteen  when  his  father  and
       brother were killed (as he has said on two occasions when asked) and
       not ten (as he has said on other occasions).  He says that was about
       five years before he came to the UK which would support  a  date  of
       birth in around 1999.  That would also be more consistent  with  him
       being about fifteen years when he got his  first  Tazkira  three  to
       three and a half years before coming to the UK.


  212. In addition to those reasons, I have already explained why I do  not
       accept that AZ is not in contact with his family in  Afghanistan  or
       at least able to contact them if he wishes to do so.  He may well be
       denying that ability to prevent enquiries  being  made  which  might
       undermine his account.


  213. There are a number of other inconsistencies in AZ's evidence  as  to
       his asylum claim.  Whilst not necessarily relevant to credibility of
       his case as to age, the fact that he has now  admitted  not  telling
       the truth about aspects of that claim (and embellishing his  account
       for example as to the second suicide bombing) is undermining of  his
       credibility in relation to his evidence more generally.


  214. I have explained why I am unable to give weight to the  evidence  of
       Ms Mehrabian.  As I have indicated, I do not doubt that her  opinion
       as to AZ's age is honestly held but the reasons she gives in support
       of that view do not enable me to give that opinion weight as I  have
       already explained.


  215. Similarly, I have explained why Dr Falk's evidence does  not  assist
       me in this regard.  As I have also recorded when  dealing  with  her
       evidence, I do not accept her criticisms of the Age Assessment.   Mr
       Sellwood's evidence does not directly go to age and I  have  already
       noted that the working memory problems which Mr Sellwood  identifies
       are not generally linked to long-term memory and would not therefore
       explain the significant inconsistencies in AZ's evidence.  Moreover,
       Mr Sellwood himself observed that he had difficulties explaining the
       results of the working memory tests when viewed against the  outcome
       of the other tests.


  216. Turning then to the Age Assessment, the assessors placed some weight
       on the lack of credibility of AZ's account.  For the reasons I  have
       already given, based  on  more  up-to-date  evidence  and  therefore
       further inconsistencies, I share that concern. Those inconsistencies
       include his account of his claimed  age  and  therefore  I,  as  the
       assessors, do not accept that AZ was fifteen when he arrived in  the
       UK as he has claimed.


  217. The assessors also based their assessment on views offered by  those
       who had the opportunity to observe AZ with others of his age  group.
       I accept that there is evidence from a variety  of  sources  at  the
       time of AZ's arrival and subsequently which might lend some  limited
       support to his claimed age.  For  example,  the  fact  that  he  was
       initially placed in foster care  by  the  Respondent  and  that  the
       consultant at the hospital said that he could be between fifteen and
       twenty-five years (although of  course  that  latter  opinion  would
       place his claimed age right at the bottom of a ten  years'  spectrum
       and so is of less weight).  However, those views  were  provided  by
       persons who observed AZ over a very limited  meeting  when  compared
       with those who observed  him  interacting  with  his  peers  over  a
       slightly longer period.


  218. For those reasons, I, as the assessors did, can place weight on  the
       views of Ms Zoltan and Ms Tong.  I accept that those views say  only
       that AZ was appropriately placed in Appledore which was a  reception
       centre for those aged sixteen to eighteen years.  However, based  on
       what is there said about AZ's confidence and interactions, I, as the
       assessors, consider it appropriate to view those views as supporting
       an assessment that AZ was in the median range of those  accommodated
       in Appledore ie approximately seventeen years of age  at  that  time
       (in mid 2016).


  219. I give weight to  the  Age  Assessment  itself.   It  is  a  careful
       analysis of the evidence on a holistic basis.  Taken in  the  round,
       the evidence supports the view taken by the assessors.  I  was  also
       impressed by the  evidence  of  Mr  Stringer  who  was  one  of  the
       assessors.  Although, for understandable reasons, he was  unable  to
       remember much about the assessment, the considered opinion  evidence
       which he offered assisted me to  further  understand  the  reasoning
       which adds to the weight which I give to the Age Assessment.


  220. I give weight also to the evidence there and elsewhere in the social
       care records as to AZ's ability to  live  independently  even  quite
       soon after his arrival in the UK,  his  confidence  and  ability  to
       challenge.  Those factors lead me also to conclude that AZ is  older
       than he has claimed and likely to be the age at which  he  has  been
       assessed.


  221. Taking all the  evidence  together  along  with  my  views  of  that
       evidence and looking at it in the round, I have concluded that AZ is
       the age at which he was assessed. The Age Assessment  was  concluded
       on 24 June 2016 when he was assessed to be seventeen.   He was given
       a date of birth of 1 January 1999.  Although I have  indicated  that
       some of AZ's evidence, particularly as to the Tazkiras and  the  age
       he was when his father and brother were killed, suggests that he may
       in fact be older than that, I was not asked  by  the  Respondent  to
       depart from the assessed age.  Since AZ is on either party's case an
       adult, the only impact of my judgment is as to the time during which
       he remains entitled to leaving care support provision.


  222. Doing the best I can and recognising that it is very difficult to be
       certain as to precise age, I find that AZ  is  now  aged  twenty-one
       years and I assess his date of birth to be 1 January 1999.


   Signed        [pic]Dated: 25 March 2020
   Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
