
IAC-FH-LW-V1

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/6138/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                            16 February 2017


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                              john ehis osemota
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr P Corren, Counsel, instructed by Law Lane Solicitors appeared on behalf
of the Applicant.

Mr W Hansen, Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                    - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


1.   This is an application  for  judicial  review  of  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing the applicant's leave  to  remain  in  this
    country on the basis of his living with a partner.  It is necessary  to
    look at the history of this matter to some extent.


2.   The applicant entered this country, he being Nigerian, as a student  in
    September 2007.  He made various applications to remain  as  a  student
    and in due course, following refusal, he had his appeal allowed, and he
    was able to obtain a Masters Degree from the University of  Southampton
    in December 2010.  He then applied for leave as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study
    Work) Migrant and a visa was granted, valid until  29  June  2013.   He
    left this country the day before that.  He then returned  in  September
    2013, again as a student, he having been granted entry clearance  which
    was valid until February 2015.  He received a postgraduate  Diploma  in
    Business Administration in March 2015, but he had refusal in  April  of
    the application that he had made cover that.   He  then  in  July  2015
    applied for leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant and that  was
    refused and so were various other applications and an  application  for
    judicial review.  He has now sought leave to remain  as  the  unmarried
    partner of his partner whom he met when they were both  at  Southampton
    University in 2011 and they have, it is said, formed a relationship.

3.   The refusal of that by the Secretary of State  which  is  under  attack
    was on 22 March 2016 and it resulted in a removal direction.   He  had,
    for some reason best known to the Secretary of  State,  been  put  into
    custody.  It is difficult to understand quite why,  but  it  is  to  be
    noted that on a bail application  his  partner  had  offered  to  stand
    surety for him and it was clearly accepted evidence having  been  given
    both by him and his partner before the First-tier Judge that they  were
    indeed then living together.

4.   One of the problems in this case is that those advising  the  applicant
    have produced an enormous quantity of documentation which  was  alleged
    by them to show that they had been living together for two years  prior
    to the making of the application.  The original application was made in
    March 2015.  Accordingly, it was necessary to show that they  had  been
    living together for two years before that.  Of course, there  had  been
    the gap between June and September, but that would not be held  against
    him if there had been cohabitation before that, and it is his case, now
    supported by evidence  from  his  partner,  that  that  indeed  is  the
    position.  Unfortunately, the documentary evidence does  not  show  the
    relevant two year period.  I say the relevant two year  period  because
    in order to bring himself within the Rules he has to establish that  he
    has been with his partner for a period of at least two years before the
    application was made.

5.   He does have an application outside the Rules, but  his  presence  here
    was at best precarious.  That does not affect his family life right and
    it is said too that he may even have been here unlawfully at  the  time
    the application was made.  I do not need to go into  that  because  the
    reality is that on the face of it,  if  he  cannot  establish  that  he
    complies with the two year Rule, he has a weak Article 8 claim.

6.   Unfortunately, the evidence  from  his  partner  was  not  put  to  the
    Secretary of State at the time that the adverse decision  was  made  in
    April 2016, and the Secretary of State perfectly properly took the view
    that the necessary two year period had not then  been  established  and
    that led her to certify the claim that was made under Section  94.   On
    the material before her at that time, and having regard to the weakness
    of any claim outside the Rules, it may be that that  decision  was  one
    that she was entitled to reach.  Certainly, that is the submission made
    on her behalf by Mr Hansen.  When one is considering  even  weak  cases
    outside the Rules and there is clear indication of present cohabitation
    and that there has been living together on the documentation  since  at
    the least the beginning of August 2014, which is what the documentation
    establishes, then it may well be that even such a  weak  claim  outside
    the Rules was not doomed to failure.  Mr Hansen  submits  that  it  was
    doomed and draws  my  attention  to  the  authority  of  SS  (Congo)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] 1 All ER of  20  July
    2006.

7.   The law does not show that any claim such as this outside the Rules  is
    bound to fail.  It shows, as I say,  that  there  may  be  considerable
    obstacles.  Nonetheless, where there is a clear,  genuine  relationship
    and where consideration has to be given to  whether  that  relationship
    can properly be expected to be carried on outside the  United  Kingdom,
    there is an inevitable issue, particularly where there is no  financial
    bar under the Rules to say that that application should fail, so  I  am
    afraid in some doubt as to whether it was appropriate for the Secretary
    of State to certify having regard to the clear evidence of an  existing
    relationship which had been in existence  for  at  least  a  period  of
    eighteen months.

8.   However, it is of course always open to the  Secretary  of  State,  and
    she does this regularly to issue supplementary decisions when  judicial
    review proceedings are brought.  She now  has  the  evidence  from  the
    partner.  She had at all times the evidence from the applicant and that
    would have had to have been rejected in order to justify the  decision,
    so that is another reason why certification is not in the circumstances
    such as this appropriate, but we are dealing with human rights and  the
    obligation upon the Secretary of State is  to  consider  at  all  times
    whether a decision is in accordance with human rights.  There  is  also
    an obligation on this Tribunal equally pursuant to  Section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act to comply with the relevant human rights  legislation.
    In those circumstances the view that one can only consider the material
    before the Secretary of State at the time a decision was made  must  be
    applied somewhat flexibly when one is considering  human  rights.   The
    difficulty of course is that the Secretary of State chooses to  certify
    and that is all that is in issue.

9.   It seems to me, for the reasons that I have given, that  this  decision
    to certify was not one which was in  all  the  circumstances  a  lawful
    decision.  It was not one that the Secretary of State was  entitled  to
    reach, even on the material  that  was  before  her  at  the  time  the
    decision was made, but in the light of the developing evidence, bearing
    in mind as I say that one is concerned with human rights,  in  my  view
    this decision is one which cannot stand  so  far  as  certification  is
    concerned.

10.  It is submitted by Mr Hansen that, as I  have  said,  on  the  material
    before her, when the decision was made, it was one she was entitled  to
    reach and therefore I should dismiss this application leaving  it  open
    to the applicant to make  a  fresh  claim  based  upon  the  up-to-date
    situation.  As it happens because regrettably this has taken some  time
    to come before the court, the situation as it now is will  have  to  be
    taken into account because clearly the Secretary of State is now  going
    to have to make, in any event, a fresh decision, but in  my  view,  for
    the reasons I have given the existing decision cannot stand as  it  is.
    ~~~~0~~~~

MR JUSTICE COLLINS:    So, what relief do you say I should give?

MR CORREN:    My Lord, the only -

MR JUSTICE COLLINS:    Really the only certification is -

MR CORREN:        Only the certification which we rebut as being -

MR JUSTICE COLLINS:    Well, what you should do  is  to,  that  having  been
                      quashed gives you the right to appeal in country.

MR CORREN:    Yes.

MR JUSTICE COLLINS:    But obviously the Secretary of State will  reconsider
                      because she won't want to go along the  appeal  route
                      if she takes the view now  that  he  is  entitled  to
                      stay.  I mean obviously  that  will  be  a  waste  of
                      everyone's time and money.  But  of  course  she  can
                      make  a  decision  and  she  may  come  to  the  same
                      decision, that's not for me to decide.

MR HANSEN:    I've always understood that in these circumstances no  further
                      relief is necessary beyond quashing the -

MR JUSTICE COLLINS:    No, I think that's right.

MR HANSEN:    And then the Secretary of State could issue a  fresh  decision
                      with the same result.

MR JUSTICE COLLINS:    Well that's up to her.

MR HANSEN:    But it would probably be unwise in the circumstances -

MR JUSTICE COLLINS:    No, that's all the relief I think I can give you.

MR  CORREN:     Yes,  it's  just   the   matter   in   those   circumstances
                      (indecipherable) costs.  There may be some  arguments
                      about costs not following the event  (indecipherable)
                      so I wonder whether (indecipherable) - make a similar
                      -

MR JUSTICE COLLINS:    Make a  similar  order  of  the  last  case  I  think
                      because I mean I would not frankly  award  you  costs
                      based upon all the work that you've done in producing
                      - or your solicitors have done in producing all  this
                      material.  At the  very  least  there  may  be  other
                      grounds for resisting -

MR CORREN@    I'm in Your Lordship's hands - I mean,  it  is  a  very  short
                      argument - it may be save your  energy  further  down
                      the line -

MR JUSTICE COLLINS:    Well, no, because I think they, you haven't served  a
                      schedule and you will need that at  the  very  least,
                      won't you, because I can't really make  any  sensible
                      decision without it, so I think I will make the  same
                      order as -

MR CORREN:    14 days

MR JUSTICE COLLINS:    14 days, 14 days, 14 days, yeah, and  as  I  said  in
                      the other one that I  have  to  deal  with  leave  to
                      appeal and I refuse it.  You will  have  to  persuade
                      the Court of Appeal if you want to take  it  further,
                      but I don't think you will.  Alright, well thank  you
                      both.

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/6138/2016


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                       The Queen on the application of

                              John Ehis Osemota
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



     Before Mr Justice Collins sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr Corren, of Counsel, instructed  by  Law  Lane
Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and Mr Hansen of Counsel,  instructed
by the Government Legal Department,  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  at  a
hearing at Field House, London on 16th February 2017.

Order


(1)  Application allowed and the decision of 22 March 2016 is quashed.

(2)  The defendant must pay the applicant's  costs  reasonably  incurred  in
      pursuing this application to be the subject of a  detailed  assessment
      if not agreed.

Reasons

In the judgment annexed.


                                    [pic]

         Signed:


                                     The Honourable Mr Justice Collins




        Dated:    16 February 2017










Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).






