
IAC-AH-DN-V2

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                                                JR/6309/2019

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                            21 February 2020


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                          SUDHARSAN IDHAYACHANDRAN
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE aLLEN


                               - - - - - - - -

Ms S Jegarajah, instructed by A and P Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Ms H Masood, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    JUDGE ALLEN: The applicant has applied  with  permission  for  judicial
    review of the Secretary of State's decision of 29  May  2019  rejecting
    further submissions as not amounting to a fresh claim and maintaining a
    deportation order.


The Immigration History


1.   The applicant claims to have come to the United Kingdom  on  7  January
    2010.  He made an asylum claim later  that  month  and  the  claim  was
    refused in June.  He appealed that decision, unsuccessfully, the appeal
    being dismissed on 9 August 2010 by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   In 2011, having been marked as an absconder and being in breach of  his
    reporting conditions he was charged with theft from  his  employer  and
    fraud  by  false  representation  and  convicted  to   twelve   months'
    imprisonment in total for fraud, possession  of  an  ID  document  with
    improper intention and theft.

3.   On 25 September 2013 he was served with a decision notice  and  reasons
    for deportation letter and appealed  that  decision.   His  appeal  was
    dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal  in  2014  and  he  became  appeal
    rights exhausted on 6 July 2015.  An application for  leave  to  remain
    under  family/private  life  on  the  ten  year  route   was   rejected
    subsequently,  further  submissions  were  made  in  2016  and  further
    representations again in 2018.  He appealed against the refusal of  the
    application made on 28 February 2018 and his appeal was dismissed on 27
    November 2018.  On 29 May 2019 a deportation order was  authorised  and
    signed to facilitate his deportation.  He was detained while  reporting
    on 10 July 2019, and was served with  removal  directions  on  23  July
    2019.  He made further submissions which were considered  and  rejected
    and he lodged a judicial review which led to removal  directions  being
    cancelled.  The judicial review permission was refused on the papers on
    14 October 2019 and at an oral hearing on 19 November  2019.   He  made
    further submissions in December 2019 but these were rejected on  18  of
    that  month  and  he  was  detained  on  19  December  upon  a  planned
    enforcement visit and on  24  December  2019  a  stay  of  removal  and
    permission were refused and he was removed from the United Kingdom.  He
    filed an out of hours application renewing his claim which was  refused
    as was a permission to appeal application the same day.

Judicial Consideration and Early Decisions

4.   As the applicant's claim is in respect of private and family life,  and
    has been refused on the basis that the requirements  of  paragraph  353
    have not been satisfied, it is necessary to consider the earlier claims
    that were made and the earlier decisions  as  they  form  part  of  the
    context for the decision under challenge.

5.   In the appeal in the First-tier Tribunal in 2014 which  was  an  appeal
    against the deportation order,  the  applicant  raised  protection  and
    human rights grounds.  With regard  to  the  family  and  private  life
    issues, the Tribunal was satisfied that the applicant  had  established
    family life in the United Kingdom with his wife.   The  Tribunal  noted
    that the applicant's wife, although born in Sri Lanka, had never  lived
    there, did not speak the language well and had effectively lived in the
    United Kingdom all her life.  She had her parents  and  family  in  the
    United Kingdom and had a small business.  It was noted that she  had  a
    hearing problem.  It was concluded  that  it  would  be  a  significant
    interference with the family and private life of the applicant and  his
    wife if he were required to leave the United Kingdom and  if  his  wife
    could not accompany him.  It would be an  inference  with  her  private
    life if she chose to go with him and was forced to  leave  her  parents
    and her business behind.

6.   However it was noted that there was family accommodation  available  to
    the couple in Colombo and they would not be destitute.   It  was  clear
    that her  parents  visited  Sri  Lanka.   It  was  concluded  that  the
    applicant's removal would not be in breach of Article 8  balancing  the
    relevant factors together including the offence and the fact  that  the
    respondent  was  not  proceeding  under   the   automatic   deportation
    provisions and the fact that the applicant had  not  committed  further
    offences since his release.  The appeal was dismissed.

7.   The appeal in 2018 was, as noted above, against  the  decision  by  the
    respondent on 7 March 2018 to refuse an application for leave  made  on
    human rights grounds.  The applicant was not represented at the hearing
    but appeared in person.

8.   It was accepted on  behalf  of  the  respondent  the  applicant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his children but  the
    respondent was of the view that it would not be unduly  harsh  for  the
    two children to live in Sri Lanka with their parents  or  for  them  to
    remain in the United Kingdom if the applicant were deported.

9.   It was the clear evidence of the applicant's wife that  she  would  not
    return to Sri Lanka with her husband should he be  deported  and  hence
    the decision would separate the parents  and  the  applicant  from  his
    children.  The judge considered section 117C(v) of the  2002  Act.   In
    particular he considered the meaning of the phrase "unduly harsh" which
    had recently been considered in KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53.  He  noted
    the endorsement by the Supreme Court in that case of what had been said
    by the Upper Tribunal in MK (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 223  (IAC)  that
    the  phrase  "unduly  harsh"  did  not   equate   with   uncomfortable,
    inconvenient, undesirable merely difficult  but  posed  a  considerably
    more elevated threshold.  "Harsh" in  this  context  denoted  something
    severe or bleak and the addition of  the  adverb  "unduly"  raised  the
    already elevated standard still higher.

10.  The judge went on to consider the best  interests  of  the  applicant's
    two children as being a primary though not a  paramount  consideration.
    The children were born respectively on 30 October 2014 and 16  December
    2015 and were British nationals, aged 4  and  3  at  the  date  of  his
    decision.

11.  The judge noted that the  applicant's  wife  is  hard  of  hearing  but
    considered there was no obvious way in which that impediment  would  be
    exacerbated should the  applicant  be  required  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom and return to Sri Lanka.  He found it would not be unduly harsh
    for the children to be separated from their father.  They would  remain
    in the full-time care of their mother with whom they currently  resided
    and they had wider support from other family  members.   There  was  no
    question of any education or health requirements being disrupted.   And
    the financial position would not be  adversely  affected  because  they
    were already dependent upon their mother since the  applicant  was  not
    permitted to work.  The judge quoted what had  been  said  about  undue
    harshness in KO (Nigeria) and considering the matter also  outside  the
    Rules  concluded  that  the  decision   to   refuse   leave   was   not
    disproportionate and the appeal was dismissed.

12.  As noted above, further submissions of 16  July  2019  were  considered
    and rejected under paragraph 353 in a decision  letter  dated  25  July
    2019.  In that decision letter the respondent noted points made in  the
    submissions letter dated 16 July 2019 including  that  the  applicant's
    wife has hearing problems, that he provides care to his disabled father-
    in-law and brother-in-law, who  has  learning  difficulties,  that  his
    children are particularly dependent on him and that his children  would
    have to leave the EU if he were removed.

13.  He provided medical evidence in respect of his brother-in-law  and  the
    learning difficulties that he has, and evidence relating to  disability
    living allowance for his father-in-law and other evidence  in  relation
    to him.

14.  The decision-maker noted that the Article 8  rights  of  the  applicant
    had been fully considered at the appeal hearing in November  2018.   It
    was observed that at that hearing it was accepted that  he  had  family
    life with his wife who has hearing difficulties, and with his children.
     It was noted that he had not referred to care he  claimed  to  provide
    his disabled father-in-law and brother-in-law at the appeal hearing and
    nor had he provided supporting medical or social care  expert  evidence
    stating what care he provided to his father-in-law and  brother-in-law,
    why that care needed to be provided by him and in his absence why  that
    care could not be provided by  other  extended  family  members  or  UK
    public services.  It  was  as  a  consequence  not  accepted  that  the
    applicant was required to remain in the United Kingdom for this reason.
     It  was  not  accepted  that  the  further  representations  contained
    significant evidence that would cause alternative findings to  be  made
    on the decisions already made with regard to his Article 8 rights.  The
    relevant issues were considered in the context  of  the  paragraph  353
    test and it was concluded that the test was not met.

15.  Further representations were made on  behalf  of  the  applicant  on  3
    December 2019, including an independent social worker report  dated  25
    September 2019, completed after an assessment with  the  family  on  26
    August 2019.  In addition further witness statements were put in by the
    applicant and his wife.

16.  The respondent noted what was said by the independent social worker  in
    her report.  The letter quotes in some detail also from the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal of November  2018,  and  noting  also  judicial
    review proceedings brought in respect of the 25 July 2019 letter  which
    among other things observed that the claimant's family and private life
    applications had already been considered  and  rejected  and  that  his
    submissions on the family/private life issue  had  no  bearing  on  the
    decisions challenged by that application for judicial review.

17.  In the decision letter it was also  noted  that  the  applicant's  wife
    would have  access  to  help  from  local  authorities  and  qualifying
    benefits as she would become a lone parent.  It was said that there was
    no exceptional circumstance  in  which  she  could  not  bring  up  her
    children as a lone  parent.   It  was  recognised  that  she  had  been
    profoundly deaf since the age of 3 which she had proven herself  to  be
    very resourceful and hardworking and despite  her  disability  she  had
    successfully educated herself to degree level and started  up  and  ran
    her own business from home since 2007, noting that this was a  business
    she had run without the help of her husband for around five years.   It
    was also noted that additional support might be given to her, given her
    disability.  It was acknowledged that once her husband was deported she
    would face distress, upset and a period of adjustment within the family
    dynamic but this was not considered a very compelling circumstance that
    would prevent his removal.

18.  The decision letter  went  on  to  note  that  the  independent  social
    worker's report described in full detail how the applicant's father-in-
    law and brother-in-law rely heavily on him for  their  physical  needs.
    It was pointed out that however no details  of  the  care  and  support
    provided specifically to those two individuals was mentioned during his
    appeal and only scant  reference  had  been  made  to  the  support  he
    offered.  This was summed up in the sentence: "The appellant has  given
    practical help and support to the witness's father  and  brother".   It
    was believed that he would have  mentioned  his  role  in  full  detail
    during his appeal since it appeared that the role described within  the
    report appeared to have been ongoing since  he  joined  the  family  in
    2012.

19.  The decision-maker then went on to set out the  nature  and  extent  of
    the applicant's father-in-law's disabilities, noting that he  currently
    received disability living  allowance  and  also  met  the  eligibility
    criteria within the Care Act 2014 under section 9 of that  Act  for  an
    assessment to be fully completed due to the level  of  his  disability.
    Therefore if the applicant were deported his father-in-law would  still
    have the support of his  wife,  his  daughter,  other  extended  family
    members and the support of the local authorities.

20.  As regards the  applicant's  brother-in-law,  he  has  a  diagnosis  of
    learning disabilities, but it was noted that he  was  able  to  support
    himself fully and worked five days a week as a cleaner in Nando's.   It
    was noted that he also met the eligibility criteria under section 9  of
    the Care Act for an assessment to be fully completed due to the  levels
    of his disability and therefore like his father he  would  have  family
    support and the support of the local authorities.  It  was  again  said
    that it was not considered that the evidence provided evidence  of  any
    very compelling circumstances which outweighed the public  interest  in
    seeing the applicant deported.

21.  Consideration was given to the application to  revoke  the  deportation
    order but it was concluded that the necessary criteria  were  not  met.
    There was then a consideration of paragraph 353 and the conclusion that
    the criteria set out there were not met.

22.  In her  report  following  an  assessment  dated  26  August  2019  the
    independent social worker Ms Khumalo having met the family at home  and
    talked to them then carried out  a  social  care  assessment  of  needs
    including the best interests of the children, concluded  that  all  the
    family members are heavily dependent upon the applicant and if he  were
    removed from the family unit this would  have  a  detrimental  negative
    effect on everyone including the children.  She considered  that  there
    was a significant risk of family breakdown,  and  psychological  mental
    health deterioration for all those involved if he were to  be  deported
    to Sri Lanka.  As regards the children's best interests, she considered
    they were most likely to experience a sense of loss  if  their  current
    relationship  with  their  father  was  disrupted  and  there   was   a
    possibility of them experiencing chronic  long-term  stress  which  she
    said differs from acute stress and that anxiety will  be  high  due  to
    change of environment, culture,  language  and  social  life.   If  the
    applicant were removed and separation from the children forced and also
    separation from his extended family, the children  might  endure  long-
    term emotional psychological trauma if separated from their  father  at
    such a young age.  During her  assessment  the  two  children  appeared
    happy around their father and other family members.  Children who had a
    father in a household were more likely to  be  emotionally  secure,  be
    confident to explore their surroundings and as  they  grow  older  they
    have better social connections.   She  also  noted  that  the  disabled
    family members would like the applicant to live with them and  removing
    him from the family unit would have a significant impact on  everyone's
    health and wellbeing.

The Proceedings

23.   The  original  grounds  were  considered  by  Judge  Blundell  on   an
    application for a stay of removal, which he considered on  23  December
    2019.  He refused the application for a stay on removal and refused the
    application for permission on the papers.  Among other things he  noted
    grounds which appeared to relate to what was said to be any applicant's
    derivative right to reside in the United Kingdom were  unarguable,  and
    it does not appear that  those  matters  were  pursued.   He  found  no
    arguable merit in the grounds and  refused  permission  and  refused  a
    stay.  There was an application to Mr Justice Murray in respect of  the
    stay and that was refused as was an application to the Court of Appeal.

24.  On 6 January 2020 there was a renewal hearing before Judge  O'Callaghan
    at which he granted the applicant permission to rely upon  the  amended
    grounds and granted permission, bearing in mind  the  contents  of  the
    independent social worker's report, with respect to the position of the
    applicant's children, and  consideration  of  the  wrong  test  in  the
    decision letter.  He refused an application for an order requiring  the
    respondent to bring the applicant back to the United Kingdom.

25.  The amended grounds argue that the respondent had  failed  to  consider
    the applicant should succeed under paragraph 399(a)(i)(a) and  (b)  and
    was in breach of section 55(1)(a) and (3) of the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.  It was argued that the respondent  erred  in
    making no reference to section 55 or to the statutory guidance pursuant
    to section 55(3) of the Act.  Reference was made  to  the  guidance  in
    Zoumbas [2013] 1WLR 3690 and the family circumstances and the impact of
    the applicant's removal.  It was argued that  the  respondent  had  not
    considered whether it would be unduly harsh for the family to remain in
    the United Kingdom without the applicant.

26.  I heard detailed oral submissions from  Ms  Jegarajah  and  Ms  Masood.
    Rather than setting out those submissions in  this  decision,  I  shall
    endeavour to incorporate the essential points made by both of them with
    regard to the issues in this application.

27.  In essence the two central issues in this case are the  absence  as  it
    is contended of a consideration of section 55 and the best interests of
    the children, and the Secretary of State's decision in that regard, and
    the use of the wrong test in the decision letter in referring  to  very
    compelling circumstances rather than, as should  have  been  the  case,
    undue harshness.

28.  I have quoted above in some detail from the decision of  the  judge  in
    November 2018.  It is relevant of course to  bear  in  mind   that  the
    applicant was unrepresented at that time.  Clearly  however  the  judge
    had reference to the best interests of the children, as can be seen for
    example from paragraph 40 of his decision.  He went on to consider  the
    impact on the children at paragraph 42 of the decision.  The respondent
    referred back to this decision in the decision letter of 25  July  2019
    noting that it had been accepted that the  applicant  had  family  life
    with his wife and children, and referring to relevant paragraphs of the
    appeal determination which concerned themselves with the  circumstances
    of the children remaining in the United Kingdom with  their  mother  on
    the applicant's removal.  It was then said that the applicant  had  not
    provided any fresh compelling evidence with  regard  to  his  wife  and
    children that was unable to be considered within his  dismissed  appeal
    and therefore no consideration could be given to  this  aspect  of  his
    claim.  Indeed it  appears  that  the  further  evidence  provided  was
    medical evidence in respect of his  wife,  his  father-in-law  and  his
    brother-in-law and nothing further was  provided  with  regard  to  the
    children.

29.   Subsequently  of  course  the  respondent  was   provided   with   the
    independent  social  worker's  report  together  with  further  witness
    statements from the applicant and his wife.  I have summarised the  key
    conclusions of the independent social worker above.  These matters were
    all noted by the decision-maker, who had particular  reference  to  the
    report of the independent social worker at paragraphs 19 and 20.

30.  It is correct that the decision letter does not refer  to  section  55.
    However it builds upon what had been concluded by the judge in November
    2018 and the earlier decision letter in July 2019.  It does not seem to
    me that the failure to refer specifically to section  55  is  material.
    In many ways this is tied in with the issue of undue harshness to which
    I shall come on in a moment.  But what was described by the independent
    social  worker  and  the  evidence  that  had  been  before  the  judge
    previously is in essence no more than what could be expected to be  the
    normal consequences of deportation, sad and unfortunate for the  family
    though they are likely to be.  As is  argued  by  the  respondent,  the
    further submissions rely on facts that  are  not  materially  different
    from those put to the First-tier Tribunal Judge in November 2018.   Nor
    can it properly be said that there is an element of  dependency  by  or
    impact on the children in respect of the applicant that  comes  out  of
    the independent social worker's report that was not in essence part  of
    the materials adjudicated upon by the First-tier Judge  and  considered
    in the two decision letters.  It would  have  been  preferable  if  the
    decision-maker had referred to section 55, as of course was done in the
    supplementary letter of January 2020, but in  my  view  the  respondent
    does not need that subsequent letter in order to cure  the  defects  in
    the decision letter and the challenge.  It has to be borne in mind that
    this is a fresh claims case, and that in a second appeal  a  First-tier
    Judge would, in accordance  with  the  Devaseelan  guidance,  take  the
    November 2018 decision as a starting point and the facts as  relied  on
    by the applicant in the first submissions are not materially  different
    from those put to the judge.  Accordingly I see no materiality  in  the
    failure to refer specifically in the decision  letter  to  section  55,
    which as I say, simply borrows from  the  conclusions  in  the  earlier
    decision letters in this regard and therefore  section  31(2A)  of  the
    Senior Courts' Act 1981 is applicable here.

31.  Essentially in my view the same reasoning applies to the employment  of
    the very compelling circumstances test rather than the undue  harshness
    test in the decision letter.  That was clearly wrong.  But in  my  view
    it is not material.  It is clear from KO (Nigeria) and subsequent cases
    such as PG (Jamaica) [2019] EWCA Civ 1213 that undue harshness poses  a
    considerably more elevated threshold than uncomfortable or  undesirable
    or difficult and denotes something severe or bleak and goes beyond that
    which would necessarily be  involved  for  any  child  faced  with  the
    deportation of a parent.  In my view had the  respondent  employed  the
    correct test in the decision letter she could have  come  to  no  other
    conclusion than that the undue harshness test was not met in this case.
     The family all  live  together,  and  even  if  the  applicant's  wife
    considers that her deafness might preclude her from hearing an intruder
    in the house in the night for example, it is the case  that  of  course
    her mother, her father and her brother are all living  under  the  same
    roof.  It was noted that social services support is available  for  her
    father and her brother, and that is not irrelevant in  considering  the
    undue harshness issues.  No doubt the applicant's wife would  miss  her
    husband's support in respect of the business and the  translation  help
    that he is able to give her but it has not been shown that there is no-
    one else who would be able to provide that level of assistance for her.
     This  is,  sadly,  a  case  where  the  harsh  usual  consequences  of
    deportation are being experienced by this family and one can only  have
    sympathy for them.  But the law sets the test  at  the  high  level  at
    which it is set, and in  my  judgment  there  can  be  said  to  be  no
    materiality to the error of the respondent in employing the wrong  test
    in this regard since had she employed the correct test she  would  have
    inevitably come to the same conclusion.

32.  It must follow from this that I see no  relevance  essentially  to  the
    January 2020 letter.  There was an interesting and  helpful  discussion
    on the guidance in Caroopen in this regard at the hearing as  to  which
    of the categories set out in Caroopen that letter falls within.  In  my
    judgment it makes no difference, since that letter was as a  matter  of
    strict law unnecessary in light of  the  immateriality  of  the  errors
    which it may have sought to cure in the earlier decision letter.

33.  For all these reasons therefore I  consider  that  the  application  in
    this case cannot succeed and it is refused.~~~~0~~~~


                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/6309/2019


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







          The Queen on the application of Sudharsan Idhayachandran
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective  representatives,  Ms  S  Jegarajah,  instructed  by  A   and   P
Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and Ms H Masood,  instructed  by  the
Government Legal Department, on behalf of the Respondent, at  a  hearing  at
Field House, London on 21 February  2020.

     Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

(1)  For the reasons set out in the judgment,  I  order  that  the  judicial
review application be dismissed.

Order


(2)    I  order,  therefore,  that  the  judicial  review   application   be
      dismissed.




Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

(3)  Any application for permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal  must
be made no later than 7 days after the date  of  the  sending  out  of  this
Order.




Costs

(4)  The Respondent seeks her costs as set out in the schedule  provided  at
the hearing. Any objection to the award of those costs  is  to  be  made  no
later than 7 days after the sending out of this Order.










                                                David Allen
         Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




        Dated:





Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

