

                                                                      UTIJR6

                                                                JR/6326/2018


                  Upper Tribunal
                  Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                  Judicial Review Decision Notice





                       The Queen on the application of

                                   WH + 3

                                                                   Applicant
                                   - and -

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                   Before

               Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 18 February 2019



            Application for judicial review: substantive decision


Having considered all documents lodged and having  heard  Mr.  G.  Dolan  of
counsel, instructed by Lova Solicitors Ltd on behalf of the  Applicant,  and
Mr. J. Fletcher of Counsel, instructed by the Government  Legal  Department,
on behalf of the Respondent, at a hearing  at  Field  House,  London  on  18
February 2019.


ANONYMITY


Anonymity should be granted because the  case  involves  protection  issues.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Applicant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  members  of  her  family.  This  direction
applies to the Applicant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Decision: the application for judicial review is refused


THE HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


1.    The Applicant is a national of Sri Lanka.  She arrived in the  United
    Kingdom, as a visitor, on 26  October  2013  with  her  son.  She  then
    applied for asylum on 28 October 2013. Her application was  refused  on
    20 February 2015 but her appeal  was  allowed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Robertson in a decision promulgated on 1 September 2015.


2.    The Respondent appealed against this  decision  and  in  a  decision,
    dated 5 January 2016, Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Black  found  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson had made an error of law and, in  a
    decision promulgated on 27 April 2016,  she  allowed  the  Respondent's
    appeal and remade the decision, dismissing the Appellant's appeal in  a
    decision promulgated on 27 April 2016. The Applicant sought  permission
    to appeal to the Court of Appeal, but her application was  refused  and
    she had exhausted her appeal rights by 17 March 2017.


3.    Further representations were made on her behalf on 7 July 2018 but on
    22 August 2016 the Respondent decided that they did  not  amount  to  a
    fresh protection or human rights claim.


4.    The Applicant lodged her claim for judicial review  on  24  September
    2018 and the Respondent filed his acknowledgment of service and summary
    grounds of defence on 23 October 2018.  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Canavan
    granted the Applicant permission on the papers on 12 November 2018.


5.    On 2 January  2019  a  lawyer  at  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted  the
    Respondent an extension of time to file his detailed grounds of defence
    and he filed these on 11 January 2019. Counsel for the Respondent filed
    and served his skeleton argument on 12  February  2019.  The  Applicant
    failed to comply with any of the  directions  made  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Canavan when she granted permission.


THE SUBSTANTIVE HEARING


6.    The basis on which permission was granted was limited. Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Canavan found that "given the  dearth  of  evidence  showing  any
    activity by  the  Applicant  herself,  it  is  not  arguable  that  the
    Respondent's finding that there was insufficient evidence of  political
    activity in the UK to give rise to a realistic prospect of success in a
    hypothetical appeal is outside the range  of  reasonable  responses  to
    such limited evidence.  Prior to reaching this decision, the Judge  had
    noted that the evidence of the Applicant's involvement in  protests  by
    the Tamil Diaspora in the United Kingdom  was  limited  to  unexplained
    photographs,  which  did  not  appear  to   include   the   Applicant".
    Therefore, to the extent that the Applicant relied  on  any  sur  place
    political activities in the  United  Kingdom  in  paragraph  9  of  her
    grounds of claim, permission  has  not  been  given  to  proceed  to  a
    judicial review of the Respondent's decision on this basis.


7.    In addition, Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan did not grant permission  in
    relation to the ground of  claim  contained  in  paragraph  29  of  the
    grounds of claim and entitled "Mental Health Grounds", which relied  on
    paragraph 450 of GJ and Others (post- civil war returnees) Sri Lanka CG
    [2013] UKUT 00319 and J v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2005] EWCA Civ 629.


8.    Instead, Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan  found  that  it  was  at  least
    arguable that a proper reading of the risk categories in GJ and  Others
    includes those individuals who "are, or are perceived to be"  a  threat
    to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they  "are,  or
    are perceived to have" a significant role in relation to  post-conflict
    Tamil separatism.


9.    At the start of the hearing, counsel for the Applicant applied for  an
    adjournment on the basis that he had only  been  instructed  the  night
    before and was not in receipt of the full  bundle.  He  also  submitted
    that, as the Applicant was vulnerable,  it  was  in  the  interests  of
    justice, that he had time  to  read  the  full  bundle  and  draft  his
    skeleton argument. Counsel for the Respondent opposed  the  application
    on the basis that no reason had been provided for the  failure  on  the
    part of the Applicant's solicitors to comply with the directions.


10.   I have considered the overriding objectives contained  in  rule  2  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  In  particular,  I
    have taken into account the need to  provide  the  Applicant  with  the
    opportunity to participate fully in these proceedings by being properly
    represented and the need  to  avoid  unnecessary  delay.  I  have  also
    considered the fact that any adjournment would involve more expense for
    the Applicant in terms of the costs thrown away for today and the  need
    to meet the costs of instructing counsel at any adjourned hearing.


11.   Having done so, I found that it  was  not  necessary  to  adjourn  the
    hearing to another day and that providing  counsel  for  the  Applicant
    with time to prepare for a hearing at 2  p.m.  would  ensure  that  the
    Applicant was able to participate in the hearing through her counsel. I
    also ensured that counsel for the  Applicant  had  all  of  the  papers
    missing from his Bundle.  When  the  court  reconvened,  I  heard  oral
    submissions from both counsel and I have taken  the  content  of  these
    submissions into account when reaching my decision below.


THE SUBSTANTIVE DECISION


12.   Paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules states:


         "Fresh claims


         When a  human-rights...claim  has  been  refused  or  withdrawn  or
         treated as withdrawn under paragraph 333C of these  Rules  and  any
         appeal relating to that claim is no longer  pending,  the  decision
         maker will consider any further submissions and, if rejected,  will
         then  determine  whether  they  amount  to  a  fresh   claim.   The
         submissions will amount to a fresh claim if they are  significantly
         different from the material that has  previously  been  considered.
         The  submissions  will  only  be  significantly  different  if  the
         content:


         (i)      had not already been considered; and


         (ii)     taken together with the  previously  considered  material,
             created a realistic prospect of success,  notwithstanding  its
             rejection".


13.   The Applicant had made an earlier protection  claim,  which  had  been
    refused and her subsequent appeal had been dismissed  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Black in a decision, dated  21  March  2016.  Therefore,
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules applied and the  Respondent  had
    to consider whether there was material which had  not  previously  been
    considered and whether any  such  material,  taken  together  with  the
    previously considered material, created a realistic prospect of success
    before another First-tier Tribunal Judge.


14.   This consideration needs to take place in the context of  the  country
    guidance provided in GJ and Others in which the Upper Tribunal made the
    following relevant findings:


         "(7)      The  current  categories  of  persons  at  real  risk  of
             persecution or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether in
             detention or otherwise, are:


             (a) Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a  threat  to
                  the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because  they
                  are, or are  perceived  to  have  a  significant  role  in
                  relation to  post-conflict  Tamil  separatism  within  the
                  diaspora and/or a renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.


             ...


             (d) a person whose name appears on a computerised "stop"  list
                  accessible at the airport,  comprising  a  list  of  those
                  against whom there is an  extant  court  order  or  arrest
                  warrant. Individuals whose name appears on a  "stop"  list
                  will be stopped at the airport  and  handed  over  to  the
                  appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such
                  order or warrant.


15.   When she remade  the  decision,  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Black
    adopted  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Robertson. In particular, in paragraph 33 of  her  decision  she  found
    that the Applicant had been arrested,  detained  and  tortured  by  the
    authorities on two occasions, once in 2011 and once in 2013.


16.   I accept that paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules states that:


         "... the fact that a person has already been subject to persecution
         of serious harm, or to direct threats of such persecution  or  such
         harm, will be regarded as a serious indication of the person's well-
         founded fear or persecution or real risk of suffering serious harm,
         unless there are good reasons to consider that such persecution  or
         serious harm will not be repeated".


17.   I have also taken into account that in paragraph 34 of  her  decision,
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson noted that past persecution was  an
    indication of future ill-treatment and found  that  the  Applicant  had
    suffered past persecution on the basis  of  a  perception  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities that she had links to the LTTE. She also found  that
    evidence of past torture is a good  indicator  that  the  Applicant  is
    likely to be tortured on return.


18.   However, the country guidance in GJ and Others did not find  that  the
    mere fact that a person had been suspected of an involvement  with  the
    LTTE in the past and had been arrested, detained and tortured gave rise
    to a future risk of persecution in every case.


19.   Instead, the  Upper  Tribunal  noted  that  there  were  a  number  of
    particular basis upon which a  risk  of  persecution  on  return  would
    arise. One of these was when a person was or was perceived to a  threat
    to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they  have,  or
    are perceived to have, a significant role in relation to  post-conflict
    Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a  renewal  of  hostilities
    within Sri Lanka. Therefore, even if there was a prior finding that the
    Applicant had at one time been perceived to have been involved with the
    LTTE, it was also necessary for her  to  establish,  albeit  to  a  low
    standard of proof, that she would be perceived to  have  a  significant
    role in post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  or  within
    Sri Lanka.


20.   In paragraph 34 of her decision, First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Robertson
    found that the Applicant did not have any significant role in a  threat
    to any renewal of  hostilities  in  Sri  Lanka  and  this  finding  was
    maintained by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Black in paragraph 5  of  her
    error of law decision.  In addition, Upper Tribunal Judge  Canavan  had
    found that it was not arguable that it was irrational to find that  the
    Applicant had not been involved in any  sur  place  activities  in  the
    diaspora in the United Kingdom in support of the LTTE.


21.   In addition, I note that Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Black  set  aside
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson's decision on the  basis  that  the
    Judge had found that the Applicant had not fallen  within  any  of  the
    risk categories in GJ and Others but had gone on to find that  she  was
    at future risk of persecution in Sri Lanka.  When  doing  so  she  also
    noted that there was no evidence of any charges or outstanding warrants
    in her name which would result on her being on the  "stop  list".   She
    also noted that there had been a two-year gap between her  two  arrests
    and that there was no evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that  her
    husband or her friend, Priya, had any links to the LTTE or had played a
    significant role in any renewal of hostilities in Sri Lanka.


22.   When remaking and dismissing her appeal, Deputy Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Black also found that there was no evidence before the Tribunal to show
    that there was a risk of repetition of the past ill treatment given the
    lack of profile and involvement  of  the  Applicant  in  any  political
    activity. She also found that there  was  no  evidence  of  any  arrest
    warrants or factors which that would place the  Applicant  at  risk  of
    appearing on a stop list nor any  evidence  that  she  was  of  current
    interest to the authorities.


23.   When further representations were made on the Applicant's  behalf  she
    did not provide any evidence that there was an arrest warrant or  court
    charges in her name or that the authorities had been looking  for  her.
    She did submit an article entitled Inaction and delayed action  by  the
    Government as well as the law enforcement arm leads to a repeat of  the
    2014 Aluthgama Anti-Muslim  violence  in  Sri  Lanka,  which  had  been
    published by the Media  Unit  of  the  Council  of  Sri  Lankan  Muslim
    Organisations in UK, dated March 2018. However, this  article  has  not
    been included in the Applicant's Bundle and was not referred to in  the
    grounds of claim.


24.   The Bundle does include the expert report by Dr.  Chris  Smith,  dated
    31 May 2018. However, at paragraph 82 of his report, he stated that "it
    is clearly the  case  that  the  Appellant  did  not  have  a  role  of
    significance or importance in the LTTE - she does  not  even  claim  to
    have been a member" He did go on to state that "however, this does  not
    mean, ipso facto, that [she] will not be of adverse interest".  But  at
    paragraph 83 he continued by explaining  that  "the  authorities  would
    seem to continue to be interested in  ex-LTTE  members  and  have  been
    since the end of the war". However, it was  not  the  Applicant's  case
    that she was an ex-LTTE member.


25.   At paragraph 87 of his report, he did also state that "thus  far,  the
    [Applicant] has been  detained  twice  in  2011  and  2013,  therefore,
    clearly adverse interests had clearly been  established  ...  [and  the
    Applicant can be re-arrested at any time for the same case,  under  the
    PTA".


26.   However, the expert was instructed on the  basis  that  the  Applicant
    was married to someone who was involved in "the"  political  party  and
    that she was arrested in 2011 after her husband disappeared.  There was
    no evidence that her husband had been politically active in Sri Lanka.


27.   At paragraph  20  of  his  report  Dr.  Smith  also  stated  that  the
    Applicant "claims to be of adverse  interest  because  the  authorities
    believe that [she] was involved  in  transporting  explosives  for  the
    LTTE. This led to [her] detention and ill-treatment on two  occasions".
    This has never been part of the Applicant's case.


28.   The Respondent addressed the content of the expert  report  from  page
    10 of the refusal letter. He noted that the Applicant's account of  her
    contact with her husband between 2011 until 2013 was  inconsistent.  He
    also noted the inaccuracies referred to above in paragraph 27  of  this
    decision. be of adverse interest because the authorities  believe  that
    [she] was involved in transporting explosives for the LTTE. This led to
    [her] detention and ill-treatment on  two  occasions".  The  Respondent
    also noted that paragraph 96 of his report Dr. Smith had also  referred
    to the Applicant having said that an arrest warrant had been issued  in
    her name. Again, this was not her case. In addition, he noted  that  in
    paragraph 47 of his report, the expert referred to the  risk  faced  by
    those associated with the TGTE but the Applicant had  not  claimed  any
    such association.


29.   In his decision letter the Respondent clearly  gave  anxious  scrutiny
    to the expert report but given its factual inaccuracy it was reasonable
    to give its findings only limited weight.


30.   It was also rational for the Respondent to take into account  that  at
    paragraph 22 of his  report,  Dr.  Smith  accepted  that  much  of  the
    information provided about the circumstances in Sri Lanka was collected
    over eight years previously. Therefore,  his  expert  opinion  was  not
    based on  evidence  that  was  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  when  they
    considered its country guidance in GJ and others.


31.   The Respondent also considered the psychological  report  provided  by
    Georgia Costa, dated 8 April 2018.  She concluded  that  "it  is  clear
    that a decision to remove [the Applicant] and her family from the UK at
    this stage would have devastating effects on her mental health and  her
    risk  of  suicide  would   greatly   increase.   She   needs   on-going
    psychological help, ongoing medication and close monitoring"


32.   However, as the Respondent noted in his decision that the  report  did
    not establish that she would be at risk from the authorities on  return
    to Sri Lanka. Counsel for the Applicant submitted that  the  fact  that
    she was psychologically vulnerable would place her at risk  on  return.
    However, he based his concerns on information provided  by  the  expert
    about returnees being questioned on return  at  the  airport.  However,
    this information has now been superseded by the  evidence  provided  to
    the Upper Tribunal in GJ and Others. In addition, there was no evidence
    to suggest that she was of any  current  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities and would be detained and ill-treated.


33.   Counsel for the Applicant also relied on paragraph 51 of  Dr.  Smith's
    report where he stated that "scarring is an issue for  returned  asylum
    seekers".  However, the basis of this assertion was  information  given
    to Dr. Smith in May 2004 and since then case law has found that this is
    not necessarily  the  case.  The  current  risk  categories  are  those
    contained in GJ and others.


34.   For all of these reasons, I find that the  Respondent  had  considered
    the Applicant's further representations  in  detail  and  with  anxious
    scrutiny and that it was not irrational or unlawful to  find  that  she
    had not provided any  new  material  which  taken  together  with  that
    previously considered would create  a  realistic  prospect  of  success
    before another First-tier Tribunal Judge for the purposes of  paragraph
    353 of the Immigration Rules was not irrational or unlawful.


Order


(1)   The Applicant's claim is refused.


(2)   The  decision  will  be  formally  handed  down  and,  therefore,  the
    attendance of counsel is not required.


Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal


(3)   I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal because there  is
    no merit in the grounds in the Applicant's claim form or  in  the  oral
    submissions made at the oral hearing on behalf of the Applicant.


Costs


(4)   The Applicant do pay the Respondent's costs in the sum  of  �4,833  to
    be assessed in default of agreement.





             Nadine Finch
    Signed:


             Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


    Dated:       22 February 2019










Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to the above parties on:.

Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 7 Days of the date the Tribunal's decision on  permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).
