
                                                            JR/6053/2019 (V)


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                               Judicial Review
                               Decision Notice



             The Queen on the application of SASSAN HESSAMIAZAR

                                                                  Applicants
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

 1. This application considers the requirements  for  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant. In particular, the calculation of
    the "continuous period of five years lawfully in the UK" and the extent
    of "allowable absences" during the qualifying period.

 2. The applicant seeks to challenge the respondent's Administrative Review
    decision dated 09 September 2019  and  by  implication  the  underlying
    decision dated 05 August 2019 to  refuse  Indefinite  Leave  to  Remain
    (ILR) on grounds of five years continuous lawful residence in the UK as
    a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.

Background

   1. The applicant entered the UK in 2010 as a  Tier  4  (General)  Student
      Migrant. He was granted further leave to remain  as  a  Tier  1  (Post
      Study Work) Migrant until 03 March 2014.  The  applicant  applied  for
      leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant on 03 March 2014 to work
      as a project manager for a newly registered UK company called  Mayfair
      Industry Ltd. In a letter  from  Mayfair  Industry  to  the  Companies
      Registration Officer dated 15 October 2013 the Director of the company
      stated that he intended to appoint the  applicant  as  the  authorised
      manager of a branch in Erbil, Iraq. He would deal with all the company
      administration in that office. On 16  April  2014  the  applicant  was
      granted leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant valid  until  11
      April 2017.

   2. The applicant made an in-time application for further leave to  remain
      on the same basis. A letter  from  the  applicant's  employer  to  the
      respondent dated 21  March  2017  explained  that  the  applicant  was
      essential to the survival of the company. The focus of  the  company's
      work was in Erbil. The applicant's employer went  on  to  explain  his
      role.

         "The main aim of  the  company  in  the  first  initial  months  of
         establishment has been to register an office  in  Erbil,  Kurdistan
         Regional Government of Iraq, and start to get projects over  there.
         To do so, the company employed Sassan Hessamiazar,  for  all  right
         reasons, which the last 3 years proved to be truly the case. He was
         granted Tier 2 visa, which we would like to request to be extended.

         He is a first person of  contact  who  represents  interest  of  my
         company outside of the UK and manages projects  in  Erbil/Iraq.  My
         decision on choosing this field of work and the region to work,  of
         Erbil/Iraq, is based  on  his  vast  knowledge  and  experience  in
         construction particularly in oil/gas field to manage  projects.  He
         not only knows the technical part of the work  and  knows  relevant
         experts and companies to contact, but have  the  knowledge  of  the
         region, such as language and culture. So, without him I will not be
         able to run the business ...

         At the beginning I thought that I would dispatch him to  Erbil/Iraq
         for the first few months in order to set up the office and register
         it over there. After a few months, having him over there, while  he
         was doing and improving the company  in  every  aspect  beyond  our
         expectations,   however   unforeseen   conditions   and    unstable
         environment did unfold many challenges. The situation required  him
         to stay there for longer than initially planned.  I  did  not  have
         anyone else in  his  capacity  in  both  professional  ability  and
         personal strength and trustworthiness which I could trust  to  hand
         over the office and projects to."

 3. The applicant's employer went on to explain some  of  the  difficulties
    that led to the need for his continued presence  in  the  Erbil  office
    beyond the period initially  anticipated.  His  employer  concluded  by
    saying that because of those problems  the  company  still  needed  the
    applicant to be present in the Erbil office until they got to  a  point
    where they could establish a trusted team there.  The  applicant  would
    then be based mainly in London and would only have to travel  to  Erbil
    when needed.

 4. The applicant's employment contract dated 01 April 2016 stated that  he
    would work at the London and Erbil office, but that his presence in the
    Erbil office "would be predominant until that office is  fully  settled
    and a local office manager" was appointed. The respondent was satisfied
    that the applicant met the requirements for further leave to remain  as
    a Tier 2 (General) Migrant. Further leave was granted  until  16  April
    2019.

 5. On 19 March 2019 the applicant applied for ILR as a  Tier  2  (General)
    Migrant. A letter from his employer dated 12 March 2019 was in  similar
    terms to the previous letter. It explained the essential role that  the
    applicant played in the operations in Erbil. Now that the  company  was
    well established it was planning more  ambitious  projects  "connecting
    the UK's businesses and investments to the  ones  in  Erbil/Iraq."  The
    letter went on to say:

         "The core reason for employment of Sassan Hessamiazar was the  need
         for him to represent the company in Erbil and carry out all  duties
         regarding projects over there, very  heavy  full-on  responsibility
         which required his presence over there  undoubtedly.  Now  that  we
         have established ourselves over there and overcome  many  obstacles
         and hard works, thanks to him and his skills and experience, he  is
         needed more than ever; therefore we are looking forward to continue
         with his employment for years to come, for  much  bigger  projects,
         more involving UK's businesses and investments in Erbil/Iraq. These
         new plans would require him to be more present  in  London  and  to
         travel more frequently between London office and Erbil/Iraq office.

         ...

         Sassan Hessamiazar has not only contributed to  the  success  [and]
         achievements of the company, but has  been  the  core  reasons  for
         that; and he will remain so, as we wish to continue his employment,
         for him to carry on his great work."

 6.  The  written   representations   made   by   the   applicant's   legal
    representatives accepted that he "exceeded the allowed amount  of  days
    outside of the UK" in the relevant five year period, but asserted  that
    the Home Office policy stated that absences  that  were  for  a  reason
    consistent with the original purpose of entry to the UK were "allowable
    absences". The letter went on:

         "Your records will show that our client was offered  an  employment
         as a Project Manager with Mayfair Industry Ltd to help to establish
         a  subsidiary  office  in  Erbil,  Iraq  and  to  carry   out   the
         construction projects there. Mayfair Industry  Ltd  obtained  their
         sponsorship status to employ Mr Hessamiazar for that specific role.
         The company secured an extension of their  sponsorship  status  and
         our client was granted further leave to remain as a Tier 2  Migrant
         to continue his duties as a Project Manager. As a first  person  of
         contact in Erbil, our client has represented the best interests  of
         his employer there. As a result of his  vast  experience  and  high
         education (it should be noted that our client completed his  Master
         Degree course in Management in the UK) he  greatly  contributed  to
         the growth and expansion of Mayfair Industry Ltd. It  is  therefore
         evident that  our  client  absences  are  directly  linked  to  his
         permitted employment and therefore are allowed as confirmed in  the
         guidance above. Our client was granted his Tier 2 Migrant status on
         the basis that he will mainly work outside of  the  UK  as  it  was
         evident from the beginning that the  constructions  projects  would
         take place in Erbil, Iraq."

 7. The respondent refused the application in a decision  dated  05  August
    2019. She was not satisfied that the applicant met the requirements  of
    paragraph 245HF(b) and paragraph 245AAA of the  immigration  rules  for
    five years continuous lawful residence in the UK as a Tier 2  (General)
    Migrant. The application indicated that the applicant was  absent  from
    the UK for 327 days in the first  qualifying  year,  366  days  in  the
    second (presumably including a leap year), 344 days in the  third,  356
    days in the fourth and 192 days  in  the  fifth  qualifying  year.  The
    respondent concluded that the applicant remained  outside  the  UK  for
    more than 180  days  during  each  consecutive  12  month  period.  The
    applicant failed to show that the  absences  were  for  a  sufficiently
    compelling or compassionate reason to justify exercising discretion.

 8. The applicant applied for Administrative Review of  the  decision.  The
    grounds for Administrative Review pointed out that  the  applicant  was
    granted leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General)  Migrant  to  work  as  a
    project manager for Mayfair Industry Ltd largely based in Erbil,  Iraq.
    The evidence produced with the applications for leave  to  remain  made
    this  clear.  The  grounds  referred  to  the   respondent's   guidance
    "Indefinite Leave to Remain; calculating continuous period in  UK"  (06
    July 2018), which stated under the heading  "Allowable  Absences"  that
    "Absences for a reason consistent with the original purpose of entry to
    the UK" were permitted in relation to applications made under the  Tier
    2 (General) scheme. The respondent was  wrong  to  apply  the  test  of
    whether there were sufficiently compelling or compassionate reasons  to
    exercise discretion instead  of  considering  whether  the  time  spent
    outside the UK was an allowable absence.

 9. The Administrative Review decision is  dated  09  September  2019.  The
    respondent found that the caseworker was correct to conclude  that  the
    applicant remained outside the UK for  more  than  180  days  during  a
    consecutive 12-month period. She acknowledged that the guidance  stated
    that absences must be for a reason consistent with the original purpose
    of entry to the UK or for a serious or compelling reason. However,  the
    decision went on to say:

         "... It is noted that the guidance also  confirms  that,  "absences
         must be consistent with, or connected to, the applicant's sponsored
         or permitted compliment or the permitted  economic  activity  being
         carried out in the  11K  -for  example,  business  trips  or  short
         secondments". It is additionally noted that  the  guidance  states,
         "time spent away from the UK for extended periods, particularly  if
         the business no longer exists, should not  be  allowed",  and  that
         "Absences due to employment, whether related to the applicant's job
         in the 11K or not, count towards the 180 maximum each year."."

10. In light of other aspects of the guidance the respondent concluded that
    the caseworker did not make a mistake in assessing  the  absences.  The
    respondent maintained the  decision  to  refuse  the  application  with
    reference to paragraph 245HF(b) and 245AAA of the immigration rules.

11. The applicant filed an application to bring judicial review proceedings
    on 05 December 2019. Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Coker  granted  permission
    following a renewed oral application on 07 February 2020.

The applicant's case

12. The applicant argues:

      i) During the hearing it was accepted that the applicant does not meet
         the strict requirements of the immigration rules.

     ii) Mr Halim argued that the respondent's policy  guidance  "Indefinite
         Leave to Remain; calculating  continuous  period  in  UK"  (Version
         18.0, 29 March  2019),  under  the  heading  "Allowable  Absences",
         provides for absences if they are for a reason consistent with  the
         original purpose of entry to the UK. He called  this  the  "primary
         provision". When the applicant applied for leave  to  remain  as  a
         Tier 2 (General) Migrant the evidence made clear that he  would  be
         employed by Mayfair Industry Ltd as a project manager who primarily
         worked in  Iraq.  The  primary  provision  provided  for  allowable
         absences of over 180 days. It was argued that this would provide  a
         rational outcome and was consistent  with  the  "coherence  of  the
         scheme".

    iii) The  respondent's  analysis  misread  the  policy.  The  respondent
         wrongly applied sections of the policy guidance which did not apply
         to the applicant. To read the policy in the way  contended  by  the
         respondent would lead to the primary  provision  being  elided  and
         would create a perverse outcome.

The respondent's case

13. The respondent argues:

      i) The respondent lawfully concluded that the applicant did  not  meet
         the requirements of the immigration rules because the applicant was
         absent from the UK for periods of over 180  days:  R  (RN)  v  SSHD
         (paragraph 245AAA) [2017] UKUT 76 referred.

     ii) The meaning of the rules should be discerned objectively  from  the
         language used not from guidance documents: R (Ahmed) v SSHD  [2019]
         EWCA Civ 1070 referred.

    iii) In any event, the applicant's argument is based on a misreading  of
         the relevant guidance. The guidance does  not  permit  absences  of
         more than 180 days even if  the  absence  is  consistent  with  the
         original purpose of entry to the UK. The guidance made  clear  that
         (a) no more than 180 days absence from  the  UK  is  allowed  in  a
         consecutive 12 month period; (b)  absence  must  be  for  a  reason
         consistent with the original purpose of entry to the UK  or  for  a
         serious or compelling reason; and (c) absence  due  to  employment,
         whether related to the applicant's job  in  the  UK  or  not  count
         towards the 180 day maximum each year. When read as  a  whole,  the
         policy makes clear that absences, in whatever category, can be  for
         no more than 180 days in a consecutive 12 month period.

     iv)  Paragraph  245AAA(a)(i)  and  paragraph  245AAA(c)  are   separate
         requirements. The first sets  out  the  180  day  limit  and  makes
         provision for exceptions that would not be counted towards the  180
         day calculation. The second is a freestanding requirement  to  show
         that absences were allowable.



Legal Framework

16. Paragraph 245HF sets out  the  requirements  for  Indefinite  Leave  to
    Remain as a  Tier  2  (General)  Migrant.  For  the  purpose  of  these
    proceedings, the relevant part is:

         "To qualify for indefinite leave to remain as a  Tier  2  (General)
         Migrant or Tier 2 (Sportsperson) Migrant, an  applicant  must  meet
         the  requirements  listed  below.  If  the  applicant  meets  these
         requirements, indefinite leave to remain will be  granted.  If  the
         applicant does not meet these requirements, the application will be
         refused.

         Requirements:

         ...

         (b)  The applicant must have spent a continuous period of  5  years
             lawfully in the UK, of which the most recent period must  have
             been spent with leave as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant or Tier  2
             (Sportsperson) Migrant ..."

17. Paragraph 245AAA sets out general  requirements  for  applications  for
    Indefinite Leave to Remain under the Points Based  System  and  defines
    what is meant by a "continuous  period  of  5  years  lawfully  in  the
    UK"[pic]

         "245AAA

             The following rules apply to all requirements  for  indefinite
             leave to remain in Part 6A and Appendix A:

             (a)  References to a "continuous period" "lawfully in the  UK"
                  means, subject to paragraph (e), residence in the  UK  for
                  an  unbroken  period  with  valid  leave,  and  for  these
                  purposes a period shall be considered unbroken where:

                  (i)  the applicant has not been absent  from  the  UK  for
                      more than 180 days during any 12 month period in  the
                      continuous period, except that:

                      (1)  any absence from  the  UK  for  the  purpose  of
                           assisting  with  a  national   or   international
                           humanitarian  or  environmental  crisis  overseas
                           shall not count towards  the  180  days,  if  the
                           applicant provides evidence  that  this  was  the
                           purpose of the absence(s) and that their Sponsor,
                           if there was one, agreed to  the  absence(s)  for
                           that purpose; and

                      (2)  for any absences from the UK during  periods  of
                           leave granted under the Rules in place before  11
                           January 2018, the applicant must  not  have  been
                           absent from the UK for more than 180 days  during
                           each consecutive 12 month period, ending  on  the
                           same  date  of  the  year  as  the  date  of  the
                           application for indefinite leave to remain; and

                      (3)  for any applicant who has or has had leave as  a
                           Tier 2 (General) migrant, where  the  Certificate
                           of Sponsorship Checking Service entry shows  that
                           they  were  sponsored  to  work  in  any  of  the
                           occupations in table 1 of  Appendix  J  when  the
                           absence occurred, any absence from the UK for the
                           purpose of research activities overseas shall not
                           count towards the  180  days,  if  the  applicant
                           provides  evidence  from  their  sponsor  showing
                           that:

                            a) research was the purpose of the  absence(s);
                               and

                            b) the sponsor, agreed to  the  absence(s)  for
                               that purpose; and

                            c) the absence(s)  directly  related  to  their
                               Tier 2 employment in the UK; and

                      (4)  for any applicant who has or has had leave as  a
                           Tier 1 (Exceptional Talent) Migrant,  where  they
                           were endorsed by the Royal Society,  the  British
                           Academy or the Royal Academy of Engineering,  any
                           absence from the UK for the purpose  of  research
                           activities overseas shall not count  towards  the
                           180 days, if it occurred  while  they  held  this
                           leave.

                  (ii) the applicant has existing limited leave to enter  or
                      remain upon their departure and return, except that:

                        1) where that leave expired no  more  than  28  days
                           prior  to  a  further   application   for   entry
                           clearance which was made before 24 November  2016
                           and subsequently granted,

                        2)  where,  on  or  after  24  November  2016,   the
                           applicant makes a further application  for  entry
                           clearance  during  the  currency  of   continuing
                           limited leave which is subsequently granted, or

                        3)  where,  on  or  after  24  November  2016,   the
                           applicant makes a further application  for  entry
                           clearance within 14 days of the applicant's leave
                           expiring and the  Secretary  of  State  considers
                           that there was a good reason beyond  the  control
                           of  the  applicant   or   their   representative,
                           provided  in  or   with   the   application   for
                           indefinite leave to remain, why  the  application
                           could  not  be  made  during  the   currency   of
                           continuing limited leave, or

                        4)  where  a  successful   application   for   entry
                           clearance is made  following  the  refusal  of  a
                           previous  application  to  which   (2)   or   (3)
                           otherwise applies, and the application  was  made
                           within 14 days of that refusal (or the expiry  of
                           the time-limit for making an in-time  application
                           for administrative review, or any  administrative
                           review or appeal being  concluded,  withdrawn  or
                           abandoned or lapsing), that period spent  without
                           existing leave, pending the applicant's  re-entry
                           into the United Kingdom,  shall  be  disregarded;
                           and

                  (iii)     the  applicant  has  any   current   period   of
                      overstaying disregarded where paragraph 39E of  these
                      Rules applies; and

                  (iv) the applicant has any previous period of  overstaying
                      between  periods  of  leave  disregarded  where:  the
                      further application was made before 24 November  2016
                      and within 28 days of the expiry  of  leave;  or  the
                      further application was made on or after 24  November
                      2016 and paragraph 39E of these Rules applied.

             (b)  [deleted]

             ...

             (c)  Except for periods where the applicant  had  leave  as  a
                  Tier 1(Investor) Migrant, a Tier 1(Entrepreneur)  Migrant,
                  a Tier 1(Exceptional Talent) Migrant or a  highly  skilled
                  migrant, any absences from  the  UK  during  the  relevant
                  qualifying period must have been for  a  purpose  that  is
                  consistent  with  the  applicant's  basis  of  stay  here,
                  including paid annual leave, or for serious or  compelling
                  reasons." [emphasis added]

18. The relevant policy guidance relating to the calculation of  continuous
    periods of residence  in  the  UK  was  "Indefinite  leave  to  remain:
    calculating Continuous period in UK" (Version 18.0) 29 March  2019.  It
    is necessary to quote large parts of the guidance to  put  the  section
    relied on by the applicant in context.

         "How to determine if the continuous period is spent lawfully in the
         UK
         This section tells you how to decide if the  continuous  period  is
         spent lawfully in the UK.

         The applicant must not have spent any  of  their  time  in  the  UK
         without valid leave to enter or remain.

         You must refuse indefinite leave to remain (ILR) if  the  applicant
         does not meet the continuous period  requirement  set  out  in  the
         Immigration Rules.

         The continuous period requirement is the  minimum  amount  of  time
         which a migrant must spend in employment or being active in the  UK
         economy before being eligible to qualify for ILR.

         You must assess if the applicant has  spent  the  required  minimum
         time period in the UK, as well as whether  they  meet  all  of  the
         other requirements for ILR set out in the Immigration Rules.

         When you calculate if an applicant has met  the  continuous  period
         requirement, you must examine how many days  absence  from  the  UK
         they have accrued.

         The applicant must  provide  reasons  for  these  absences  in  all
         categories except bereaved partner. The majority of applicants  are
         also required to provide evidence of the absence. Evidence  is  not
         required from applicants in the following categories:
                . Innovator (Appendix W)
                . Tier 1 (Investor) (paragraph 245EF)
                . Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) (paragraph 245DF)
                . Tier 1 (Exceptional talent) (paragraph 245BF)

         The Secretary of State retains discretion under the Immigration Act
         1971 to grant leave outside the rules in exceptional cases.

         Definition of the UK
         For immigration purposes, 'UK' means  Great  Britain  and  Northern
         Ireland only.

         It does not include the Crown dependencies of the:
                . Channel Islands
                . Isle of Man

         Time  spent  in  the  Crown  dependencies  may  count  towards  the
         continuous period.

         Details of categories of leave that can be included can be found in
         the Common Travel Area guidance. Where the applicant held leave  in
         a category not included, you must treat any time spent in the Crown
         dependencies category as an absence from the UK.

         Any time spent working off  shore  on  the  UK  continental  shelf,
         beyond the 12 mile zone defined as UK territorial waters, does  not
         count toward the continuous qualifying period for ILR, for  example
         on ships or oil rigs. You must count this as an  absence  from  the
         UK.

         Absences which will not break continuity in the continuous period
         This section tells you when absences will not break continuity when
         calculating if the continuous period requirement has been met.

         Period between the issue of entry clearance and entering the UK
         The period between entry clearance being issued and  the  applicant
         entering the UK may be counted toward the  qualifying  period.  Any
         absences between the  date  of  issue  and  entry  to  the  UK  are
         considered an allowable absence. This period will count towards the
         180 days allowable absence in the continuous 12-month  period.  The
         applicant does not need to  provide  evidence  to  demonstrate  the
         reason for delayed entry.

         If the delay is more than 180 days, you can only include time after
         the applicant entered the UK in the continuous period calculation.

         ...

         180 whole days absence
         No more than 180 days' absences are allowed in  a  consecutive  12-
         month period.

         You must only include whole days  in  this  calculation.  Part  day
         absences, for  example,  less  than  24  hours,  are  not  counted.
         Therefore if the applicant had a single absence during the 12 month
         period and arrived in the UK on  day  181,  the  period  would  not
         exceed 180 days.

         ...

         Allowable absences
         Absences must be for a reason consistent with the original  purpose
         of entry to the UK, or for a serious or compelling reason,  in  the
         following categories:
                . representative of an overseas business
                . domestic workers in private households

         And in the following sub categories of the points-based system:
                . ...
                . Tier 2 (General) [emphasis added)
                . ...

         The applicant must provide evidence as explained below.

         For the categories below, there is no requirement to give a  reason
         for absences if they do not exceed 180 days  in  a  consecutive  12
         month period:
                . Innovator
                . Tier 1 (Exceptional talent)
                . Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)
                . Tier 1 (Investor)
                . UK ancestry
                . Retired person of independent means
                . Points-based System dependants
                . Appendix W dependants

         Absences linked  to  reason  for  being  in  the  UK  -  evidential
         requirements
         For all other categories, absences  must  be  consistent  with,  or
         connected to, the applicant's sponsored or permitted employment  or
         the permitted economic activity being carried out  in  the  UK  for
         example, business trips or short secondments.

         This also includes any paid annual leave which must be assessed  on
         a case by case basis and should be in line  with  UK  annual  leave
         entitlement for settled workers. For example, the  statutory  leave
         entitlement is 5.6 weeks' paid holiday each year, which for workers
         who work a 5 day  week  is  28  days'  paid  leave.  However,  many
         employers provide 25 or 30 days'  paid  leave  a  year,  plus  bank
         holidays.

         Short visits outside the UK on weekends or other  non-working  days
         are consistent with  the  basis  of  stay  and  do  not  break  the
         continuity of leave. You must count such absences towards  the  180
         day limit.

         Evidence in the form of a letter from the employer which  sets  out
         the reasons for the  absences,  including  annual  leave,  must  be
         provided. Where short visits outside the UK, on weekends  or  other
         non-working days have  taken  place,  evidence  from  the  employer
         should be  provided  to  confirm  the  applicant's  normal  working
         pattern and show the absences occurred during a non-working period.

         However,  time  spent  away  from  the  UK  for  extended  periods,
         particularly if the  business  no  longer  exists,  should  not  be
         allowed.

         Employment outside of the UK
         If the absences are connected to other employment outside  the  UK,
         which demonstrates the UK employment is secondary,  these  are  not
         permitted  absences,  and  the  continuous  period  requirement  is
         broken.  Absences  due  to  employment,  whether  related  to   the
         applicant's job in the UK or not, count towards the 180 day maximum
         each year.

         Continuation of lawful leave during absences from the UK
         ...

         On or after 24 November 2016

         The continuous period is maintained if the applicant either:
                .  leaves  the  UK  with  valid  leave,  applies  for  entry
                  clearance before their leave expires, is granted  and  re-
                  enters the UK using that entry clearance
                . applies for new entry clearance within 14  days  of  their
                  leave expiry date, one of the circumstances below applies,
                  their application is granted and they reenter the UK using
                  that entry clearance.

         ...

         Exceptional cases
         This section tells you about the exceptional circumstances when you
         can grant the applicant indefinite leave to remain (ILR) when their
         continuous leave is broken.

         Absences of more than 180 days in a 12-month period before the date
         of application (in all categories) will mean the continuous  period
         has been broken. However, you may consider a grant of  ILR  if  the
         applicant provides evidence to show the excessive absence  was  due
         to serious or compelling reasons.

         Serious or compelling reasons will vary but can include:
                . serious illness of the applicant or a close relative
                . a conflict
                . a natural disaster,  for  example,  volcanic  eruption  or
                  tsunami

         The applicant must provide evidence in the form of a  letter  which
         sets out full details of the compelling reason for the absence  and
         supporting documents, for example medical certificates or  evidence
         of disruption to travel arrangements.

         Absences  of  more  than  180  days  in  any  12-month  period  for
         employment  or  economic  activity  reasons  are   not   considered
         exceptional.
         ...

         Where an applicant has had a break in their leave while outside  of
         the UK, the entry clearance officer is unlikely to have  considered
         the reason, as any break would be irrelevant to the entry clearance
         application. As a result, you must consider the reason as  part  of
         the ILR application. The SET(O) form requests that migrants provide
         evidence demonstrating why  previous  applications  were  submitted
         while they did not have valid leave. Each break must be decided  on
         its  merits.  There  is  further  information  on  this   type   of
         consideration in the overstayer guidance.

         If an applicant's leave expires whilst they are outside the UK  and
         they apply for new entry clearance more than 14  days  after  their
         previous leave expires, for any reason, the  continuous  period  is
         broken and leave is not aggregated,  The  continuous  period  would
         also be broken where the gap is within  14  days  but  you  do  not
         consider the reasons provided to be sufficiently compelling.

         Breaks of leave and allowable absences
         For any acceptable breaks of leave, the period spent outside of the
         UK will count towards the 180 days allowable absence. This includes
         any time:
                . while their leave remains valid
                . after the expiry of their leave
                .  while  the  entry   clearance   application   was   under
                  consideration
                . before they entered the UK once entry clearance  had  been
                  granted"

Decision and reasons

19. It is necessary to understand the scheme of the immigration rules first
    with reference to the language of the relevant rules, construed against
    the overall purpose of the scheme, in order to place my  assessment  of
    the respondent's policy in proper context.

Leave to enter or remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant

20. The category of Tier 2 (General) Migrant forms part of the Points-Based
    System for leave to enter and remain in the UK contained in Part 6A  of
    the immigration rules. Paragraph 245H of the immigration  rules  states
    that the purpose of Tier 2 is to enable UK employers to recruit workers
    from outside the EEA to fill a particular vacancy that cannot be filled
    by a British or EEA worker.

21. A Tier 2 (General) Migrant applying for leave to remain in the UK under
    paragraph 245HD of the immigration rules must  have  a  minimum  of  50
    points under paragraphs 76 to  79D  of  Appendix  A,  10  points  under
    Appendix B, and 10 points under Appendix C. The 'Attributes'  contained
    in Appendix A relate to requirements to pass the Resident Labour Market
    Test, for a Certificate  of  Sponsorship  and  an  appropriate  salary.
    Appendices  B  and  C  contain  'English  language'  and  'Maintenance'
    requirements.

22. The purpose of Tier 2 (General) is to grant leave to  enter  or  remain
    for a person to work for  a  UK  company.  It  is  reasonable  for  the
    respondent to presume that a person who is working for a UK company  as
    a Tier 2 (General) Migrant is likely to spend most of their time living
    and working in the UK otherwise they would not need to apply for  leave
    to  enter  or  remain.  However,  nothing  in   paragraph   245H,   the
    requirements contained in paragraph 245HD or the Appendices  appear  to
    require an applicant to work in the UK for  a  specified  period  as  a
    condition for leave to enter or remain in this category.

23. Paragraph 245HE(a) states that a  Tier  2  (General)  Migrant  will  be
    granted leave for a period of five years (245HE(a)(ii)) or  up  to  six
    years in certain circumstances (245HE(a)(iii)). Again, nothing  in  the
    conditions relating to the  length  of  leave  contained  in  paragraph
    245HE(d) require an applicant to work in the UK for a specified period.

Indefinite leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant

24. Paragraph 245HF sets out the requirements for ILR as a Tier 2 (General)
    Migrant. One of the core requirements contained in  paragraph  245HF(b)
    is that an applicant must have spent "a continuous period  of  5  years
    lawfully in the UK". First, like other  provisions  for  ILR  contained
    elsewhere in the immigration rules, there  is  a  specified  period  of
    continuous lawful residence. Second, in contrast  to  the  requirements
    for limited leave to enter or remain as  a  Tier  2  (General)  Migrant
    there is a requirement for the person  to  have  spent  the  continuous
    period in the UK.

25. Paragraph 245AAA of the immigration rules sets out general requirements
    for ILR applications under the Points-Based System. Paragraph 245AAA(a)
    makes clear that references to a "continuous period" "lawfully  in  the
    UK" means residence "in the UK"  for  an  unbroken  period  with  valid
    leave. The paragraph goes on to list circumstances in which the  period
    shall be considered unbroken even though there might  appear  to  be  a
    break of continuous residence in the UK.

26. In R (on the application of RN) v SSHD (Paragraph 245AAA)  [2017]  UKUT
    76 the Upper Tribunal considered the construction of a previous version
    of paragraph 245AAA(a)(i) introduced on 13 December 2012 (HC  760).  By
    the date of the  decision  challenged  in  this  case  the  wording  of
    paragraph 245AAA(a)(i) had been amended by the Statement of Changes  to
    the immigration rules HC 309, which was introduced on 11 January  2018.
    Although there were several additions, the main elements of the wording
    of paragraph 245AAA(a) remained broadly  the  same.  In  RN  the  Upper
    Tribunal found that an absence of more than 180 days in a  relevant  12
    month period would fail to satisfy the requirement  of  the  rules.  In
    order to make sense of the rules  the  term  'residence'  in  paragraph
    245AAA(a) equated to 'presence' in the UK.

27. I am surprised that neither party referred to the  subsequent  decision
    of the Court of Appeal, which considered the background to  the  scheme
    contained in paragraph 245AAA in detail: see R (on the  application  of
    Roli Nesiama and others) v SSHD [2018] EWCA  Civ  1369.  The  Court  of
    Appeal upheld the Upper Tribunal's decision in  RN.  In  assessing  the
    intention of paragraph 245AAA as it stood at the date of  the  decision
    in that case the court found that the purpose of the rule was to set  a
    maximum number of days absence from the UK  and  that  the  policy  was
    consistent with the construction of paragraph 245AAA [38-39]. I did not
    find it necessary  to  invite  further  submissions  from  the  parties
    because, aside from the fact that they should have been  aware  of  the
    decision, it  does  no  more  than  provide  general  support  for  the
    conclusion that I have come to regarding the scheme  in  place  at  the
    date of the decision in this case.

28. The amended paragraph 245AAA(a)(i) retained  the  core  requirement  to
    spend no more than 180 days outside the UK in any 12 month  period  and
    introduced a more detailed series of exceptions.  For  the  purpose  of
    this case, there are two relevant provisions.

    No more than 180 days outside the LIK

    (i)  Paragraph 245AAA(a)(i) contains a requirement that a  person  with
         leave to enter or remain as a Tier 2  (General)  Migrant  must  not
         spend more than 180 days outside the UK in any 12 month  period  if
         they intend to apply for ILR under paragraph 245HF,  even  if  they
         have had continuous lawful leave for five years.  I  will  describe
         this as the "no more than 180 days outside the UK" requirement.

         Paragraphs   245AAA(a)(i)-(iv)   set   out   specific   exceptions.
         Consistent  with  the  primary  provision  contained  in  paragraph
         245AAA(a) the wording of the exceptions continued to emphasise  the
         180 day  limit  on  absences  from  the  UK.  Where  the  specified
         exceptions apply the absence will not count  towards  the  180  day
         limit. Nothing in the wording of those provisions expressly  permit
         absences of more than 180 days, equally, nothing  would  appear  to
         obviate a person who has spent, for example,  more  than  180  days
         outside the UK for the purpose of assisting with  an  international
         crisis from relying on paragraph 245AAA(a)(i)(1) to say that  their
         period of residence was unbroken because it did not  count  towards
         the  180  day  limit.  The  wording  and  intended  effect  of  the
         exceptions is somewhat unclear, but it is not necessary to  analyse
         this part of the rules in detail because none of the exceptions  or
         periods to be disregarded contained in paragraphs 245AAA(a)(i)-(iv)
         apply in this case.

    Allowable absences

    (ii) Paragraph 245AAA(c) contains a separate  but  related  requirement
         which applies to  Tier  2  (General)  Migrants  but  not  to  other
         specified categories. A Tier 2 (General)  Migrant  must  also  show
         that any absences from the UK during the relevant qualifying period
         was for one of two permitted reasons. I will describe this  as  the
         "allowable absences" requirement. The absence must have been for  a
         purpose that is consistent with the applicant's basis  of  stay  or
         for serious or compelling reasons. The reference to "any"  absences
         indicates that all absences must be for one of  the  two  allowable
         reasons unless the exceptions to the no more than 180 days  outside
         the UK requirement apply.

29. The provisions contained in paragraph 245AAA must be read with the core
    requirement to spend a continuous period of five years lawfully "in the
    UK". The additional provisions contained in paragraph 245AAA  recognise
    that a person might spend time outside the UK as part of their work for
    a UK company or during periods of annual leave. Alternatively,  serious
    or compelling circumstances might arise whereby a person might need  to
    leave the UK during  the  five  year  qualifying  period  e.g.  serious
    illness of the applicant or a close relative. However, nothing  in  the
    wording of paragraph 245AAA(c) disapplies the no  more  than  180  days
    outside the UK requirement let alone contains any positive  wording  to
    suggest that an applicant is permitted to  spend  more  than  180  days
    outside the UK in those circumstances without breaking  the  continuous
    period of lawful leave "in the UK".

30. When the provisions contained in paragraphs  245HF(b)  and  245AAA  are
    read together a Tier 2 (General) Migrant who has spent periods of  time
    outside the UK must satisfy all the relevant requirements.  First,  the
    applicant must have spent "a continuous period of 5 years  lawfully  in
    the UK". Second, the applicant must not have been absent  from  the  UK
    for more than 180 days during any  12  month  period  (subject  to  the
    exceptions or periods to be disregarded). Third, any absence is not  an
    allowable absence unless it was for one of the two permitted reasons.

Overview of the Tier 2 (General) immigration rules

31. The scheme contained  in  the  immigration  rules  indicates  that  the
    purpose of leave to enter or remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant is to
    allow UK companies to recruit workers from outside the EEA if a vacancy
    cannot be filled by a British or EEA worker. Nothing in the immigration
    rules appears to limit the period of time that a person  must  work  in
    the UK once they have been granted limited leave to  enter  or  remain.
    However,  there  is  an  underlying  presumption,  disclosed   by   the
    subsequent requirements for ILR, that a Tier 2 (General)  Migrant  will
    spend most of his time working in the UK.  The  scheme  is  subject  to
    limits on the number of Tier 2 (General) sponsors and a  limit  on  the
    length of time that a person can be  employed  by  a  UK  company  with
    limited leave to enter and remain.

32. In contrast to the requirements for limited leave, it  is  an  explicit
    requirement for ILR as a Tier 2 (General)  Migrant  to  have  "spent  a
    continuous period of five years lawfully in the UK".  Paragraph  245AAA
    seeks to define what is meant by the phrase. A person  must  show  that
    they meet the  no  more  than  180  days  outside  the  UK  requirement
    (245AAA(a)(i)), and if there are absences,  they  must  also  meet  the
    allowable absences  requirement  (245AAA(c)).  If  a  person  does  not
    qualify for ILR as a Tier 2 (General)  Migrant  after  five  years  the
    scheme appears to leave an applicant and his employer  in  a  difficult
    position because there seems to be no provision for a further grant  of
    limited leave to remain (245HE(a)).

Policy guidance

33. Having considered  the  scheme  for  Tier  2  (General)  Migrants  with
    reference to the wording of the immigration rules, I turn to  the  Home
    Office  policy  guidance  "Indefinite  leave  to  remain:   calculating
    continuous period in UK" (Version 18.0) 29 March 2019, which forms  the
    central plank of the applicant's case.

34.  Mr  Halim  accepted  that  the  applicant  did  not  meet  the  strict
    requirements of the immigration rules. He relied on a  single  sentence
    of the 19 page guidance, which he described as the "primary  provision"
    in support of his argument. Under the heading " Allowable Absences" the
    first line states:

         "Absences must be for a reason consistent with the original purpose
         of entry to the UK, or for a serious or compelling reason.. ."

35. Mr Halim argued that, despite having absences that  exceeded  180  days
    for each and every 12 month period  during  the  five  year  qualifying
    period, the plain wording of the policy entitled the applicant  to  ILR
    because the absences, for whatever period of time,  were  permitted  by
    this wording. He asserted that this  interpretation  would  lead  to  a
    rational outcome and was consistent with the coherence of the scheme.

36. The analysis of the Tier 2 (General) scheme set out above indicates the
    opposite. It was open to the respondent to grant successive periods  of
    limited leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant in the  knowledge
    that the applicant spent most of his time working for a UK  company  in
    Erbil. Nothing in the scheme of the  immigration  rules  for  leave  to
    enter or remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant requires an applicant  to
    spend a specified period in the UK.

37. At the point when the applicant applied for long term settlement in the
    UK the scheme was different. In most cases, the underlying  presumption
    is likely to be that a person who is granted leave to enter  or  remain
    to work for a UK company will spend most of their time residing in  the
    UK. By the time they have completed the general  limit  of  five  years
    limited leave to remain most applicants will be eligible to  apply  for
    settlement.

38. The policy lists the categories of the immigration rules covered by the
    guidance. The categories include Tier  2  (General)  Migrants.  In  the
    section giving guidance on how to decide whether the continuous  period
    is spent lawfully in the UK,  it  states  that  the  continuous  period
    requirement is the minimum amount of time which a migrant must spend in
    employment or being active in the UK economy before being  eligible  to
    qualify for ILR. The caseworker considering the application is required
    to examine how  many  days  absence  the  applicant  has  accrued.  The
    applicant must  provide  reasons  for  the  absences  and  evidence  in
    support. The policy  confirms  that  the  Secretary  of  State  retains
    discretion to grant leave outside the rules in exceptional cases.  What
    is said in this section of the policy is broadly  consistent  with  the
    intended purpose of the immigration rules and the overall scheme.

39. The next section outlines the  circumstances  when  absences  will  not
    break  continuity  when  calculating  whether  the  continuous   period
    requirement has been  met.  It  begins  by  discussing  the  provisions
    relating to the  period  between  the  issue  of  entry  clearance  and
    entering the UK, which will count towards  the  qualifying  period  and
    towards "the 180 days allowable absences". The section relating to  PBS
    dependents also refers to "180 days allowable absences".

40. The section the applicant relies on is headed "Allowable Absences"  and
    is broadly consistent with the terms  of  paragraph  245AAA(c)  of  the
    immigration rules. It confirms which categories must  produce  evidence
    to show that any absences are for a reason consistent with the original
    purpose of entry to the UK or for a serious or compelling  reason.  The
    guidance goes on to set out details  about  the  evidence  required  to
    explain the absences. It recognises that  a  person  might  spend  time
    outside the UK on business trips, short secondments, and during  annual
    leave. It states that short visits outside the UK are  consistent  with
    the basis of stay and do  not  break  the  continuity  of  leave.  Such
    absences should be counted towards the "180 day  limit".  The  guidance
    then states that "... time spent away from the UK for extended periods,
    particularly if the business no longer exists, should not be  allowed".
    Nothing in this section of the guidance departs from the overall scheme
    of the rules.

41. The guidance goes on to consider employment outside  the  UK.  Absences
    due to other employment outside the UK which demonstrates that  the  UK
    employment is secondary would not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph
    245AAA(c). If there is any doubt about the intention  of  the  guidance
    relating to allowable absences it is dispelled by the final sentence of
    that paragraph, which states:

         "Absences due to employment, whether related to the applicant's job
         in the UK or not, count towards the 180 maximum each year."

42. The scheme of the immigration rules places a clear cap on the number of
    days that a person can  spend  outside  the  UK  before  continuity  of
    residence is broken for the purpose of paragraph 245AAA(a).  A  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant must show that they have spent no more than 180  days
    outside the UK in any 12 month period and must justify  those  absences
    with evidence to show that they were allowable absences. The fact  that
    the guidance repeatedly refers to "180 day allowable absences" and  the
    "180 day limit" reflects the overall intention of the scheme. The  only
    absences that are not counted towards the 180 day maximum are the  ones
    expressly identified in the rules. The applicant does not  come  within
    any of those exceptions.

43. I understand why the open nature of the sentence  relied  upon  by  the
    applicant might be tempting to seize upon when  he  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration  rules  for  continuity  of  residence.
    However, what is said under the heading "Allowable Absences" cannot  be
    read in isolation. It must be considered in light of the overall scheme
    and the rest of the guidance. The fact that  the  section  relied  upon
    does not repeat the phrase "180 days allowable absence" used  elsewhere
    in the policy does not detract from the intended  meaning.  Nothing  in
    the wording of the policy makes any express statement  permitting  more
    than 180 days allowable absence. In order to depart from  the  intended
    purpose of the scheme in the way the applicant  contends,  the  wording
    would need to be clear. It is not. The wording is consistent  with  the
    overall purpose of the provisions relating to continuity of  residence,
    which restrict allowable absences to no more than 180 days  in  any  12
    month period.

Conclusion

44. For the reasons given above, I conclude that the policy  is  consistent
    with the broad intention of the immigration rules for ILR as a  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant and cannot be read in the way the applicant contends.
    The respondent's decision  is  lawful.  The  application  for  judicial
    review must be dismissed.

45. I recognise that this leaves the applicant in a difficult position. The
    representations made with the application for ILR accepted that he  did
    not meet the strict requirements of the immigration rules  relating  to
    continuity of residence and relied solely on the narrow reading of  the
    policy without  putting  it  into  proper  context.  As  a  result,  no
    submissions were made to the respondent asking  for  discretion  to  be
    exercised in this case.

46. The applicant and his employer have been open about the nature  of  his
    employment from  the  start.  The  applicant's  particular  skills  and
    experience are said to play an essential role in the company. The scale
    of the investment made by the company  in  establishing  operations  in
    Erbil is unclear. The applicant's employer has given  good  reasons  to
    explain why it has taken much longer than anticipated  to  set  up  the
    office.  Given  the  recent  history  of  Iraq  no  doubt  there   were
    significant operational challenges  for  a  new  company  to  overcome.
    Although the applicant has spent the vast majority of his time  working
    in Erbil, and his absences exceeded the 180 day limit during  each  and
    every 12 month period during  the  qualifying  period,  the  last  year
    indicated a dramatic  drop  in  his  absences  to  192  days.  This  is
    consistent with his employer's initial expectation that  the  applicant
    would eventually be in a position to spend more time working in the  UK
    once the office in Erbil was more established.

47. The nature of the  scheme  appears  to  leave  the  applicant  and  his
    employer on a cliff edge. It is not possible to apply for further leave
    to remain as a Tier 2  (General)  Migrant  because  the  applicant  has
    completed the  five  year  limit.  If  he  does  not  meet  the  strict
    requirements for ILR his employment and  the  success  of  the  company
    might be placed in jeopardy. Although the Tier 2 scheme  places  limits
    on the period of limited leave and the number of Tier  2  sponsors,  it
    does have the overall aim of allowing a route to settlement after  five
    years. It is unlikely that the scheme would intend to place  jobs  that
    cannot  be  filled  by  British  or  EEA  workers   or   UK   companies
    unnecessarily at risk.

48. The respondent has discretion to  consider  whether  to  grant  further
    leave to remain or  ILR  in  exceptional  circumstances.  Although  the
    applicant's circumstances are not covered by the examples envisaged  in
    the policy, the respondent has discretion to go beyond the policy in an
    appropriate case. It is a matter for the applicant whether  he  decides
    to make further representations. The facts  of  the  case  may  justify
    serious consideration by the respondent if he does.
                                    ~~~~~




                                                            JR/6053/2019 (V)

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                               Judicial Review
                               Decision Notice




             The Queen on the application of SASSAN HESSAMIAZAR
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

                                    [pic]

                                    ORDER
                                    [pic]

  UPON HEARING from Mr R. Halim, on behalf of  the  applicant,  and  Mr  Z.
  Malik, on behalf of the respondent at a  remote  hearing  held  at  Field
  House on 01 October 2020.

  AND UPON judgment being handed down on 28 October 2020.

  Decision: application dismissed

  1. The application for judicial review is dismissed for the reasons given
       in the judgment (attached).

  Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

  2. Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal  is  refused  because  the
       Upper Tribunal decision does not contain arguable errors of law.  The
       Upper Tribunal  interpreted  the  scheme  from  the  wording  of  the
       immigration rules before turning to consider the terms of the policy.
       The  grounds  do  not  seek  to  challenge   the   Upper   Tribunal's
       interpretation of the scheme  contained  in  the  immigration  rules.
       Having put the policy in proper context it is not arguable  that  the
       Upper Tribunal erred in finding that the wording of  the  policy  did
       not go so far as to allow any number of days absence so long as  they
       were consistent with the basis of stay.  The  interpretation  of  the
       policy contended for by the applicant was in clear  contrast  to  the
       intended purpose of the immigration rules, which limit the number  of
       allowable absences to no more than 180 days in any  12  month  period
       (subject to the exceptions and periods to be disregarded).

  Costs

  3. The applicant shall pay the respondent's costs of 5,701.




                  M. Canavan
       Signed:     [pic]
                  Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


       Dated: 28 October 2020




  [pic]


  Applicant's solicitors:
  Respondent's solicitors:
  Home Office Ref:
  Decision(s) sent to above parties on: 28/10/2020
  [pic]



  Notification of appeal rights


  A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is
  a decision that disposes of proceedings.


  A party may appeal against such a decision to the Court of  Appeal  on  a
  question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to  the
  Upper Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which  the  decision  is
  given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless  consider
  at the hearing whether to give  or  refuse  permission  to  appeal  (rule
  44(4B) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


  If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an  application
  or by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to appeal  can  apply
  for permission from the Court of Appeal itself.  This  must  be  done  by
  filing an appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office of  the  Court
  of Appeal  within  28  days  of  the  date  the  Tribunal's  decision  on
  permission to appeal was sent (Civil Procedure Rules  Practice  Direction
  52D 3.3).


[pic]
