
[pic] UTIJR6

                                                              JR/ 6956/ 2017

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice



                The Queen on the application of X and Others
                                                                  Applicants
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                  Before Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Dr S  Chelvan  and  Mr  F  Asghar,  of  Counsel,
instructed by Asghar and [pic]Co Solicitors, on  behalf  of  the  applicants
and Mr Z Malik, of Counsel, instructed by the Government  Legal  Department,
on behalf of the respondent, at a hearing  at  Field  House,  London  on  31
January 2020.



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
I make an anonymity orders Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the applicants or  members  of
his family. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.



Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

Introduction

1. The applicants are all Yemeni nationals.  The  first  applicant  is  the
   husband of the second and the couple  are  the  parents  of  the  third,
   fourth, fifth, sixth and [pic]seventh applicants,  the  last  two  being
   minors. In light of my anonymity direction, I shall refer to  the  first
   applicant as "X" throughout this decision.

2. The central challenge put forward by the applicants in this  application
   for judicial review focuses on the respondent's failure to have  made  a
   decision on their outstanding applications for further leave  to  remain
   in the United [pic]Kingdom. In its simplest  form,  this  is  a  "delay"
   case, although there are specific issues  surrounding  this  core  issue
   which require specific consideration,

The relevant factual and procedural background

3. X  entered  the  United  Kingdom  with  entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  1
   (Entrepreneur) Migrant on 25 February 2014,  accompanied  by  the  other
   applicants as his dependents. The leave conferred by the entry clearance
   ran until 23 April 2017. Prior to entry, the family unit had resided  in
   Saudi Arabia.

4. By an application made on 18 April 2017 (differing dates are  stated  in
   the papers, but this has no material bearing on the case), X  sought  an
   extension of his leave to remain as a Tier 1 Entrepreneur,  pursuant  to
   paragraph 245DD of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules").  The  other
   applicants applied for an extension [pic]of their  respective  leave  as
   his dependents. It is these applications which  remain  [pic]outstanding
   before the respondent.

5. Prior to the extension applications being made, HMRC  began  a  criminal
   investigation into alleged multi-million pound  tax  fraud  involving  a
   number of different tax regimes and a large number of companies.  X  was
   suspected of involvement and arrested. I shall set out  further  details
   about this matter, below.

6. As a result of the criminal investigation,  the  respondent  decided  to
   delay  or  defer  a  decision  on  X's  application  and  those  of  his
   dependents.  It  is  somewhat  unclear  as  to  how  this  decision  was
   communicated to X and his legal advisers. Suffice it to say that between
   April and July 2017 a number of  contacts  were  made  which  led  X  to
   understand that no decision would be made on  the  pending  applications
   until the criminal investigation had concluded, or at  least  progressed
   in some way. This led to a Pre-Action Protocol letter being sent to  the
   respondent on 31 July 2017. A response was received on  7  August  2017.
   Dissatisfied with this, the application tor judicial review was made  on
   16 August 2017. Following service  of  an  Acknowledgement  of  Service,
   there was no permission  decision  'on  the  papers':  the  matter  went
   straight to an oral hearing at which permission  was  refused  by  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Hanson on 28 November 2017. His decision  was  challenged
   to the Court of Appeal. Permission to appeal was granted by Henderson LJ
   on 5 November 2018. By consent, on 10 October 2019,  Simler  LJ  allowed
   X's appeal and granted permission to bring judicial review  proceedings.
   The matter was remitted to the Upper  Tribunal  for  a  [pic]substantive
   hearing.

7. In light of further case management directions issued by Upper 'Tribunal
   Judge O'Connor, amended grounds of challenge were filed on  27  November
   2019 (these were not settled by Dr Chevlan or Mr Asghar). These for  the
   basis of this application for judicial review.

8. Further procedural  steps  then  ensued,  including  the  production  of
   additional evidence, the filing of detailed grounds of  defence,  and  a
   reply to these.

The criminal investigation

9. The investigation has been ongoing since July 2016. Thirteen individuals
   were arrested and remain on criminal bail.  X  is  among  these.  It  is
   suspected that these individuals, being alleged directors, shareholders,
   and/or signatories to bank accounts for a  number  of  businesses,  have
   conspired to defraud  HMRC  and  [pic]launder  the  proceeds  of  crime.
   Specifically, X was arrested on suspicion of the following:

           Fraudulent Evasion of Income Tax contrary to section 106A of the
           Taxes Management Act 1970;

           Conspiracy to Cheat the Public Revenue contrary to section 1 of
           the Criminal Law Act 1977;

           Money laundering contrary to sections 3 to 7, 328, and 329 the
           Proceeds of Crime Act 2002.

10. The evidence adduced by the respondent indicates that the  investigation
   is ''document heavy", with over 700 exhibits  "uplifted"  and  over  100
   media items. The investigation has involved the  consideration  of  over
   100 individual bank accounts,

11. As  matters  currently  stand,  the  bail  conditions  preclude  X  from
   applying for a new travel document, have required  the  Home  Office  to
   surrender his existing passport to HMRC, and for  HMRC  to  retain  that
   passport.

12. It is important to note that there has as yet been no charging  decision
   against X [pic]or, as I understand it, any of the individuals subject to
   the criminal investigation.  The  most  up  to  date  evidence  on  this
   particular issue (contained in  a  letter  to  X  from  HMRC,  dated  13
   November 2019) states that:

           "As you are  aware,  this  matter  is  part  of  a  large  scale
           investigation,  which  [pic]will  be  submitted  to  the   Crown
           Prosecution Service in stages in due course.  Therefore,  it  is
           for this reason that your bail return date has been [pic]revised
           to a date when it is anticipated that an indication  a  charging
           decision is likely to have been made by  the  Crown  Prosecution
           Service."

13. That bail return date now stands as 13 August 2020.

14. I record at this juncture that  X  has  always  strenuously  denied  any
   involvement in the alleged criminal conspiracy.

Procedural matters

15. Three specific procedural matters arose in respect of the hearing on  31
   January  2020.  First,  on  17  January  2020  the  applicants  made  an
   application to rely on [pic]further evidence. This consisted of  updated
   witness statements from X  and  the  second  applicant,  both  dated  15
   January 2020, together with additional evidence relating to the criminal
   investigation (specifically, an expert report by Michael  Handy  on  the
   issue  of  the   authenticity   of   signatures   apparently   used   on
   [pic]documents being considered  by  HMRC)  and  the  claimed  prejudice
   caused to the applicants by the respondent's ongoing failure  to  decide
   the applications for further leave to remain. By an order sealed  on  24
   January 2020, Upper Tribunal [pic]Judge Gleeson granted the  application
   to admit the new evidence on the basis that as the respondent's  failure
   to make decisions was a continuing event, it was appropriate  to  permit
   the applicants to adduce evidence as to claimed prejudice caused to them
   by that failure.

16. The second matter relates to new evidence sought to be  adduced  by  the
   respondent in the form of a witness statement Ms Angela  McMahon,  dated
   27 January 2020. Ms McMahon,  an  Investigation  Officer  at  HMRC,  has
   already provided a witness statement.  The  new  witness  statement  was
   drafted in order to respond to X's latest witness statement, referred to
   above. However; as acknowledged by Mr Malik, the respondent  had  failed
   to make any application [pic]to adduce this new evidence. He informed me
   that the order of Judge Gleeson  [pic]had  only  been  received  by  the
   respondent  on  30  January  2020  and  the  timescale  for  making   an
   application was extremely short. Whilst that may be the  case,  for  the
   following reasons I decided that  Ms  McMahon's  new  witness  statement
   should not be admitted.

17. First, the new witness statement pre-dated  Judge  Gleeson's  order  and
   there  could  have  been  an  application  from   the   respondent,   in
   anticipation of the applicants' further evidence being admitted, to have
   Ms McMahon's witness statement admitted.

18. Second, in any event, an application could have been made on 30  January
   or, at the very latest, on the morning of the hearing  itself.  No  such
   application was forthcoming.

19. Third, there has been no satisfactory explanation  for  the  failure  to
   have made any application.

20. Bearing in mind the  need  for  procedural  rigour  in  judicial  review
   proceedings, fairness and the interests of justice did not  require  the
   admittance of the respondent's new evidence.

21. Mr Malik confirmed that he was  content  to  proceed  with  the  hearing
   notwithstanding my decision on this point.

22. The third procedural matter relates to anonymity. An application for  an
   [pic]anonymity direction was made by the applicants on 29 January  2020.
   Two  arguments  were  put  forward:  first,  that  disclosure   of   the
   applicants' names (in particular X's) could potentially create a risk to
   them if they were to be returned to Yemen at some point (although  there
   is no prospect of that as matters currently  stand).  Second,  that  the
   presence of two minor children  in  these  proceedings  was  a  powerful
   factor in favour of anonymity.

23. At the end of the hearing  I  ruled  that  an  anonymity  direction  was
   appropriate. I have given full consideration to the importance  of  open
   justice. The first  argument  put  forward  on  the  applicants'  behalf
   carried a degree of merit, but by itself  was  insufficient  to  justify
   anonymity.  However,  the  fact  remains  that  the  sixth  and  seventh
   applicants are minor children, and in  all  the  circumstances  of  this
   case, the need to protect them from being  identified  (particularly  by
   way of so-called "jigsaw identification") is  sufficiently  powerful  to
   displace the presumption of naming the applicants. I  record  here  that
   the respondent's position on this issue was neutral.

The relevant legal framework

24. I do not propose to set out each and  every  legislative  provision  and
   other materials that have been referred to in this case. These  are  all
   to be found in the bundle of authorities.

25. The relevant provisions of the Immigration Act  1971  ("the  1971  Act")
   are as follows:

           "1. - General principles.

           (1) All those who are in this Act expressed to have the right of
           abode in the United Kingdom shall be free to live in, and to
           come and go into and from, the United Kingdom without let or
           hindrance except such as may be required under and in accordance
           with this Act to enable their right to be established or as may
           be otherwise lawfully imposed on any person.

           (2) Those not having that right may live, work and settle in the
           United Kingdom [pic]by permission and subject to such regulation
           and control of their entry into, stay in and departure from the
           United Kingdom as is imposed by this Act; and indefinite leave
           to enter or remain in the United Kingdom shall, by virtue of
           this provision, be treated as having been given under this Act
           to those in the United [pic]Kingdom at its coming into force, if
           they are then settled there (and not exempt under this Act from
           the provisions relating to leave to enter or remain).

           (3) Arrival in and departure from the United Kingdom on a local
           journey from or to any of the Islands (that is to say, the
           Channel Islands and Isle of Man) or the Republic of Ireland
           shall not be subject to control under this Act, nor shall a
           person require leave to enter the United Kingdom on so arriving,
           except in so far as any of those places is for any purpose
           excluded from this subsection under the powers conferred by this
           Act; and in this Act the United Kingdom and those places, or
           such of them as are not so excluded, are collectively referred
           to as "the common travel area".

           (4) The rules laid down by the Secretary of State as to the
           practice to be followed in the administration of this Act for
           regulating the entry into and stay in the United Kingdom of
           persons not having the right of abode shall include provision
           for admitting (in such cases and subject to such restrictions as
           may be provided by the rules, and subject or not to conditions
           as to length of stay or otherwise) persons   for the purpose of
           taking for purposes of study, or as visitors, or as dependants
           of persons lawfully in or entering the United Kingdom.

           ...

           3. - General provisions for regulation and control.

           (1) Except as otherwise provided by or under this Act, where a
           person is not a British citizen

              (a) he shall not enter the United Kingdom unless given leave
              to do so in [pic]accordance with the provisions of, or made
              under this Act;

              (b) he may be given leave to enter the United Kingdom (or,
              when already there, leave to remain in the United Kingdom)
              either for a limited or for an indefinite period;

              (c) if he is given limited leave to enter or remain in the
              United Kingdom, it may [pic]be given subject to all or any of
              the following conditions, namely -

                 (i) a condition restricting his [work] or occupation in the
                 United Kingdom;

                 (ia) a condition restricting his studies in the United
                 Kingdom;

                 (ii) a condition requiring him to maintain and accommodate
                 himself, and any dependants of his, without recourse to
                 public funds;

                 (iii) a condition requiring him to register with the
                 police.

                 (iv) a condition requiring him to report to an immigration
                 officer or the Secretary of State; and

                 (v) a condition about residence.

           (2) The Secretary of State shall from time to time (and as soon
           as may be) lay [pic]before Parliament statements of the rules,
           or of any changes in the rules, laid down by him as to the
           practice to be followed in the administration of this Act for
           regulating the entry into and stay in the United Kingdom of
           persons required by this Act to have leave to enter, including
           any rules as to the period for which [pic]leave is to be given
           and the conditions to be attached in different circumstances;
           and section 1(4) above shall not be taken to require uniform
           provision to be made by the rules as regards admission of
           persons for a purpose or in a capacity specified in section 1(4)
           (and in particular, for this as well as other purposes of this
           Act, account may be taken of citizenship or nationality). If a
           statement laid before either House of Parliament under this
           subsection is disapproved by a resolution of that House passed
           within the period of forty days beginning with the date of
           laying (and exclusive of any [pic]period during which Parliament
           is dissolved or prorogued or during which both Houses are
           adjourned for more than four days), then the Secretary of State
           shall as soon as may be make such changes or further changes in
           the rules as appear to him to be required in the circumstances,
           so that the statement of those changes be laid before Parliament
           at latest by the end of the period of forty days beginning with
           the date of the resolution (but exclusive as aforesaid).

           (3) In the case of a limited leave to enter or remain in the
           United Kingdom, -

              (a) a person's leave may be varied, whether by restricting,
              enlarging or removing the limit on its duration, or by
              adding, varying or revoking conditions, but if the limit on
              its duration is removed, any conditions attached to the leave
              shall cease to apply; and

              (b) the limitation on and any conditions attached to a
              person's leave (whether imposed originally or on a variation)
              shall, if not superseded, apply also to any subsequent leave
              he may obtain after an absence from the United Kingdom within
              the period limited for the duration of the earlier leave.

           (4) A person's leave to enter or remain in the Uni ted Kingdom
           shall lapse on his going to a country or territory outside the
           common travel area (whether or not he lands there), unless
           within the period for which he had leave he returns to the
           United Kingdom in circumstances in which he is not required to
           obtain leave to enter; but, if he does so return, his previous
           leave (and any limitation on it or conditions attached to it)
           shall continue to apply.

           ...

           3C Continuation of leave pending variation decision

           (1) This section applies if -

              (a) a person who has limited leave to enter or remain in the
              United Kingdom [pic]applies to the Secretary of State for
              variation of the leave,

              (b) the application for variation is made before the leave
              expires, and

              (c) the leave expires without the application for variation
              having been decided.

           (2) The leave is extended by virtue of this section during any
           period when -

              (a) the application for variation is neither decided nor
              withdrawn,

              (b) an appeal under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Asylum
              and Immigration Act 2002 could be brought, while the
              appellant is in the United Kingdom against the decision on
              the application for variation (ignoring any possibility of an
              [pic]appeal out of time with permission),

              (c) an appeal under that section against that decision,
              brought while the appellant is in the United Kingdom, is
              pending (within the meaning of section [pic]104 of that Act),
              or

              (d) an administrative review of the decision on the
              application for variation -

                 (i) could be sought, or

                 (ii) is pending.

           (3) Leave extended by virtue of this section shall lapse if the
           applicant leaves the United Kingdom.

           (3A) Leave extended by virtue of this section may be cancelled
           if the applicant -

              (a) has failed to comply with a condition attached to the
              leave, or

              (b) has used or uses deception in seeking leave to remain
              (whether successfully or not).

           (4) A person may not make an application for variation of his
           leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom while that leave
           is extended by virtue of this section.

           (5) But subsection (4) does not prevent the variation of the
           application mentioned in subsection (1)(a).

           ...

           Schedule 2

           1. -

           (1) Immigration officers for the purposes of this Act shall be
           appointed by the Secretary of State, and he may arrange with the
           Commissioners of Customs and Excise for the employment of
           officers of customs and excise as Immigration officers under
           this Act.

           ...

           (3) In the exercise of their functions under this Act
           immigration officers shall act in accordance with such
           instructions (not inconsistent with the immigration rules) as
           may be given them by the Secretary of State, and medical
           inspectors shall act in accordance with such instructions as may
           be given them by the Secretary of State or, in Northern Ireland,
           as may be given in pursuance of the arrangements mentioned in
           sub-paragraph (2) above by the Minister making [pic]appointments
           of medical inspectors in Northern Ireland."

26. References have also been made to the  Data  Protection  Act  2018,  the
   General Data Protection  Regulations  2016  (Regulation  (EU)  2016/679:
   "GDPR"), the  Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the  European  Union
   ("CFR"), and the European Convention on Human Rights ("ECHR").





The parties' arguments

27. With particular reference  to  para  18  of  the  amended  grounds,  the
   applicants' challenge can be summarised as follows:

           i.  The  respondent  has  no  express  or   implied   power   to
              suspend/delay/defer a decision on an application for leave to
              remain pending the outcome of a criminal investigation;

          ii. The  respondent  is  bound  to  decide  the  applications  in
              accordance with the applicable Rule and any relevant  policy,
              and if the requirements of the Rule are satisfied,  leave  to
              remain must be granted;

         iii. When deciding X's application, the  respondent  is  bound  to
              apply  the  presumption  of  innocence  when/if   considering
              paragraph 322(5) of the Rules, given  that  X  has  not  been
              convicted of an [pic]offence;

          iv. If X is subsequently convicted of an offence, the  respondent
              has the  power  to  revoke  any  leave  granted  to  initiate
              deportation proceedings;

           v. The outstanding  applications  must  also  be  determined  in
              accordance with EU law principles of proportionality as  this
              case  concerns  the  sharing  of  data   between   government
              agencies;

          vi. The respondent's ongoing failure to decide  the  applications
              has caused real prejudice to the applicants;

         vii. The failure  to  decide  the  applications  is,  in  all  the
              circumstances, unreasonable and disproportionate.

28. The respondent's case can be summarised as follows:

           i. It is not irrational  to  delay  making  a  decision  on  the
              applicants' outstanding applications for leave to  remain  on
              the basis that the course of action proposed  by  them  would
              involve obtaining and considering  a  very  large  amount  of
              evidence collated by HMRC as part  of  its  ongoing  criminal
              investigation.

          ii. Taking this alternative course of  action  would  not  be  an
              efficient use of public funds;

         iii. The issue of proportionality does not arise in this case, but
              even if it did, the respondent's position is proportionate in
              all [pic]circumstances.

29. In responding to the  respondent's  detailed  grounds  of  defence,  the
   applicants' reply emphasises the assertion that there is simply no power
   for  the  respondent  to  suspend  or  delay  decision-making   in   the
   circumstances of this case.

30. During the course of argument, Mr Malik  confirmed  that  there  was  no
   policy, published or otherwise, relating to the situation in  which  the
   applicants find [pic]themselves.

31. I record here that Dr Chelvan did not rely  upon  the  contents  of  X's
   latest witness  statement,  dated  15  January  2020,  when  making  his
   submissions.

Analysis and conclusions

32. Although the terms "delay", "suspend", and "defer" have  been  variously
   employed to describe the respondent's failure to make a decision on  the
   applicants' outstanding applications, for the purposes  of  my  analysis
   and [pic]conclusions, I shall refer only  to  the  first  of  these.  As
   helpfully confirmed by Dr Chelvan at the  outset  of  the  hearing,  the
   challenge put forward in this case is  to  be  categorised  as  unlawful
   "delay" by the respondent.

33. I have sought to gather together the different strands  of  the  grounds
   of challenge in order to provide a clear structure to  my  consideration
   of the issues. In so doing I have formulated the following questions:

           i. Question 1: is  there  an  express  power  available  to  the
              respondent to  delay  making  decisions  on  the  applicants'
              outstanding applications?

          ii. Question 2: if there is no express power, is there an implied
              power?

         iii. Question 3:  if  there  is  a  power  to  delay  (express  or
              implied), is the respondent's decision to  delay  nonetheless
              irrational?

          iv. Question 4: is a response delay unlawful by reference to  any
              other sources of law, in particular GDPR, CFR, or ECHR?

Question 1: is there an express power to delay  making  a  decision  on  the
applications for leave to remain?

34. The first question to address is  whether  there  is  an  express  power
   available  to  the  respondent  to  delay  making  a  decision  on   the
   applicants' applications.

35. It is apparent from the 1971 Act that  there  is  no  express  provision
   contained therein which specifically allows for  a  delay  in  decision-
   making in cases where an applicant is subject to criminal  investigation
   or indeed for any other identified reason. Mr Malik  has  not  contended
   for a contrary position.

36. The Rules do not  expressly  provide  for  a  delay  in  decision-making
   pending the outcome of a criminal investigation or on any  other  basis.
   Again, Mr Malik has not sought to suggest otherwise.

37. In my judgment, the absence of an express power to cover the  particular
   circumstances arising in the present case is unsurprising. It  would  no
   doubt be burdensome and very probably unworkable for primary legislation
   and/or the Rules to specify any and all categories of cases in  which  a
   delay in decision-making might be appropriate. Even viewed from a  wider
   perspective, the absence of any  express  general  power  to  delay  the
   decision-making process in any given case or classes of case  is  not  a
   "trump card"  in  the  applicants'  favour.  It  cannot  have  been  the
   intention of Parliament to require that all  aspects  of  administrative
   decision-making in immigration cases be the subject of provisions  under
   primary or secondary legislation (or indeed the Rules)  which  expressly
   identify the specific power in question (see R (on  the  application  of
   New London [pic]College Limited) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
   Department [2013] UKSC 51; [2013]  1  WLR  2358,  discussed  in  greater
   detail, below).

38. The existence of a policy (published or otherwise) on the  issue  cannot
   have any bearing on to the existence of an express power to  delay.  The
   policy  guidance  cited  in  the  present  case  ("general  grounds  for
   refusal", version 28.0, published on  10  April  2017)  states  that  an
   application for  leave  to  remain  "must"  be  put  "on  hold"  if  the
   individual concerned is subject to a pending prosecution. X  is  not  of
   course subject to a pending prosecution and  both  parties  agreed  that
   this policy guidance is inapplicable.

39. In light of the above, I conclude that there is no express  power  under
   the 1971 [pic]Act or the Rules for the  respondent  to  delay  making  a
   decision on applications for leave to  remain  where  the  applicant  is
   subject to a criminal investigation. However, this does not entitle  the
   applicants to succeed in their challenge.

Question 2: is there an implied power to delay  making  a  decision  on  the
applications for leave to remain?

40. In my judgment, the absence of an express power to delay does  not,  for
   that reason alone, lead to  the  conclusion  that  there  cannot  be  an
   implied power.

41. Having said  that,  an  implied  power  must  exist  in  order  for  the
   respondent's decision to delay making  a  decision  on  the  applicants'
   applications to be potentially lawful; if there is no  such  power,  the
   respondent's defence to this application for judicial review would  fall
   at the first fence.

42. Dr Chelvan strongly urges the Tribunal not to "add in" a power into  the
   1971 [pic]Act that is not expressly stated therein, or set  out  in  the
   Rules or, as a minimum, described in a published policy. I disagree with
   the submission that an identification  of  an  implied  power  would  be
   tantamount to reading in a new species of executive power that does  not
   already exist. If an implied power  to  delay  deciding  an  application
   exists, it has done so prior to my decision in this  case,  albeit  that
   there are no (at least as far as either myself or the parties are aware)
   decided cases on the particular issue currently in play.

43. It is of note that there is nothing contained in sections  3  and  4  of
   the 1971 Act or the Rules which stipulate  any  timeframe  for  deciding
   applications for leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom.  Nor  do  any
   provisions brought to my attention [pic]expressly preclude  a  power  to
   delay decision-making either in respect of an individual application  or
   a specific cohort. To this extent, the wording  of  the  relevant  legal
   sources does not assist the applicants' case.

44. In addition, the decision of Collins J in FH and Others v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2007] EWHC  1571  (Admin)  is  predicated
   upon the absence of express provisions  for  deciding  applications  (in
   that case, for asylum) within a particular timeframe. The  Secretary  of
   State's concession in that case that there was an "implicit  obligation"
   to decide asylum applications "within a reasonable time" articulates the
   point (see para 6).

45. I disagree with the point made at para  4  of  the  applicants'  amended
   grounds of challenge, which asserts that once a  person  is  subject  to
   investigation  [pic](or  a  charging  decision  or  prosecution),   they
   generally fall within the jurisdiction [pic]of "criminal  agencies"  and
   (presumably) outside the regime of immigration [pic]control.  I  do  not
   see any legal source material or reason in  principle  to  support  that
   contention. It must be the case that an individual  may  be  subject  to
   both immigration control and a criminal investigation  at  one  and  the
   same time. Subject to any strong contraindications, I see no basis  upon
   which it can be said that once an individual who is otherwise subject to
   immigration control falls under a criminal investigation, the respondent
   is thereby in some way precluded from exercising any powers  in  respect
   of her  decision-making  (subject  of  course  to  ordinary  public  law
   constraints).

46. In my view, the crux of the issue under Question 2 is  the  judgment  of
   Lord Sumption (with whom Lords Hope, Clarke and Reed agreed)  in  R  (on
   the [pic]application of New London College Limited). That case concerned
   the  system  [pic]for  licensing  educational  institutions  to  sponsor
   students under Tier 4 of the Points-Based System under  the  Rules.  New
   London College had its licence revoked by the respondent. The revocation
   had been  affected  by  reference  to  policy  guidance  issued  by  the
   respondent, guidance that had not been [pic]incorporated into the Rules.
   The appellants asserted that for this reason, the guidance was unlawful.
   The Court accepted the argument of the  Intervener  that  the  licensing
   system contained in the policy guidance did not fall within the scope of
   sections 1(4) and 3(2) of the 1971  Act.  However,  the  respondent  had
   acted lawfully in establishing and administering the licensing by virtue
   of a broader implied power arising under that Act. At paras 28  and  29,
   Lord Sumption held as follows:

           "28. So in my opinion Mr. Drabble's submission is unsupported by
           authority. But is it right in principle? In my view it  is  not.
           It has long  been  recognised  that  the  Crown  possesses  some
           general administrative powers to carry on the ordinary  business
           of government which are not exercises of the  royal  prerogative
           and do not require statutory authority: see  B.V.  Harris,  "The
           'Third Source' of Authority  for  Government  Action  Revisited"
           (2007) 123 LQR 225. The extent of these powers and  their  exact
           juridical basis are controversial. In R v Secretary of State for
           Health Ex p C [2000] 1 FLR 627 and Shrewsbury and Atcham Borough
           Council  v  Secretary  of  State  for  Communities   and   Local
           Government [2008] 3 All ER 548, the Court of  Appeal  held  that
           the basis of the power was the Crown's status as  a  common  law
           corporation sole, with  all  the  capacities  and  powers  of  a
           natural person subject only to such  particular  limitations  as
           were imposed by law. Although in R (Hooper) v Secretary of State
           for Work and Pensions [2005] 1 WLR 1681, para 47  Lord  Hoffmann
           thought that there was "a good deal of force" in this  analysis,
           it is open to question whether the analogy with a natural person
           is really apt in the case of public or governmental  action,  as
           opposed to purely managerial acts of a  kind  that  any  natural
           person  could  do,  such  as  making  contracts,  acquiring   or
           disposing of property, hiring and firing staff and the like. But
           the question does not need  to  be  resolved  on  these  appeals
           because the  statutory  power  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
           administer the system of immigration  control  must  necessarily
           extend to a range of  ancillary  and  incidental  administrative
           powers not expressly spelt out in the Act, including the vetting
           of sponsors.

           29.   The Immigration Act  does  not  prescribe  the  method  of
           immigration control to be adopted. It leaves  the  Secretary  of
           State to do that, subject to her laying  before  Parliament  any
           rules that she prescribes as to the practice to be followed  for
           regulating entry into and stay in the United Kingdom.  Different
           methods of  immigration  control  may  call  for  more  or  less
           elaborate administrative infrastructure.  It  cannot  have  been
           Parliament's intention that the Secretary  of  State  should  be
           limited to those methods of immigration control  which  required
           no other administrative measures apart from  the  regulation  of
           entry into or stay in the United Kingdom. If  the  Secretary  of
           State is entitled (as she  plainly  is)  to  prescribe  and  lay
           before Parliament rules for the  grant  of  leave  to  enter  or
           remain in the United  Kingdom  which  depend  upon  the  migrant
           having a suitable sponsor, then she must be also be entitled  to
           take administrative measures for identifying  sponsors  who  are
           and remain suitable, even if these measures  do  not  themselves
           fall  within  section  3(2)  of  the  Act.  This  right  is  not
           [pic]course unlimited.  The  Secretary  of  State  cannot  adopt
           measures   for   identifying   suitable   sponsors   which   are
           inconsistent with the Act  or  the  Immigration  Rules.  Without
           specific statutory authority, she cannot  adopt  measures  which
           are coercive; or which  infringe  the  legal  rights  of  others
           (including their rights under the Human Rights  Convention);  or
           which are irrational or unfair or otherwise  conflict  with  the
           general constraints on administrative action imposed public law.
           However, she has not transgressed any of  these  limitations  by
           operating a [pic]system of approved Tier 4 sponsors. It  is  not
           coercive. There are substantial [pic]advantages for sponsors  in
           participating, but they are not obliged  to  do  so.  The  rules
           contained  in  the  Tier  4  Guidance  for  determining  whether
           applicants are suitable to be sponsoring  institutions,  are  in
           reality conditions of participation, and  sponsors  seeking  the
           advantages of a licence cannot complain if they are required  to
           adhere to them."

                                                         [Underlining added]

47. Mr Malik relies heavily upon what is said in the final sentence of  para
   28 and the totality of para 29 to support his contention that  there  is
   clearly an implied power  arising  from  the  1971  Act  permitting  the
   respondent to delay making a decision on X's application, and indeed  on
   any  other  application  of  an  individual  subject   to   a   criminal
   investigation. He categorises the decision to delay as coming within the
   "range of ancillary and incidental administrative powers  not  expressly
   set out in the [1971] Act."

48. Dr Chelvan's principal argument against  this  is  the  absence  of  any
   express provision under the 1971 Act, or  within  secondary  legislation
   and the Rules, relating to cases in which  an  applicant  for  leave  to
   remain is also the subject of a [pic]criminal investigation  in  respect
   of which there has been no charging decision. It is  said  at  the  very
   least, and effectively as a prerequisite to the existence of an  implied
   power, there should be a published policy from the  respondent  on  this
   category of case.

49. For the reasons set out below, I accept Mr Malik's position  and  reject
   that of Dr Chelvan.

50. First, I have already concluded that there is an absence of  an  express
   power under the 1971 Act, but this is not determinative of the existence
   of an implied [pic]power.  The  same  applies  to  the  absence  of  any
   specific provisions relating to delay in secondary  legislation  or  the
   Rules.

51. Second, Lord Sumption's conclusion that the respondent  enjoys  a  power
   extending beyond that which requires certain measures to be laid  before
   Parliament,  and  to  include  "a  range  of  ancillary  and  incidental
   administrative powers not expressly spelt out in  the  Act",  is  in  my
   judgment  of  direct  application  to  the  present  case.   Here,   the
   respondent's decision to delay is not  concerned  with  the  substantial
   requirements to be met for leave to remain  (in  [pic]other  words,  the
   criteria  under  paragraph  245DD  of  the  Rules).  The  delay  is,  by
   definition, a state of affairs arising prior to any application  of  the
   substantive  requirements  of  the  Rules.  This  is  to   be   properly
   categorised as an example of the exercise of a power  "ancillary  and/or
   incidental" to  immigration  control.  It  follows  that  there  was  no
   requirement for the respondent to incorporate any provisions relating to
   delay in deciding a particular  class  of  applications  into  secondary
   legislation or the Rules.

52. Third, in my judgment the absence of a policy (published  or  otherwise)
   dealing with the particular type of case arising  in  these  proceedings
   does not constitute a basis for concluding that the New  London  College
   case can properly be distinguished  and,  for  that  reason  alone,  the
   respondent possesses no implied power to delay. It is correct  that  the
   New London College case was concerned with policy guidance (relating  to
   sponsor licensing of educational institutions). However, Lord Sumption's
   conclusion that the guidance in question was lawful  by  virtue  of  the
   implied "range of ancillary and incidental administrative powers" is not
   in my view properly to be confined to cases in which a  specific  policy
   exists. To do so  would  effectively  result  in  a  policy  becoming  a
   condition becoming a condition precedent to the existence of the type of
   implied power to which Lord Sumption was referring. That  would,  in  my
   judgment, constitute an unjustifiably restrictive interpretation of  his
   conclusions.

53. Dr Chelvan also relies on the fact that in FH and Others, the court  had
   regard to the White Paper entitled "Fairer, Faster and Firmer - a Modern
   Approach to Immigration and Asylum"  (see  para  13).  As  I  read  that
   decision, the central [pic]conclusions reached by  Collins  J  (none  of
   which are said to be incorrect) are not predicated upon a  consideration
   of the White Paper. Rather, the guidance on  [pic]delay  is  based  upon
   ordinary public  law  principles,  specifically  that  of  irrationality
   leading to unlawfulness.

54. During the course of argument, I was  referred  by  Dr  Chelvan  to  the
   litigation in MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10; [2017] WLR 771. He  submitted
   that when applications were put on  hold  pending  the  outcome  of  the
   appeal to the Court of Appeal, the respondent  had  published  a  policy
   explaining this. In Dr Chelvan's submission, this indicated that  delays
   in deciding applications should,  indeed  must,  be  the  subject  of  a
   policy. Having undertaken my own researches after  the  hearing,  I  was
   only able to find  a  document  entitled,  ''Minimum  income  threshold:
   information for applicants", updated on 16  July  2014.  This  confirmed
   that decisions would be made on those applications which  had  been  "on
   hold". I was not able to find the predecessor to  this  document,  which
   had apparently been first created 18 April 2014. In any  event,  on  the
   assumption that there had [pic]been a policy statement on the  delay  in
   those applications, for reasons previously stated, I  conclude  that  it
   does not follow that any  and  all  decisions  to  delay  must  be  made
   pursuant to a policy.

55. Third, a central theme of the applicants' case (certainly in respect  of
   the oral submissions)  has  been  the  claimed  difficulty,  indeed  the
   impossibility, of a [pic]reviewing  court  or  tribunal  to  assess  the
   lawfulness of a decision to delay in the absence of a policy. It is said
   that this goes to the question of whether an  implied  power  exists  at
   all. I conclude that the absence of a policy goes not to  the  existence
   of an implied power, but instead to the issue of whether the exercise of
   such a power is lawful, A court or tribunal  can  properly  apply  well-
   known principles of public law when undertaking such an assessment.

56. In light of the foregoing, I conclude that there  is  an  implied  power
   under the 1971 Act for the respondent to have decided to delay making  a
   decision on the applicants' applications for leave to remain.

Question 3: is the delay irrational?

57. It is common ground between the parties that the exercise of  any  power
   must be exercised according to established  principles  of  public  law,
   specifically the requirement to act rationally,

58. In the context of the delay issue as it arises in the present case,  the
   following basic propositions can be taken from FH and Others:

           i.    In order to succeed, the applicants  must  show  that  the
              delay is irrational (para 11);

           ii.   To be  deemed  as  such,  the  delay  must  outside  of  a
              "reasonable time" (paras 6 and 11);

           iii.  What is a "reasonable time" depends on  the  circumstances
              of the case (para 8).

59. I now turn to address the relevant circumstances of this case  which  go
   to inform [pic]my assessment of the rationality of the delay.

60. The applicants' applications have now been outstanding for fairly  close
   to 3 years. That is not an inconsiderable period of  time.  It  is  not,
   however, such an  inordinately  long  period  as  to  render  the  delay
   irrational by reference to the passage of time.

61. In my judgment, the absence of a policy covering the situation in  which
   a decision on a pending application is put off during the  course  of  a
   criminal investigation and before a charging decision is made, does  not
   of  itself  render  the  delay  irrational.   It   is   the   particular
   circumstances of case which are all- important.  An  assessment  of  the
   rationality of the delay is required in light  of  those  circumstances.
   The absence of a policy may, in certain cases, make  it  more  difficult
   for the respondent to adequately justify a delay. Indeed, in my view the
   absence of a policy covering the present situation is less  than  ideal.
   Given that a [pic]policy exists in respect of those subject to a pending
   prosecution (referred to earlier in my decision), it would be  desirable
   for  the  respondent  to  formulate  one.  This  might  provide  greater
   transparency  for  applicants  (and,  where  appropriate,  their   legal
   representatives). For my part, I  would  urge  the  respondent  to  give
   careful consideration to this course of action. Having  said  this,  the
   fact that  the  current  state  of  affairs  may  be  unsatisfactory  or
   undesirable does not mean that the high threshold  of  irrationality  is
   met.

62. The core of the respondent's case in seeking to justify the delay  as  a
   rational  exercise  of  her  implied  power  relates  to  the   criminal
   investigation to which X  is  subject.  The  potential  nature  of  this
   investigation set out in the first  witness  statement  of  Ms  McMahon,
   dated 9 January 2020, has been summarised  in  paragraphs  9-10,  above.
   There is no reason for me to  doubt  the  reliability  of  the  evidence
   provided by Ms McMahon. The respondent's  detailed  grounds  of  defence
   describe the size of the investigation as being "significant".  In  oral
   submissions, Mr Malik employed the terms "unusual" and "exceptional"  to
   describe its nature. Dr Chelvan objected to this  phraseology,  pointing
   out that these words had  not  been  employed  in  the  grounds  or  the
   respondent's skeleton argument. In  my  judgment,  the  evidence  of  Ms
   McMahon unarguably shows that the investigation  is  highly  complex  in
   nature. It  makes  no  material  difference  as  to  whether  the  terms
   "unusual" or "exceptional" are used to  describe  the  investigation  in
   other ways. For what it is worth, both are apt.

63.  The  question  then  arises:  has  the  respondent  acted  prima  facie
   rationally in [pic]delaying a decision on the  applicants'  applications
   in light of the nature of the criminal investigation? The evidence of Mr
   Budden is that to make  a  decision  at  this  stage  would  not  be  an
   efficient use of public funds. Such a course of action [pic]would entail
   the respondent having to review the evidence gathered by HMRC thus far.

64. The use of resources is a relevant factor in assessing  the  rationality
   of a delay. At paragraph 11 of  FH  and  Others,  Collins  J  stated  as
   follows:

           "11.  As was  emphasised  by  Lord  Bingham,  the  question  was
           whether delay [pic]produced a breach of Article 6(1).  Here  the
           question is whether the delay  was  unlawful.  It  can  only  be
           regarded as unlawful if it fails  the  Wednesbury  test  and  is
           shown to result from actions or inactions which can be  regarded
           as irrational. Accordingly, I do not  think  that  the  approach
           should be  different  from  that  indicated  as  appropriate  in
           considering an alleged breach of the reasonable time requirement
           in Article 6(1). What  may  be  regarded  as  undesirable  or  a
           failure to reach the best standards is not  unlawful.  Resources
           can be taken into account in considering whether a decision  has
           been made within a reasonable time, but (assuming the  threshold
           has been crossed) the defendant must produce  some  material  to
           show that the manner in which he has decided to  deal  with  the
           relevant claims and the resources  put  into  the  exercise  are
           reasonable. That does not mean that the court  should  determine
           for itself whether a different and perhaps better approach might
           have existed. That is not the court's function.  But  the  court
           can and must consider whether what has produced  the  delay  has
           resulted from a rational system.  If  unacceptable  delays  have
           resulted, they cannot be excused  by  a  claim  that  sufficient
           resources were not available. But in deciding whether the delays
           are unacceptable, the court must recognise  that  resources  are
           not infinite and that it is for the defendant and  not  for  the
           court to determine how those resources should be applied to fund
           the various matters for which he is responsible."

65. In the present case, it is quite clear that significant  resources  have
   already been [pic]put into the criminal investigation  (the  absence  of
   any specific figures is beside the  point:  the  nature  and  amount  of
   evidence  being  considered  speaks  for  itself).  On  behalf  of   the
   applicants, it is said that any inefficient  use  of  resources  by  the
   respondent could be avoided by HMRC (and possibly the Crown  Prosecution
   [pic]Service)  sharing  relevant  information,  such  that  an  informed
   decision could be made on the applicants' applications. In response,  Mr
   Malik submits that as the applications could be granted or refused prior
   to a charging decision, it was rational  for  the  respondent  to  delay
   making her own decision on the applications.

66. On one level, there  is  merit  to  the  applicants'  argument  on  this
   particular issue. There is no evidence to suggest that  HMRC  could  not
   share information with the respondent. Having said that, it  is  a  fact
   that the criminal investigation is ongoing and it is  difficult  to  see
   how  the  respondent  could  obtain  a  full  picture  of  the  relevant
   circumstances at this pre-charging decision stage. Indeed, the inference
   must be that HMRC itself does not have a full  picture,  given  that  an
   indication of a charging decision is not likely to be made until  August
   2020. Even if relevant information were shared by HMRC, it is a rational
   position for the respondent to adopt that she would have  to  separately
   review what would clearly be a voluminous body of evidence in  order  to
   arrive at  a  properly  considered  decision.  It  is  a  highly  likely
   consequence and clearly a rational  one  to  foresee,  that  this  would
   absorb resources. It is also right that the respondent could, as matters
   stand, potentially grant the outstanding applications  or  refuse  them.
   The ability to refuse notwithstanding the absence of  a  conviction  and
   despite the satisfaction of the substantive  requirements  of  paragraph
   245DD the Rules, arises under paragraph 322(5) of the Rules:

           "Grounds on which leave to remain  and  variation  of  leave  to
           enter or remain in [pic]the United Kingdom  should  normally  be
           refused[pic]

           ...

           (5)   the undesirability of permitting the person  concerned  to
           remain in the  United  Kingdom  in  the  light  of  his  conduct
           (including  convictions  which  do  not  fall  within  paragraph
           322(1C),  character  or  associations  or  the  fact   that   he
           represents a threat to national security."

67. The applicants assert that the presumption of innocence must apply to  X
   in [pic]respect of a decision  to  delay  (or  when  actually  making  a
   decision on the applications themselves). Yet  this  argument  does  not
   assist their case because whilst the presumption must indeed be  applied
   at all stages until conviction, it does not prevent the  refusal  of  an
   application on "bad character" grounds under  paragraph  322(5)  of  the
   Rules.

68. In all the circumstances, I conclude that the decision to delay  on  the
   basis of resources is not irrational.

69. The applicants submit  that  the  respondent  could  and  should  simply
   decide the applications now and if X is subsequently  convicted  of  any
   offences, revocation action could be taken at that stage. That is indeed
   a possibility: the respondent can turn to appropriate tools for this  to
   be  done  (see,  for  example,  paragraph  323(i)  of  the  Rules).  The
   availability of an alternative  course  of  action  does  not,  however,
   necessarily or in the particular circumstances of this case  render  the
   decision to delay irrational. There is nothing in the 1971  Act  or  the
   Rules to indicate that an  application  for  leave  to  remain  must  be
   decided forthwith if the applicant  satisfies  all  of  the  substantive
   criteria (in this case, paragraph 245DD).

70. I now  turn  to  the  claimed  prejudice  caused  to  X  and  the  other
   applicants by the respondent's delay. In so doing, I have had regard  to
   all relevant evidence  before  me,  including  that  admitted  by  Judge
   Gleeson (and subject to  Dr  Chelvan's  confirmation  that  he  was  not
   relying on X's latest witness statement as  the  basis  of  any  of  his
   submissions).

71. The second applicant's detailed witness statement  of  15  January  2020
   sets out problems encountered by her and her children  as  a  result  of
   their current predicament. In summary, it is said that as  a  result  of
   having statutorily extended leave to remain under section 3C of the 1971
   Act,  they  experience  real  difficulties  in   respect   of   studies,
   employment,  obtaining  a  provisional  driving  licence,  obtaining   a
   national insurance number, and (in respect of the  two  minor  children)
   schooling. There is no particular reason to doubt this evidence, insofar
   as it goes.

72. The fact remains that all of the applicants continue to enjoy  leave  to
   remain pursuant to section 3C. The conditions of their previous grant of
   leave continue, save for the fact  that  a  departure  from  the  United
   Kingdom would result that leave coming to an end (I will return to this,
   below). If it is the case that educational institutions,  employers,  or
   other agencies are not  sufficiently  appreciative  of  the  section  3C
   leave, that is in reality a matter that must be taken [pic]up with them.
   It is not the case that they have been left with no leave to  remain  as
   result of the respondent's  delay  and  I  conclude  that  there  is  no
   prejudice as regards the applicants' status in the United  Kingdom  such
   that the delay can be said to be irrational.

73. The second applicant and her children cannot leave  the  United  Kingdom
   without bringing their section 3C leave to an end (see section 3C(3)  of
   the 1971 [pic]Act). I can see that  this  has  caused  these  applicants
   practical difficulties, including the inability of the third and  fourth
   applicants to go overseas during  the  course  of  their  studies.  This
   obstacle, and in a real sense the cause of their current predicament  in
   general, is result of them being the dependents of X.  It  follows  from
   this procedural dependency that once the decision was made to delay  X's
   application, those of the other applicants were also  put  on  hold.  It
   cannot be said to be irrational for the respondent to  have  taken  this
   course of action: there was  no  obligation  on  her  to  "sever"  their
   applications from that of[pic] X.

74. In my judgment,  the  other  applicants  could  vary  their  outstanding
   applications in order to make independent human  rights  claims  to  the
   respondent (see section 3C(4) and (5) of the 1971 Act). The  outcome  of
   such  claims  would  of  course  be  uncertain,  but  it  would  not  be
   unreasonable for them to be made. In addition,  I  reject  Dr  Chelvan's
   contention that the making of such varied applications would  result  in
   the applicants losing either their section 3C  leave  and/or  not  being
   able to rely upon their previous grant of leave to remain.  A  variation
   of the outstanding applications would not lead to the cessation  of  the
   section 3C leave unless and until the varied application was decided and
   refused  (and  subject  to  any  potential  appellate  proceedings).  In
   addition, I cannot see any basis upon which a previous grant of leave is
   somehow  "lost"  to  an  [pic]individual  who  varies   an   outstanding
   application during the currency  of  section  [pic]3C  leave.  There  is
   nothing at page 9 of the respondent's policy on section 3C leave ("Leave
   extended by section 3C (and leave extended by section 3D in transitional
   cases)" version 9.0, published on  15  January  2019)  to  which  I  was
   referred at the hearing, which says anything to the contrary.

75. In his first witness statement of 14 August 2017,  X  asserts  that  his
   inability to leave the United Kingdom has had a  significant  impact  on
   his ability to earn an [pic]income. This is because  he  is  a  renowned
   Islamic scholar  whose  particular  abilities  in  reciting  the  Qur'an
   results in numerous engagements  overseas.  It  is  the  case  that  his
   section 3C leave would also come  to  an  end  if  he  left  the  United
   Kingdom. However, he is subject to criminal bail and as  matters  stand,
   is unable to travel as a direct result of this. The  respondent's  delay
   is immaterial in this respect.

76. In respect of the sixth and seventh applicants, there is no evidence  of
   significant prejudice affecting their best interests. I would  certainly
   appreciate that an inability to travel abroad may cause upset, but  that
   does not in my view constitute a matter going to core aspects  of  their
   well-being and development.

77. The respondent's delay is no doubt causing the applicants  a  degree  of
   stress and anxiety. They are clearly in a precarious situation.  Without
   wishing to diminish the consequences of this, it is  the  case  that  no
   medical evidence has been [pic]provided to the respondent to  show  that
   there are any particularly significant  problems  arising  out  of  this
   state of affairs.

78. Finally, I consider the question of timeframes. As  noted  earlier,  the
   applicants' applications have now been outstanding for close to 3 years.
   HMRC have stated that that an  indication  of  a  charging  decision  is
   likely to have been made by the middle of August 2020. Of course,  if  a
   decision is made to charge X, the consequent proceedings are  likely  to
   be ongoing for a considerable time thereafter. On the other hand, it may
   be that if the charging decision is favourable to  X,  matters  will  be
   brought to an end relatively quickly.

79.  In  this  regard,  Mr  Malik  has  submitted  that  the  threshold   of
   irrationality for the delay has not yet been crossed,  but  he  candidly
   accepts that this might change in  the  future,  depending  on  all  the
   circumstances. Having taken further instructions, Mr Malik  offered  the
   following on behalf of the respondent:

           "The respondent commits to making a decision on the applications
           within 3 months of any prosecution  being  concluded  or,  if  a
           prosecution does not proceed, then 3 months from  the  point  at
           which is  it  is  decided  that  no  such  prosecution  will  be
           brought."

80. Dr Chelvan responded by submitting that this stated position was  of  no
   assistance to the applicants. On any view, he submitted, a lengthy delay
   was still to be faced with all the stress and  anxiety  that  this  will
   inevitably bring.

81. Again, I am cognisant of the stress and  anxiety  being  caused  by  the
   current state of affairs. It is the case that there  are  still  some  6
   months to go before an [pic]indication will be given as  to  a  charging
   decision. Even then, if a decision is made to pursue charges against  X,
   a prosecution is likely to be a lengthy exercise. As  matters  currently
   stand, however, I conclude that this facet of the continuing delay  does
   not, individually or  in  combination  with  other  factors,  cross  the
   irrationality threshold. As Mr Malik has rightly pointed out,  this  may
   change. All depends on the particular circumstances  pertaining  to  the
   point in time which the applicants' situation is being considered.

82. Bringing all of these matters together, I conclude  that  the  delay  is
   not, as matters stand, irrational

Question 4: GDPR, the CFR, and Article 6 ECHR

83. As noted earlier, I received no oral submissions on this aspect  of  the
   applicants' cases Dr Chelvan  was  content  to  rely  upon  the  amended
   grounds and skeleton [pic]argument in this regard.

84. As I understand the argument being put forward,  it  is  submitted  that
   because HMRC have supplied, or may in due course supply, information  to
   the respondent, such sharing of "personal sensitive  data"  engages  the
   GDPR and the CFR.

85. For the following reasons, I reject this argument.

86. First, in my judgment the  applicants'  cage  falls  to  be  decided  on
   ordinary Wednesbury grounds alone:  this  is  a  "delay"  case  and  the
   threshold to be met is that of irrationality. It has not been  shown  by
   evidence that "personal sensitive data" of the applicants which was  not
   already known to the respondent has in [pic]fact been provided by  HMRC.
   The central thrust of the respondent's defence to the  applicants'  case
   is that she should not be put in a position where she has to obtain  and
   then review all of the evidence being collated by HMRC. GDPR and in turn
   the CFR, are not engaged.

87. Second, if I am wrong about that, and with reference to Article 5  GDPR,
   there is no evidence to suggest that any sharing of relevant  data  that
   may have occurred has been done so in a manner  other  than  is  lawful,
   fair, and transparent.

88. Third, if proportionality is in play, I conclude that  the  respondent's
   current stance is proportionate. Whilst on the one hand it may  be  said
   that the respondent could simply decide  the  outstanding  applications,
   grant leave to remain, and revoke it if X is subsequently convicted,  on
   the other side of the balance sheet is the legitimate concern in respect
   of resources expended in obtaining and reviewing all  relevant  evidence
   collated thus far by HMRC and the absence of  significant  prejudice  to
   the applicants. balance is in favour of the respondent.

89. This conclusion carries over to any  engagement  of  Article  8  of  the
   Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union.

90. Article 6 ECHR is referred to in the amended grounds. It  has  not  been
   explained how this provision is engaged by the applicants' case. In  any
   event, Article 6 has no application in respect of  immigration  matters,
   as opposed to criminal matters (see R (MK (Iran)) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ
   115 and the authorities discussed  [pic]therein).  Whereas  X  is  under
   criminal investigation, the judicial review proceedings  relate  to  the
   immigration matter concerning the delay  in  deciding  applications  for
   leave to remain.

91. Article 8 ECHR has not been pleaded.



Summary of conclusions

92. My conclusions in this case are as follows:

i. There is no express power for the respondent to delay making a  decision
   on the applicants' applications;

ii. There is an implied power under the  1971  Act  for  the  respondent  to
   delay making a decision;

iii. As matters stand, the delay is not irrational;

iv. The delay does not engage GDPR, and therefore does not engage the CFR;

v. If they  were  engaged,  the  delay  would  nonetheless  be  lawful  and
   proportionate;

vi. Neither Articles 6 nor 8 ECHR are engaged.

93. It follows that the applicants' application for judicial review must  be
   dismissed.






       Signed:    [pic]


                      Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


       Dated:     11 March 2020





Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
[pic]
[pic]
Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission at  the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).

[pic] UTIJR6

                                                              JR/ 6956/ 2017

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice



                The Queen on the application of X and Others
                                                                  Applicants
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                  Before Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


                                    ORDER

UPON consideration of all documents lodged and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Dr S  Chelvan  and  Mr  F  Asghar,  of  Counsel,
instructed by Asghar and Co Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicants  and  Mr
Z Malik, of Counsel, instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department,  on
behalf of the Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on 31  January
2020.

AND UPON the handing down of the Decision in this application  for  judicial
review on 12 March 2020



IT IS ORDERED THAT



   1. The Applicants are granted anonymity. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
      Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
      publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the
      Applicants or members of their family. This direction applies to,
      amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction
      could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.

   2. This application for judicial review is dismissed.

   3. The Applicants' application for permission to appeal to the Court of
      Appeal is refused.

   4. The Applicants are to pay the Respondent's reasonable costs, to be the
      subject of detailed assessment if not agreed.



Permission to appeal

Counsel for the Applicants have drafted grounds seeking permission to
appeal to the Court of Appeal. The first of these asserts that the Upper
Tribunal has erred by concluding that the there is an implied power and/or
that the Respondent has not acted irrationally when the relevant
Immigration Rule expressly provides for refusal of an application on bad
character grounds. The Tribunal's essential conclusions are based upon the
existence of an implied power and the rational exercise thereof in respect
of the delay in deciding the Applicants' applications. It was common ground
that there was power under paragraph 245DD and paragraph 322(5) of the
Immigration Rules to refuse X's application on bad character grounds.
However, as stated at [51] and [62]-[68], the Tribunal was concerned with
the lawfulness and rationality of the Respondent's stance prior to a
decision being taken on the applications. On the particular facts of this
case, the express provision under the Immigration Rules did not negate the
existence of an implied power and/or the rationality of the delay. The
argument to the contrary has no realistic prospect of success.

The second ground asserts that the Upper Tribunal committed procedural
unfairness by in effect allowing the Respondent to rely on matters put in
oral submissions that had not been pleaded in the detailed grounds of
defence. The particular expressions used by the Respondent's Counsel at the
hearing are noted at [62]. However, the Tribunal proceeded on the basis not
of "new" matters raised by Counsel, but on the face of the evidence
provided by Ms McMahon in her witness statement. The terms "unusual" and
"exceptional" were taken as nothing more than descriptions of what the
evidence itself showed. This ground has no realistic prospect of success.

The third ground contends that a grant of permission is appropriate in
light of the lack of authority on the issue of whether the absence of a
policy is central to the existence or otherwise of an implied power and/or
the rational exercise of any such power. The present case was highly fact-
specific, and it is not appropriate to grant permission on the third
ground.



 Costs

The Upper Tribunal received costs submissions from the Applicants'  Counsel,
dated 9 March 2020. The position adopted by the Respondent  at  the  hearing
and noted at [79] of the decision may be said to be of  some  assistance  to
the Applicants. However, the 3-month  timeframe  for  a  decision  mentioned
therein only applies if a decision is made not to charge X. This  is  not  a
sufficient basis on which to make no order  as  to  costs.  The  submissions
also contend that the Respondent raised "new arguments" at the hearing.  For
reasons set out in respect of the refusal to  grant  permission  to  appeal,
this contention is misconceived. Again, it does not form a sufficient  basis
on which to make no order as to costs. Finally, it  is  not  appropriate  to
reserve costs pending the outcome of any  onward  appeal  to  the  Court  of
Appeal.

The Respondent has not filed a schedule of costs.  In  these  circumstances,
it is appropriate to order a detailed assessment of the Respondent's  costs,
if not agreed.




       [pic]




       Dated:     11 March 2020




[pic]

Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------
--------------

Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


-----------------------





Signed:







































Upper Tribunal Judge Norton




-




Taylor












