

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/6410/2018
                          Heard on 23 September, and 12 and 13 December 2019


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                     The Queen on the application of T T
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                             Derby City Council
                                                                  Respondent


                  Before Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor



Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the applicant  or  members  of
his family. This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.


Representation:
For the applicant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel,  instructed  by  Bhatia  Best
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr L Parkhill,  Counsel,  instructed  by  Derby  City
Council


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Introduction
   1. The applicant, a citizen of Eritrea, challenges the  decision  of  the
      Respondent, dated  22  June  2018,  that  he  was  an  adult  with  an
      attributed date of birth of 2 July 1998, following an age assessment.


   2. The applicant asserts that he was born on 2 July 2002 and was, at  the
      date of the respondent's decision, 16 years  old.  On  his  case,  the
      applicant is now 17.

   3. There is, quite clearly,  a  significant  disparity  in  the  parties'
      respective positions.

   4. The core issue in this application for judicial review is whether,  as
      a matter of fact, the applicant is a child or not. This issue  is  for
      me to determine, having regard to all relevant evidence  adduced,  and
      on an application of the balance of probabilities. Neither party bears
      the burden of proof.

Relevant procedural history
   5. The applicant arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  the  evening  of  31
      January 2018. Having been encountered by the Home Office in the  early
      hours of  the  following  day,  an  initial  screening  interview  was
      conducted at which stage the  applicant  formally  made  a  protection
      claim in this country. The  Home  Office  formed  the  view  that  the
      applicant was an adult, contrary to his assertion that he was a child.
      The applicant was referred to the respondent on 20 February 2018 and a
      request was made for supported accommodation under  the  Children  Act
      1989 and for an age assessment to be undertaken.  At  this  stage,  or
      soon thereafter, the Home Office  placed  the  applicant's  protection
      claim on hold, pending the outcome of  the  age  dispute  issue  (that
      claim remains outstanding  to  date).  In  the  absence  of  what  was
      considered sufficient action by the respondent,  an  initial  judicial
      review claim was made on 6 March 2018. On 13 March 2018 the respondent
      commenced the  age  assessment  procedure,  with  subsequent  meetings
      taking place on 17 April, 6 May, and 22 June 2018. Permission to bring
      judicial review proceedings was refused by HHJ McKenna on 8 May  2018.
      That initial judicial review claim was not pursued further.


   6. The age assessment was completed on 22 June 2018 and a  decision  made
      that the applicant was an adult.  On  19  July  2018  the  applicant's
      representatives  sent  a  Letter  Before  Action  setting  out   their
      objections to the way in which  the  assessment  had  been  conducted,
      together with criticisms of the assessment report itself.  Unsatisfied
      with the response, this claim for judicial review was  lodged  in  the
      Administrative Court on 23 August 2018 (sealed  by  the  Court  a  day
      later  and  attributed  the   reference   number   CO/3354/2018).   An
      Acknowledgement of Service, together with summary grounds, was  lodged
      on or about 7 September 2018. By an order sealed on 27 September 2018,
      HHJ Worster granted permission, transferred  the  case  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal, and made  an  anonymity  direction  (upon  the  granting  of
      permission, the respondent had agreed to support and  accommodate  the
      applicant). On the same occasion,  the  current  reference  number  of
      JR/6410/2018 was substituted  for  the  initial  Administrative  Court
      reference. Thereafter, the Upper Tribunal issued  a  set  of  detailed
      case management directions in order to  ensure  that  the  substantive
      hearing would proceed efficiently.


   7. Matters progressed smoothly until the morning of the first day of  the
      substantive hearing on 23  September  2019.  At  this  late  stage  it
      transpired  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  not  booked  a  Tigrinyan
      interpreter for the applicant and his two witnesses.  Without  wishing
      to attribute particular blame for this unfortunate state  of  affairs,
      it  does  appear  as  though  the  omission  was  caused  in  part  by
      administrative oversight by the Upper Tribunal, and also by a  failure
      by the applicant's legal representatives  to  respond  to  a  specific
      email relating to the need for an interpreter, sent in early September
      2019. In any event, despite the best efforts of all concerned to  find
      a way through this difficulty, the hearing had to be adjourned.

Preliminary issue
   8. By an application notice sealed by the Upper Tribunal on 20  September
      2019, the applicant sought permission for his  Litigation  Friend,  Ms
      Yasmin Begum from the  Refugee  Council,  to  cease  to  act  in  this
      capacity. At the hearing, both parties were  in  agreement  that  this
      course of action would be appropriate and that, in light of R (on  the
      application of JS and Others)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department (litigation friend -  child)  [2019]  UKUT  64  (IAC),  the
      applicant no longer requires a Litigation Friend.


   9.  Having  regard  to  all  relevant  circumstances,   I   granted   the
      application. Ms Begum is therefore no longer the Litigation Friend  in
      these proceedings and  the  applicant  shall  no  longer  have  anyone
      appointed in that capacity.

The applicant's case in summary
  10. In essence, the applicant's challenge is twofold. First,  it  is  said
      that the respondent's age assessment was carried out in a procedurally
      unfair manner because no proper "minded-to" process was  followed.  In
      other words, relevant adverse matters were not put  to  the  applicant
      before the final decision  was  made,  thereby  depriving  him  of  an
      opportunity to address  concerns.  In  this  way,  the  resulting  age
      assessment was not in accordance with the well-known Merton principles
      (R (B) v London Borough of Merton [2003] 4 All ER 280).


  11. Second, the applicant asserts that the  reasons  put  forward  by  the
      respondent for disputing his claimed age are  insufficient  and  based
      upon a flawed approach  as  regards  a  number  of  relevant  factors.
      Particulars, supported by references to case-law, are set out  in  the
      grounds of challenge and I do not propose to recite them here.

The respondent's case in summary
  12. The respondent asserts that a "minded-to" process was adopted in  this
      case and there was no  procedural  unfairness.  This  is  so  even  if
      certain adverse points had not been raised with the applicant prior to
      the final decision being made.


  13. As to the applicant's substantive challenge, the  respondent  contends
      that the various factors relied on in  the  age  assessment  were  all
      valid, and that the social workers were fully entitled  to  take  them
      into account when reaching their overall conclusion.

The evidence
  14. The written evidence in this case is contained within a  comprehensive
      agreed bundle, indexed and divided by tabs 1-34. What  follows  is  by
      way of a summary of the written evidence. Similarly, the oral evidence
      is set out in very condensed form (a full note  is  contained  in  the
      record of proceedings). Relevant  aspects  of  the  written  and  oral
      evidence will be dealt with in  greater  detail  when  I  set  out  my
      assessment and conclusions, below.

The applicant's written evidence
  15. There are four witness statements from the applicant, dated 15  August
      2018, 14 February 2019, 4 September 2019, and 10 September 2019.


  16. Without reciting this evidence at length, the general  thrust  of  the
      statements is as follows. The applicant says that he is from  a  rural
      area of Eritrea, where he lived  with  his  parents  and  two  younger
      siblings. His father was in military service  and  therefore  did  not
      reside with the family  very  often.  The  applicant  did  not  attend
      school. During his time in Eritrea he was unaware of his age, as  this
      was not an issue of any importance in that country, or at least within
      his community. In 2016, the applicant  and  his  friend  were  playing
      outside when they were arrested by  soldiers  who  suspected  them  of
      attempting to leave the country illegally. The two were  taken  to  an
      informal detention centre and held for a day  before  being  released.
      Approximately a week later there  was  a  religious  festival  in  the
      applicant's village. The applicant knew that this event took place  on
      21 January every year because the church used the "Geez" calendar. The
      applicant also new that it was 2016. When leaving  the  festival,  the
      applicant and his friend saw soldiers approaching.  Afraid  that  they
      might be arrested again, the two walked until they  entered  Ethiopia.
      From there a lengthy journey to the United Kingdom ensued. In  summary
      form, this was as follows:
              i. in Ethiopia for approximately 6 months;
             ii. in Sudan for a total of just over 6 months;
            iii. a journey to Libya of 3-4 weeks;
             iv. remaining in Libya for approximately 3 months;
              v. a relatively brief journey across the sea to Italy;
             vi. remaining in Italy for 1 month;
            vii. approximately 3 months in France;
           viii. an unknown period in Germany;
             ix. a further period of some 3 months in France;
              x. arrival in the  United  Kingdom  in  the  afternoon  of  31
                 January 2018.

  17. The applicant states that he was 14 years old when he left Eritrea  in
      January 2016. This is based on information about  his  date  of  birth
      provided by his mother when he spoke to her during his time in  Italy.
      She told him that he had been 14 years old when he  left  his  country
      and  that  he  was  16  years  old  at  the  time  of  the   telephone
      conversation. Whilst the statements assert that he has had no  further
      telephone contact with his mother since that point, in  oral  evidence
      the applicant said that he did speak to her in July 2019.


  18. A significant part of the  applicant's  second  witness  statement  is
      taken up by his responses to reasons relied on by the respondent  when
      concluding that he was a good deal older than he claimed. He  strongly
      disagrees with the respondent's view that he looks and  acts  like  an
      adult. He denies that he has been inconsistent in his  evidence  about
      past experiences and his  age  in  general.  He  also  denies  certain
      statements attributed to him by the relevant allocated  social  worker
      (Ms Jackson-Royle), including that he had given  the  years  2012  and
      2014 for his imprisonment in Eritrea. He does  not  accept  the  views
      apparently expressed by a former foster carer that he  acted  like  an
      adult by requesting razors for shaving, watching 18-rated  films,  and
      wishing to sit with other adults in a restaurant.


  19. In the applicant's third witness statement he states that he  did  not
      get on with Ms Jackson-Royle, and expressed the view that he was being
      treated differently from other people in respect of his allocation  of
      cash and vouchers. Finally, he states that he had gone to stay with  a
      friend in Manchester during the Easter holidays of  2019.  His  friend
      apparently lived with a foster mother.


  20. The applicant's fourth and final witness  statement  responds  to  the
      witness statement of Ms Jackson-Royle,  dated  2  September  2019.  He
      takes issue with a number of criticisms she has of  his  evidence  and
      his non-disclosure of certain information. The applicant  states  that
      he did not feel comfortable being asked questions by Ms Jackson-Royle,
      going so far as to say that he did not trust her.

The written evidence of the applicant's witnesses
  21. DT is an Eritrean national with an  attributed  date  of  birth  of  1
      January 2002, apparently accepted by the relevant Local Authority.  He
      states that he first met the applicant in September 2018 in Derby.  He
      saw the applicant on an almost daily basis and they  played  together.
      The two of them have a group of friends of a similar age. The  witness
      states that he has no reason to  doubt  the  applicant's  age  and  he
      himself believes the applicant to be under 18  years  old.  He  states
      that there are a number of similarities between the two of them  which
      support his belief.


  22. EG is also Eritrean. He asserts that he is 17 years old, but has  been
      age assessed  as  18.  He  is  in  the  process  of  challenging  this
      assessment. EG states that he first met the applicant when  they  were
      both dispersed to Newcastle. At the time of his witness statement, the
      witness had known the applicant for approximately 5 months. It is said
      that  the  two  played  together  and  had  a  group  of  friends   of
      approximately the same age. They all went to the park together. It  is
      said that he  and  the  applicant  were  learning  to  cook  and  shop
      together. The witness' guess is that the applicant is 16 years old. He
      had been told by the applicant that he (the  applicant)  was  born  in
      2002, although the witness has never asked him what his date of  birth
      is.

The written evidence from the applicant's solicitors
  23. There are  two  witness  statements  from  Ms  Rhiannon  Salisbury,  a
      paralegal employed by the applicant's solicitors. The first, dated  22
      August 2018, deals briefly with the progression of the judicial review
      claim during the course of 2018. The second, dated 13 September  2018,
      addresses the particular issue of the applicant's claim to  have  been
      imprisoned in Eritrea. There is an issue as to  whether  he  has  been
      inconsistent as to when this allegedly occurred: the years 2012, 2014,
      and 2016, are recorded in various documents.  Ms  Salisbury's  witness
      statement asserts  that  the  applicant  informed  her  prior  to  the
      drafting of his statement, he had not said  that  the  detention  took
      place in either 2012 or 2014.


  24. There is a witness statement from Mr Stuart Luke, dated 6 March  2018.
      This deals exclusively with the initial judicial review claim and  has
      no material bearing on the issues with which I am now concerned.

The written evidence of Ms Laura Jackson-Royle
  25. There are four witness statements from Ms Jackson-Royle, dated 6 March
      2018, 7 September 2018, 2 September 2019, and 6  September  2019.  The
      first statement is very brief and  relates  to  a  visit  made  by  Ms
      Jackson-Royle to the applicant's accommodation on 27 February 2018. It
      is said that the applicant informed her that he was 16  years  old  at
      that point. The author's comment is that, if the applicant's  date  of
      birth is indeed 2 July 2002, he would, at the time of the visit,  have
      been 15 years old.


  26. The second statement relates to the question of whether there was ever
      a "minded-to" stage in the age assessment  process.  Ms  Jackson-Royle
      states that on 22 June 2018 she and another social worker visited  the
      applicant at his accommodation and put three issues of concern to  him
      (with  the  assistance  of  a  telephone  interpreter).  In  addition,
      reference is made to a further visit to the accommodation on  10  July
      2018, at which the finalised age assessment report was read out to the
      applicant with the assistance of an interpreter. On this occasion, the
      applicant was also apparently informed of comments made by the  former
      foster carer.


  27. The third witness statement is relatively detailed. It sets  out  what
      are said to be a  number  of  inconsistencies  and  omissions  in  the
      applicant's  evidence  over  the  course  of  time,  with   particular
      reference to what was said during the age assessment meetings and what
      is stated in the Home Office screening interview of 1  February  2018.
      By way of example, it is said that the applicant had failed to provide
      details of his background and journey to the United Kingdom during the
      age assessment process, whereas this information  did  appear  in  his
      witness statements. It is said that there are internal inconsistencies
      in relation to issues such as his  lack  of  education,  when  he  was
      allegedly detained in Eritrea, and the timeline of the journey to this
      country.

  28. The final witness statement is a response  to  the  applicant's  third
      witness statement. Ms Jackson-Royle states that the applicant had  not
      been treated unfairly, had been provided with adequate support by  the
      respondent,  and  had  himself  declined  aspects  of  assistance.  In
      addition, it is confirmed that  the  respondent  was  unaware  of  the
      applicant's friend said to have  been  living  in  Manchester.  Having
      undertaken checks, the address to which the applicant apparently  went
      in that city was unknown as a registered foster placement, and if  the
      applicant  had  travelled  there,  it  was  without  the  respondent's
      knowledge.

The Home Office evidence
  29. Following the making of a Subject  Access  Request  in  October  2018,
      partially redacted extracts from the Home Office database (referred to
      as the "GCID") have been disclosed. I do not propose to set  out  this
      evidence in detail, but will refer to  relevant  aspects  of  it  when
      providing my conclusions and reasons on the core issues in this  case,
      below. I do note, however,  that  there  appears  to  be  confirmation
      contained in the GCID notes of the applicant having been fingerprinted
      in both Italy (5 June 2017) and Germany (22 October 2017). There is no
      further evidence from the authorities of either country before me.


  30. As mentioned previously, I have a copy of the  Home  Office  screening
      interview which occurred on 1 February 2018 (described as the "Initial
      Contact and Asylum Registration Form"). Again, I will not set out  the
      contents of this document in detail here. Suffice it  to  refer  to  a
      couple of matters. First, it records the applicant's admission that he
      had indeed been fingerprinted in Italy and  Germany.  Second,  and  in
      relation to alleged events  in  Eritrea,  the  following  is  said  at
      Questions 5.2 and 5.4:

           "In Eritrea back in 2012 I was imprisoned as I did not want to
           do my Military service. After being Imprisoned I was trained by
           force to become a Soldier. I did not take part in a fighting
           during my time in the Military.


           In Eritrea I was imprisoned as I did not do my Military service.
           After being Imprisoned I was trained to become a Soldier."

The Social Care records
  31. These records cover the period from the initial  contact  between  the
      applicant and the respondent in February 2018 to the beginning of July
      2019. Amongst other matters, there are references  to  the  following:
      visual observations of the applicant; alleged  inconsistencies  as  to
      his date of birth  and  stated  age;  the  applicant  becoming  upset;
      instances of what may be described as tensions between  the  applicant
      and Ms Jackson-Royle; and a reference to the  applicant  intending  to
      stay with a friend in Manchester in April 2019.

The age assessment report
  32. The age assessment report itself  provides  information  on  the  four
      meetings held in its preparation, the assessors  (the  lead  being  Ms
      Jackson-Royle), and other basic information. In  terms  of  substance,
      there  are  eight  areas  of  assessment  which  led  to  the  overall
      conclusion that  the  applicant  is  an  adult.  These  are:  physical
      appearance and  demeanour;  interaction  with  the  assessors;  social
      history  and   family   composition;   developmental   considerations;
      independent/self-care   skills;   education;   health   and    medical
      assessment; and information  from  documentation  and  other  sources.
      Adverse inferences are set out, with particular reference  being  made
      to the way in which  the  applicant  claims  to  have  discovered  his
      age/date of birth, and the evidence relating to the claimed  detention
      in Eritrea and his age at that time. Ultimately, it  is  concluded  by
      the assessors that they "firmly"  believed  the  applicant  to  be  an
      adult, and that he was "clearly" over the age of 18 years old. He  was
      deemed to be aged 20 years old.


  33. The assessors' handwritten notes are also before me.  Parts  of  these
      are poorly copied.

The applicant's oral evidence
  34. In  examination-in-chief,  the  applicant  adopted  his  four  witness
      statements. He gave evidence about, amongst other matters, a tradition
      in Eritrea of rounding-up one's age, the circumstances in which he had
      been told his date of birth by his mother when he was  in  Italy,  the
      contents of the screening interview in relation to  his  detention  in
      Eritrea, the reasons for leaving that country, and his current studies
      at college.


  35. The applicant was then cross-examined at length. There was a focus  on
      what had been said to the Home  Office  and  Ms  Jackson-Royle  during
      interviews, in particular relating to what had happened in Eritrea and
      the  circumstances  surrounding  the  departure.   Specifically,   the
      applicant denied that he had been imprisoned in Eritrea  in  2012  and
      asserted that he and a friend left illegally when  they  saw  soldiers
      approaching following a religious festival in a neighbouring  village.
      Further information was given surrounding the telephone call  received
      from the applicant's mother when he was in Italy. He also said that he
      had spoken to her once more in July  2019.  There  were  a  number  of
      questions concerning the age assessment process.  Evidence  was  given
      about  the  applicant's  day-to-day  life  in  this  country  and  his
      friendship with his two witnesses.

  36. In re-examination, the applicant  gave  further  evidence  about  what
      happened immediately after his arrival in the United Kingdom. He  said
      that  his  mother,  together  with  the  mother  of  his  friend,  had
      themselves been detained when they try to see the  applicant  and  his
      friend in the detention centre. Additional  information  was  provided
      about the age assessment process and what the applicant  had  said  in
      his screening interview. He re-affirmed his claim that he left Eritrea
      on 21 January, and that he had been arrested in 2016.

  37. At this stage I record a matter  that  arose  during  the  applicant's
      evidence relating to the Tribunal-appointed Tigrinyan interpreter.  At
      two points during the evidence, Ms Benfield, on instructions, raised a
      concern that the interpreter was not fully translating the entirety of
      the applicant's answers to  certain  questions.  These  concerns  were
      properly raised at the time (see TS (interpreters) Eritrea [2019] UKUT
      00352 (IAC)). Following a short break in proceedings, I  reminded  the
      interpreter of the importance of ensuring  full  translation  and  the
      utility of asking the applicant to pause  during  the  giving  of  his
      answers in order to make the  relaying  of  the  evidence  easier.  No
      subsequent  concerns  were  raised  by  Ms  Benfield.   In   all   the
      circumstances, I was satisfied both the applicant fully understood the
      interpreter and that  there  were  no  material  deficiencies  in  the
      interpretation and relaying of the applicant's evidence to me.

The witnesses' oral evidence
  38.  In  examination-in-chief,  DT  adopted  his  witness  statement.   He
      confirmed that following a favourable age assessment, the Home  Office
      had now accepted his age and that he had been granted  refugee  status
      in the United Kingdom. He gave evidence about  his  friendship  group,
      his knowledge of their ages, and his view that the applicant  is  what
      he described as "underage".


  39. In cross-examination, DT stated that he knew the  dates  of  birth  of
      some of his friends, but not others. It was accepted that maturity did
      not depend just on  age,  but  could  be  based  upon  the  nature  or
      character of the individual. DT gave evidence about why he thought the
      applicant was not an adult. He said that he and the applicant would go
      to a park, ride bicycles, and spent time at  an  Eritrean  cafe  after
      church services on Sundays.


  40. There was no re-examination.

  41. EG adopted his witness statement. He confirmed that he currently lives
      with the applicant. He has known the  applicant  since  June  or  July
      2018. His belief that the applicant is "underage" is based  mainly  on
      the things that the two of them have in common. EG stated that if  the
      applicant were much older, they would not have anything in common.

  42. In cross-examination, EG was asked about  what  he  considered  to  be
      "childish" things that he and the applicant  did.  It  was  said  that
      activities such as football and volleyball  are  played  by  children.
      These can be started as a child and then carried on. EG confirmed that
      since he turned 18,  his  relationship  with  the  applicant  had  not
      changed. He confirmed that he was friends with DT as well. Although DT
      is younger, the gap was not big. The witness did not  accept  that  he
      could be friends with older people, only with those close to  his  own
      age.

  43. There was no re-examination.



Ms Jackson-Royle's oral evidence
  44. Ms Jackson-Royle adopted her four witness  statements.  There  was  no
      additional examination-in-chief.


  45. In cross-examination, Ms Benfield asked a number of questions relating
      to the age assessment process. Ms Jackson-Royle did not recall  having
      specific training before undertaking the age assessment report for the
      applicant.  She  recalled  undertaking  a  visual  inspection  of  the
      applicant during a visit on 28 February 2018. She was first  allocated
      to the applicant following the Order of Green J. She  was  aware  that
      two other social workers had had temporary conduct of the  applicant's
      case early in 2019. These changes have occurred due to  the  breakdown
      of the relationship between her and the applicant.  When  asked  about
      her understanding of the phrase "clearly an adult",  Ms  Jackson-Royle
      explained that this meant that it was more likely that  the  applicant
      (or the subject of any assessment) was over 18. She accepted  that  it
      could be  difficult  to  determine  age  based  solely  upon  physical
      appearance.

  46. When asked about support provided to the applicant  following  initial
      placement, Ms Jackson-Royle stated that she believes that he  had  not
      been placed as a child. She accepted that at  the  start  of  the  age
      assessment process, she  had  formed  an  initial  judgment  that  the
      applicant was in fact an adult. She believed that the local  authority
      had also formed that view. Ms Jackson-Royal believed that  the  Merton
      process had been followed  from  the  outset.  She  could  not  recall
      precisely why the second age assessment assessor, Melissa Andrews, had
      not been at the meeting with the  applicant  on  22  June  2018.  This
      meeting was the "minded-to" meeting. It was said that  the  final  age
      assessment decision had been made by her and Ms Andrews. It  was  said
      that there was no real difference between the roles of lead and second
      assessors. She confirmed that the comments of  the  foster  carer,  Mr
      Singh, had been used when making  the  outcome  decision.  When  asked
      whether the  comments  of  Mr  Singh  should  have  been  put  to  the
      applicant, Ms Jackson-Royle stated that she did  not  think  that  any
      response from him would have changed her decision. At that  time,  she
      said, her view was that  the  applicant  was  "firmly  an  adult".  Ms
      Benfield put a number of  matters  to  Ms  Jackson-Royle,  which  were
      described as flaws in the age assessment process. In response, it  was
      said that the final decision on the applicant's age was not made until
      the full age assessment had been carried out.


  47. In re-examination, Ms Jackson-Royle stated that she and Ms Andrews had
      thought that the applicant was  aged  between  18  and  21  years  old
      initially, and the age of 20 was decided on later. She did not believe
      that the meeting on 22 June 2018  would  have  been  different  if  Ms
      Andrews had been present. She had informed the applicant that she  was
      aware of the Home Office screening interview in which it was  recorded
      that he has said he was imprisoned in Eritrea in  2012.  In  response,
      the applicant has said that he was 14 when arrested.

The parties' respective submissions
  48. Mr Parkhill relied on his skeleton argument.  He  submitted  that  any
      argument from the applicant that there needed to be firm  grounds  and
      reasons for rejecting the claimed date of birth, was flawed  in  light
      of the decision of Knowles J in R(F) v Manchester City Council  [2019]
      EWHC 2998 (Admin), at  para  64.  The  current  proceedings  were  not
      concerned solely with whether or not the age  assessment  was  flawed:
      the evidence had to be considered as a  whole.  In  addition,  it  was
      submitted that there had been no actual procedural unfairness  to  the
      applicant as a result of either there being a different social  worker
      at the meeting on 22 June 2018, or because of a  failure  to  put  the
      foster carer's comments to the applicant.  In  respect  of  the  first
      point, the meeting on 22 June 2018  had  in  fact  occurred,  and  the
      points set out in Ms Jackson-Royle's witness statement were  accurate.
      As to the second point, the applicant had had ample time to provide  a
      response to the foster carer's comments.


  49. Mr Parkhill submitted that there had been material inconsistencies  in
      the applicant's evidence about what had  occurred  in  Eritrea.  These
      related to, amongst other matters, whether he had been caught  by  the
      authorities when trying to cross the border  illegally,  when  he  was
      imprisoned, and why soldiers wanted to arrest him again. The applicant
      had clearly stated that the year of claimed imprisonment was 2012. The
      applicant had now accepted telling his solicitors that  he  had  never
      said 2012 to Ms Jackson-Royle, when in fact he had  given  this  year,
      but on the basis that he was angry with her. This point  went  to  his
      overall credibility. It was submitted that according  to  the  claimed
      date of birth, the applicant had either been imprisoned when he was 10
      years old or 14 years old. If the latter, the applicant was  now  aged
      21.

  50. It was said to be incredible that the applicant did not ask his mother
      for proof of his age when he spoke to her in July 2019. There  was  no
      reasonable explanation  for  this  failure.  In  respect  of  the  two
      witnesses, Mr Parkhill said that it was "unrealistic" of them to  hold
      the conviction that the applicant was definitely not 18 or  over.  The
      assertion that they all lived a "child-like" lifestyle was  not  borne
      out by the evidence. Overall, their evidence should carry  little,  if
      any, weight.

  51. Ultimately, Mr Parkhill urged me to find that  the  applicant  was  20
      years old when assessed and is now 21 years old.

  52. Ms Benfield relied  on  her  skeleton  argument  and  written  closing
      submissions. The  "firm  grounds  and  reasons"  point  taken  in  her
      skeleton argument came down to the need to provide sound reasons  when
      producing an age assessment report. Reliance was placed upon decisions
      cited in the skeleton argument, in  particular  VS  [2014]  EWHC  2483
      (Admin), and MVN v  London  Borough  of  Greenwich  [2015]  EWHC  1942
      (Admin). A sympathetic approach should be taken to the evidence  as  a
      whole, having due regard to the applicant's vulnerability as  a  young
      person and his arduous journey from Eritrea to the United Kingdom. The
      applicant had been consistent about his date of birth and how he found
      this out. The idea of rounding up one's age was plausible in  cultural
      terms. Although the statement of 2012 as the year of the  imprisonment
      was an inconsistency, the applicant had accepted this to be the  case.
      In respect of the Home Office evidence, I was asked  to  consider  the
      fact that the interviews took place very soon  after  his  arrival  in
      this country. It was possible that  the  applicant  had  made  genuine
      errors. These  errors  were  not  fatal  to  the  applicant's  overall
      credibility. I was asked to find  that  the  applicant  had  not  been
      imprisoned in 2012, but in 2016. The  extract  from  the  Home  Office
      Country Policy and Information Note on Eritrea (an  extract  of  which
      was provided at the  hearing),  confirmed  that  legal  exit  was  not
      possible. Thus, it was plausible that the applicant had been  detained
      when encountered in a border area. The ill-treatment in detention  was
      also plausible. Given that the applicant had not attended  school,  it
      was plausible that he had not been caught  trying  to  evade  military
      service, as it was normally those aged 17 who are in school that  were
      the subject of forcible recruitment before the age of 18.


  53. Ms Benfield criticised the age assessment process as being flawed in a
      number of respects, and with reference to case-law including  VS.  The
      evidence that the applicant had not been treated as a child  following
      the Order of Green J was consistent with the pre-determination by  the
      assessors that the applicant was an adult all along.  She  highlighted
      the absence of evidence from the respondent  other  than  that  of  Ms
      Jackson-Royle. This was described as  "striking".  The  Home  Office's
      visual assessment of the applicant being significantly over the age of
      18 in 2018 was of little, if any,  value.  By  contrast,  Ms  Benfield
      urged me to find the evidence of the two  witnesses  to  be  credible.
      Their evidence had not been substantially challenged.  They  both  had
      longer-term experience of the applicant.

  54. Ms Benfield asked me to find that the applicant is currently aged  17,
      and his date of birth is in fact 2 July 2002. Even if I were  to  find
      that this is not the case, the applicant is  certainly  not  21  years
      old.

  55. Mr Parkhill briefly clarified a couple of matters. First, he  accepted
      that the applicant had provided a response to the meeting of  22  June
      2018 in his second witness statement. Second, it was to be noted  that
      there has been no application to enforce any of the  Court  Orders  in
      respect of the applicant's support.

  56. At the end of the hearing, I reserved my decision.

Assessment of the evidence and conclusions
  57. I have assessed the evidence before me as a whole. Thus, whilst I have
      dealt with various aspects of it under sub-headings for  the  purposes
      of structure, this is not  an  indication  that  I  have  artificially
      viewed matters in isolation from one another.


  58. At its core, this case concerns the reliability of evidence  going  to
      the issue of the applicant's age. My consideration of  this  issue  is
      not, however, confined to what he himself  said  about  his  age,  but
      involves a wider assessment of credibility. Importantly,  and  perhaps
      stating the obvious, the assessment of age  is  far  removed  from  an
      exact science.

Physical appearance and demeanour

  59. As is made abundantly clear from  numerous  authorities,  there  is  a
      significant danger in attempting to accurately assess age by virtue of
      physical appearance and/or demeanour. That is not a trap into which  I
      intend to fall. I make it clear that I have placed no material  weight
      upon the applicant's physical appearance and/or his demeanour  at  the
      hearing.

The respondent's evidence
  60. Whilst I do not doubt the good faith of Ms Jackson-Royle in any way, I
      am bound to say that there are in my view real difficulties  with  her
      evidence and the age assessment decision-making process as a whole.


  61. Ms Jackson-Royle candidly accepted that prior to undertaking  the  age
      assessment process  for  the  applicant,  she  had  not  received  any
      specific training. She also  acknowledged  that  this  particular  age
      assessment was only her third, the previous two having occurred during
      the course of some four years.

  62. I found this aspect of her evidence troubling. It is unclear why there
      had been no formal training, but that is not a matter with which I  am
      concerned. The fact that the  designated  lead  assessor  in  the  age
      assessment process had received none runs contrary to guidance set out
      in case-law and certainly undermines the weight which I attach to  the
      respondent's conclusion that the applicant is an adult with a date  of
      birth of 2 July 1998.

  63. I have no evidence that the second assessor, Melissa  Andrews  or  the
      "stand-in" social worker, Ms Voila Chisvo,  had  been  age  assessment
      trained.

  64. A second area of concern relates to what in my view was  a  very  firm
      view taken of the applicant's age by  Ms  Jackson-Royle,  and  in  all
      likelihood other colleagues as well, at an early stage in proceedings.
      It is clear to me that having made a visual inspection on 27  February
      2018 (the date of 28 February was  mentioned  in  oral  evidence,  but
      nothing turns on this), Ms Jackson-Royle formed a strong view that the
      applicant was clearly an adult. This view was,  self-evidently,  based
      solely  upon  physical  appearance,  a  factor  that  is   notoriously
      unreliable when attempting to assess  age.  Indeed,  Ms  Jackson-Royle
      acknowledged this in oral evidence. Although she did  state  that  the
      visual inspection had not led her to a final  decision  prior  to  the
      writing of the age assessment report, there was, I find, a strong view
      held  throughout  the  interaction  between  the  applicant  and   the
      respondent that the former was an adult.

  65. An example of what in my view was something close to a pre-disposition
      in favour of a conclusion that the applicant was an adult  all  along,
      is the fact that when asked why the foster carer's comments were never
      put to the applicant, Ms Jackson-Royle stated that such a  step  would
      probably  not  have  made  any  difference  to  the  outcome  of   the
      assessment. Given that Mr Singh's comments were cited  as  a  material
      source  upon  which  the  final  decision  was  based,   this   candid
      acknowledgement bears real significance.

  66. The respondent's view may well also have been influenced  in  part  by
      Home Office documentation produced after the initial contact with  the
      applicant by that department on 1 February 2018 and subsequently  seen
      by Ms Jackson-Royle (I will return to this evidence, below).

  67. The third area of concern in respect of  Ms  Jackson-Royle's  evidence
      relates to the compiling and evaluation of information  prior  to  the
      final age assessment report. Given that the lead assessor, Ms Jackson-
      Royle, was not age assessment trained, it seems to  me  all  the  more
      important to have had the same two assessors present at  all  relevant
      meetings with the applicant. This did not occur: Ms Andrews was absent
      from the meeting on 22 June 2018. There has been no clear  explanation
      as to why this was the case. Given that the meeting in question was, I
      find, the "minded to" stage of proceedings, the value  of  having  the
      same assessors should have been apparent. Whilst I take account of  Mr
      Parkhill's submission that the absence of Ms Andrews from the  meeting
      really made no difference at all, it does go to my overall view of the
      robustness of the age assessment procedure and, in  turn,  the  weight
      attributable to the conclusion on age.

  68. Bringing together the matters discussed above, I conclude that the age
      assessment process was  flawed  and  the  weight  I  place  upon  that
      assessment and the respondent's ultimate conclusion on the applicant's
      age is substantially reduced.

  69. As a contingent issue, I have a concern about the  particular  way  in
      which the applicant has been treated  by  the  respondent  during  the
      course of the age assessment process. Ms Jackson-Royle  told  me  that
      the applicant had not been placed  as  a  child,  notwithstanding  the
      relevant Order from the Administrative Court of 6 March  2018.  Having
      said that, it is right that  there  is  no  evidence  of  any  further
      proceedings to enforce the Order.

  70. Having set out a number of criticisms of  the  respondent's  evidence,
      there are other aspects of it which I  find  to  be  reliable  and  of
      greater value. Although Ms Jackson-Royle was initially rather confused
      about the nature of the visit on 22 June 2018, I accept that this  did
      in fact constitute the "minded-to" meeting. I am  satisfied  that  the
      three matters set out in para 2 of Ms Jackson-Royle's  second  witness
      statement were in fact put to the applicant. It follows that I do  not
      accept the applicant's evidence that nothing was said to him by her on
      this occasion, and that he only found out information from a paralegal
      at his solicitors' firm afterwards. I do not  accept  the  implication
      that Ms Jackson-Royle has simply made up the contents of  her  witness
      statement. In saying this, I also note that the applicant accepted  in
      oral evidence that he recalls making the comment about not  being  18.
      As this comment is recorded in the statement, it is unlikely that  the
      matters immediately preceding it are entirely inaccurate.  It  may  be
      that the applicant's relationship with Ms Jackson-Royle  has  been  so
      poor that he has simply declined to listen to what she has had to  say
      at various stages of the process.


  71. I find that although, for reasons set out above, the  opinion  of  the
      assessing social workers  as  to  the  applicant's  age  carries  much
      reduced weight, there are factual matters  which  have  been  reliably
      recorded. Specifically, and based  on  the  contents  of  Ms  Jackson-
      Royle's statements, the legible parts of  the  handwritten  assessment
      notes, and in part on what the applicant has accepted, I find that the
      applicant informed the social workers, amongst other matters,  of  the
      following:

              i. that he was 16 years old when  spoken  to  on  27  February
                 2018;
             ii. that he had been imprisoned in 2012 when aged 14;
            iii. that he  left  Eritrea  on  21  January  2016  following  a
                 religious ceremony and was aged 14 at that time;
             iv. that his date of birth was 2 July 2002 and he was told this
                 by his mother when he was in Italy.

  72. There is no evidence from the former foster carer, Mr Singh.  Whatever
      the reason for this might be, the consequence of this absence is  that
      I place no material weight upon the comments apparently made by him to
      Ms Jackson-Royle concerning the applicant's behaviour. I note that the
      applicant has in fact commented on the assertions apparently  made  by
      Mr Singh (the second witness statement), and there is no  good  reason
      for me to reject the relevant responses. The upshot of  this  is  that
      the reliance placed upon Mr Singh's assertions in the  age  assessment
      compounds the reduction in weight I attach to that report.


  73. There is no evidence from any other social worker, any key worker,  or
      the applicant's college. Although Ms  Benfield  described  this  as  a
      "striking" omission, it seems to me as though at least  one  of  those
      sources, the college, could have been approached by the applicant  for
      potentially supporting evidence. In any event, as a  matter  of  fact,
      there is no additional evidence from  other  sources  to  support  the
      respondent's assertion as to the applicant's age.


  74. As mentioned earlier, there is no evidence before me from  either  the
      Italian or German authorities regarding  their  interaction  with  the
      applicant. Whether or not any such evidence would have been  probative
      to the issue of his age, it is somewhat odd that it does not appear as
      though there has even been an attempt to obtain this.

The Home Office evidence

  75. I will deal with the substance of this evidence when  considering  the
      applicant's evidence, below. At  this  point,  I  make  the  following
      observations. The initial interview with the applicant occurred at 5am
      on 1 February 2018, having arrived in this  country  at  approximately
      5pm the previous day and having been encountered by the authorities at
      3.30am. It is also the case that there is no full transcript  of  that
      interview. In all circumstances, I treat what is stated  in  the  GCID
      note of the interview with caution.


  76. It is not the case, however, that the interview took place immediately
      upon arrival in this country. I find that the  applicant  did  provide
      information with the assistance of an interpreter.  I  find  that  the
      information recorded in the note is accurate in so far as it  reflects
      what the applicant in fact said, namely that,  amongst  other  things,
      his mother had been arrested when the authorities went looking for him
      to complete military service and that he did  not  wish  to  undertake
      that service.

  77. Turning to the screening interview conducted  at  9am  on  1  February
      2018, I again treated this evidence with caution given the  nature  of
      such information-gathering exercises. They are meant to obtain further
      evidence about the individual's family details and  their  journey  to
      the United Kingdom, together with a relatively  brief  description  of
      why they are seeking protection in this country. They are not in-depth
      asylum interviews (as far as I am aware, no  such  interview  has  yet
      taken place). I also bear in mind  the  fact  that  whatever  age  the
      applicant is now, he was obviously fairly close to two  years  younger
      at the time of that interview.

  78. The screening interview was conducted approximately four  hours  after
      the initial interview. I am satisfied that the applicant was  able  to
      understand the interpreter throughout (as recorded at the end  of  the
      interview) and that he confirmed that he was ready to  be  interviewed
      at the time.

  79. On balance,  I  find  that  the  record  of  the  screening  interview
      accurately reflects what was in fact stated by the applicant, save for
      one specific point. It is likely that the date of  birth  recorded  at
      question 1.2 as 2  July  1994,  was  in  fact  not  expressed  by  the
      applicant himself, but was derived from  the  Home  Office  official's
      visual assessment of his  age  and  recorded  on  other  documentation
      issued by them. I find that the applicant did state that:

              i. he left Eritrea in January 2016;


             ii. that he had been imprisoned in Eritrea in 2012 for not
                 wanting to undertake military service;


            iii. that after the imprisonment, he had been trained to become
                 a soldier, although he had not taken part in any fighting.

The applicant's own evidence
  80.  In assessing the applicant's evidence, I have had at the forefront of
      my mind the possibility that he is either still a child or, at most, a
      young adult. I have taken account of the fact that he has  been  going
      through a lengthy legal process and is (as  he  expressed  during  the
      hearing) frustrated that matters have not yet been  resolved.  I  also
      take account of the fact that the applicant's  relationship  with  his
      allocated social worker, Ms Jackson-Royle, has been strained.  Aspects
      of his evidence provided to the Home Office and  the  respondent  soon
      after his arrival in the United Kingdom must be viewed in the  context
      of what preceded that event: whatever his actual age may  be,  he  had
      undertaken a lengthy journey from Eritrea to this  country,  with  all
      the difficulties and dangers that this would have entailed.


  81.  Without pre-judging the issue of his actual age in any  way,  I  have
      treated the applicant as a vulnerable witness within  the  meaning  of
      the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of  2010.  Having  reflected
      carefully on the hearing itself and the oral evidence presented, I  am
      satisfied that the applicant was not materially inhibited  in  putting
      forward  his  evidence,  notwithstanding  his  vulnerability.  I  have
      factored into my assessment the fact that the applicant has been asked
      many questions on the same or similar subject-matter over  the  course
      of time, and it is right to say that his oral evidence at the  hearing
      was lengthy  (although  I  emphasise  that  the  questioning  was  all
      perfectly proper).

  82. At the outset of his evidence I ensured that he fully  understood  the
      interpreter and vice versa. I gave a full introduction. I am satisfied
      that the applicant had no difficulties in communicating  his  evidence
      at the hearing and that he was fully able to engage with  proceedings.
      In respect of the concern raised by Ms Benfield during  oral  evidence
      about the interpreter, I am satisfied that there is been  no  material
      prejudice to the applicant's ability to convey what he wanted to say.


  83. Even applying all of the cautionary criteria and latitudes  applicable
      to a person in the applicant's situation, and adopting a "sympathetic"
      approach, there are significant difficulties with material aspects  of
      his evidence.

  84. Before turning to these, it is important  to  say  that  he  has  been
      consistent on certain matters.  In  particular,  he  has  consistently
      stated that he left Eritrea on 21  January  2016  at  the  time  of  a
      religious festival in his (or a nearby)  village,  that  his  date  of
      birth is 2 July 2002, and that he acquired this information  from  his
      mother whilst he was in  Italy  because  the  authorities  there  were
      requesting it. This thread could indicate one of  two  things:  first,
      that he has been consistent because he  was  being  entirely  truthful
      about these matters and others; second, that his  consistency  relates
      to only three limited aspects of his evidence, and may  amount  simply
      to a recitation of elements of a fabricated account. It might not take
      very much more of  a  favourable  view  of  his  overall  evidence  to
      conclude that the consistency  weighs  heavily  on  his  side  of  the
      balance.

  85. There are obvious  inconsistencies  in  the  applicant's  evidence  as
      regards when he was allegedly imprisoned in Eritrea: the  years  2012,
      2014, and 2016 have variously been stated. In essence, the applicant's
      explanation is that he had been confused  at  the  relevant  times.  I
      fully appreciate that confusion can occur and mistakes may be made  by
      a child or young  adult  when  faced  with  questions  from  those  in
      authority  (and  I  would  include  legal  representatives   in   that
      category). However, I have nonetheless found it very difficult  indeed
      to understand how the  apparently  significant  confusion  could  have
      genuinely arisen, particularly in light of other evidence  surrounding
      the issue of dates. In his  first  witness  statement,  the  applicant
      denied ever having said that he was imprisoned in 2012 or  2014.  That
      denial  appeared  to  be  disavowed  in  oral  evidence,   where   the
      explanation was based upon confusion  only.  Yet  even  in  that  oral
      evidence, the applicant told me that he had informed the social worker
      (presumably Ms Jackson-Royle) that the imprisonment occurred in  2016,
      not 2012. I have already found that the year 2012 was in  fact  stated
      to Ms Jackson-Royle (see  above).  Later  in  evidence  the  applicant
      seemed to shift his position somewhat accepted that  he  "might"  have
      said 2012 to her. Then when asked  about  a  passage  in  the  witness
      statement of Rhiannon Salisbury, the applicant suggested that  he  had
      deliberately told her an inaccuracy (namely, that he  had  never  told
      the social worker that he was imprisoned in 2012) because he was angry
      and frustrated with Ms Jackson-Royle. Whilst I accept that he had felt
      frustration,  this  particular  point,  in  combination  with  others,
      undermines the applicant's  overall  credibility  in  respect  of  the
      imprisonment issue and more generally.


  86. The inconsistency on the year of claimed imprisonment is also  related
      to the clear statements made by  the  applicant  in  response  to  two
      questions in the screening interview that he was  taken  for  military
      service training after release.  This self-evidently runs  counter  to
      other aspects of the evidence in which he has denied ever  even  being
      asked to undertake service. This point adds  to  a  general  sense  of
      incoherence within the applicant's account.


  87. The applicant's evidence about why he was allegedly imprisoned and his
      reasons for leaving Eritrea are also highly problematic. He  has  told
      the Home Office he was imprisoned because he did not want to  (or  did
      not do) military service. Leaving aside the problem with the  date  of
      claimed imprisonment, the applicant's evidence was clear, repeated  as
      it was in two questions within the screening interview. I  cannot  see
      any plausible reason why  the  applicant  would  have  been  genuinely
      confused when providing this answer. Beyond this, the  applicant  also
      stated in the screening interview that he feared a return  to  Eritrea
      because he did not want to undertake military  service.  Yet  in  oral
      evidence, this proposition (which might in  many  circumstances  be  a
      plausible one, given the country situation in Eritrea) was  repeatedly
      disavowed. When pressed on the contents of  the  screening  interview,
      the applicant responded with what  I  am  bound  to  say  were  rather
      evasive answers, claiming for example that it was difficult to  answer
      the  question  and  that  he  could  not  remember  certain  parts  of
      responses.


  88. Related to the preceding point is  the  applicant's  evidence  on  the
      circumstances of the claimed arrest prior to the imprisonment. In  his
      first and second witness statements,  he  asserts  that  he  had  been
      "playing" with a friend near to the border  with  Ethiopia  when  they
      were picked up by soldiers on suspicion that they were about to  leave
      the country. Not only does  this  contradict  what  was  said  in  the
      screening interview, but  it  flatly  contradicted  what  he  said  in
      several answers  in  examination-in-chief  and  cross-examination.  He
      clearly stated that he had been arrested whilst trying  to  leave  the
      country illegally. I acknowledge that later in his oral  evidence  the
      applicant reverted to the claim that he and his friend had simply been
      playing at the border when the soldiers picked them up. He then denied
      that he had in fact been trying to illegally cross the border at  that
      time. The applicant's evidence has once again  been  inconsistent  and
      lacking in coherence.


  89. Another inconsistent response arose when the applicant told me that he
      eventually left Eritrea because he had been "caught" trying  to  cross
      the border  illegally  during  the  religious  celebration.  This  ran
      against other evidence in which he had stated that he and  his  friend
      decided to leave because they saw soldiers  approaching  and  did  not
      want to be imprisoned again.

  90. In light of the particular difficulties discussed above, there is real
      force in Mr Parkhill's submission that the  applicant  has  sought  to
      disassociate himself from previous evidence relating to the reason for
      why he left Eritrea because that evidence may lead  to  an  indication
      that he was older than he says at that particular juncture.

  91. At para 16, above, I have set out in summary form a chronology of  the
      applicant's journey from Eritrea to the United Kingdom. I have derived
      the details of  this  journey  largely  from  the  applicant's  second
      witness statement, together with what is  set  out  in  the  screening
      interview. Whilst there are one or two gaps, my overall view  is  that
      the applicant's  account,  at  least  in  so  far  as  the  timing  is
      concerned, essentially stands up to scrutiny.  On  his  evidence,  the
      journey was arduous and involved significant logistical and, no doubt,
      emotional obstacles. If, as claimed, the applicant was  born  in  July
      2002 and left Eritrea in January 2016, he  would  have  been  just  13
      years old for the first 6 months or so of his  journey.  Although  the
      applicant states that he  was  placed  into  an  "underage"  group  of
      refugees in Ethiopia, he later describes being placed with adult males
      at one stage in Sudan in what, on my calculation, would have been  the
      autumn of 2016, when he would, on his case, have been 14 years  and  a
      few months old. In my view, his  evidence  of  the  journey  does  not
      provide any particular support for his asserted date of birth and age.
      In more general terms, it is possible that such a young boy could have
      made the journey. Having said that, it  is  more  plausible  that  the
      applicant's ability to deal with the numerous difficulties in his path
      (including, for example,  being  imprisoned,  escaping  from  custody,
      arranging for payment by his mother of smugglers fees,  and  suchlike)
      was down to him being older than claimed.

  92. In her written closing submissions, Ms Benfield relies on the  country
      guidance decision of the Upper Tribunal in MST  and  Others  (national
      service - risk categories) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC). This is
      clearly supportive of an assertion that a young man  in  Eritrea  will
      not, in all but exceptional  circumstances,  be  able  to  leave  that
      country legally. It is also the case that the Eritrean authorities are
      vigilant  to  prevent  illegal  border  crossings.  Ill-treatment   in
      detention, as the applicant alleges occurred, is  plausible.  Finally,
      the evidence considered by the Upper Tribunal indicates that  children
      within the education system are often recruited into military  service
      in the final year of school, at which point they are normally aged 17.

  93. These  basic  propositions  may  be  said  to  be  supportive  of  the
      applicant's case. However, in my view, when placed in the  context  of
      the evidence as a whole, they add little to the particular account put
      forward. Being arrested for trying  to  cross  the  border  (or  being
      suspected of doing so) would potentially apply to someone aged  17  or
      18 as much as one aged 13 or 14. As to the school issue, the fact,  as
      I find it to be, that the applicant did not attend school, does not of
      itself  suggest  that  he  would  necessarily  have  been  liable  for
      conscription at an earlier age. In any event, as discussed previously,
      the applicant has expressly,  and  rather  implausibly,  rejected  the
      suggestion that he left Eritrea  because  of  a  fear  of  the  almost
      inevitable call-up to military service.

  94. In his interactions with Ms Jackson-Royle, the  applicant  has  stated
      that he was older than his date of birth  allowed  for.  For  example,
      when first visited by her on 27 February 2018, he stated that  he  was
      16 years old when in fact he would have been 15 years  and  6  months.
      This claim was also made when the applicant was interviewed by  social
      workers on 13 March 2018 as part of the age assessment process. In his
      first witness statement, the applicant stated that he was 14 years old
      when he left Eritrea. If that event took place  in  January  2016,  he
      would have been 13 years and six months old.  When  asked  about  this
      aspect of his evidence in  examination-in-chief,  the  applicant  said
      that it was common in Eritrean tradition to round-up one's age.  There
      is no expert evidence to that effect. Even putting that to  one  side,
      in the light of the evidence as a whole, I  have  a  material  concern
      that he had never sought to  qualify  his  age  by  reference  to  his
      claimed date of birth, even when providing evidence to his  solicitors
      when drafting the first witness statement. In addition, the claim that
      it was common to round-up age does not sit particularly well with  the
      applicant's contention that  dates  of  birth  were  insignificant  in
      Eritrea and that age was  not  spoken  of  as  it  was  deemed  to  be
      unimportant: rounding-up implies a knowledge of one's date of birth or
      at least age by year. Further, as the date of  birth  and  age  became
      extremely important as matters progressed in the United Kingdom, it is
      implausible that the applicant did not  provide  what  would,  on  his
      claimed date of birth, have been the correct age.

  95. A final but connected point on  the  date  of  birth  and  stated  age
      relates to the oral evidence on what occurred in Italy. The  applicant
      told me that his mother has said to him that he was  "turning  16"  at
      the time she informed him of his precise date of  birth.  Having  gone
      through the evidence relating to the applicant's journey from  Eritrea
      to United Kingdom with care, the chronology places  him  in  Italy  in
      approximately mid-August 2017. At that time, he would, on the  claimed
      date of birth, have been just over 15 years old. That is some way  off
      turning 16.

  96. In the course of oral evidence, it transpired that the  applicant  had
      been able to contact his mother in July  2019.  Although  it  has  not
      appeared in either of the two most recent  witness  statements,  I  am
      prepared to accept that this contact occurred. The  evidence  relating
      to this event causes the applicant further difficulties.  In  all  the
      circumstances, it is not credible that the applicant  would  not  even
      have asked his mother for possible proof of either his precise date of
      birth or age. He told me that he did not want to worry his  mother  by
      making such a  request.  However,  it  was  abundantly  clear  to  the
      applicant at this stage that his age was of critical importance to his
      case. Further, unlike when he  had  previously  contacted  his  mother
      (first in Sudan to seek payment of smugglers fees, and then in Italy),
      his overall circumstances in July 2019 were much less precarious  and,
      as a consequence, much less likely to lead his mother to unduly  worry
      about his well-being. Indeed, in my view the  contrary  would  be  the
      case: her son had reached a final, safe destination and any assistance
      she could have provided is highly likely to have been  offered,  if  a
      request had been made.

The witnesses' evidence
  97. I find that both DT and EG have provided honest evidence in the  sense
      that they both hold a genuine belief that the applicant  is,  as  they
      have described it, "underage". Their  oral  evidence  was  essentially
      consistent with the witness statements.  What  they  have  said  about
      factual matters within their own knowledge (for  example,  undertaking
      certain leisure activities,  going  out  in  Derby  town  centre,  and
      "hanging out" at an Eritrean cafe) has  been  broadly  consistent  and
      plausible.


  98. However, their evidence  does  not  assist  greatly  with  my  overall
      assessment of the applicant's age. DT is now nearly 18 years  old.  He
      confirmed that his friendship group were of a "similar"  age  and  all
      were, to the best of his knowledge, under 20 years  old.  He  accepted
      that he has not seen proof of age for any of his friends aside from at
      most three. I appreciate that he clearly believes that  the  applicant
      is not over 18, but, in all the circumstances, I am only able to place
      limited weight upon what is,  on  any  view,  an  entirely  subjective
      standpoint. The witness may be "familiar" with  the  applicant  to  an
      extent, but his determination that the latter's character  proved  him
      to be under 18 is not a reliable evidential platform. An  individual's
      character, particularly when dealing with age bands of, for  the  sake
      of argument, 17-20 or 18-21 years of age, is  so  inherently  variable
      that even a friend's view will be highly prone to error. In  addition,
      there  is  of  course  no  expert  evidence  on  the  applicant's  age
      (including any assessment of his character and behaviour).

  99. What EG has said suffers from similar difficulties. There  is  nothing
      problematic with he and the applicant  sharing  "common  things",  but
      these have been described as  leisure  activities  such  as  football,
      volleyball, and bicycling. There is nothing  inherently  childlike  in
      these pursuits: they may be undertaken by children  and  young  adults
      alike. Further, EG accepted that he got on well with DT, who is a year
      younger. Therefore,  even  on  the  witnesses'  own  evidence,  it  is
      apparent that people can get on very well with others who  are  either
      younger or older than themselves. I would accept that a  significantly
      wider age gap may lessen ties or even prevent them from being  created
      in the first place. However, even putting the respondent's case at its
      highest, the gap between the applicant and his witnesses would only be
      approximately three years.

 100. In summary, the witnesses' evidence does not undermine the applicant's
      assertions as to his date of birth and age, but nor does it materially
      support them.

Overall conclusions
 101. In bringing together all of the matters set out at some length, above,
      I reiterate the emphasis I have placed  on  a  holistic  view  of  the
      evidence. On my assessment thereof, this is a case in which there  are
      clearly significant problems on both sides. The age assessment process
      was flawed and the resulting decision carries little  weight.  On  the
      other  side,  the  applicant's  own  evidence  is  in  many   respects
      unreliable.


 102. Conversely, there are aspects of the evidence which are supportive  of
      the parties' respective positions. Certain purely factual matters have
      been  accurately  recorded  within  the  respondent's  evidence,   and
      information provided by the applicant to the Home Office has played  a
      relevant part in my  assessment.  From  the  applicant's  perspective,
      there has been consistency on certain issues, and there is no decisive
      evidential element against him.


 103. Following from the above, this is not a case in which  I  am  able  to
      agree with either party's asserted dates of birth for the applicant.

 104. I make the following core findings of fact, all based of  course  upon
      an application of the appropriate standard of proof.

 105. I find that the applicant was  not  arrested  and  imprisoned  by  the
      Eritrean authorities in January 2016, or at any  other  time.  I  base
      this on the cumulative effect of the significant  inconsistencies  and
      other deficiencies in his  evidence,  as  highlighted  previously.  In
      particular, the evidential problems relating to the  year  of  claimed
      detention, the reasons for the claimed arrest,  and  the  reasons  for
      wishing to leave Eritrea, are too great for me to accept  this  aspect
      of the applicant's account.

 106. It is more likely than not that the applicant and a friend of  similar
      age, decided to leave Eritrea illegally out of a (justified)  fear  of
      being conscripted into military  service  within  a  relatively  short
      timeframe. It is likely that  they  used  the  cover  of  a  religious
      festival to make the border crossing. The applicant was entering, what
      may be described as the age-related "danger zone" for conscription, as
      indicted by the country information contained  in  the  Home  Office's
      Country Policy and Information Note (version 5.0, July 2018).  I  find
      that he did in fact leave Eritrea illegally. It is  more  likely  than
      not that he did this at the age of 16, but with his 17th  birthday  on
      the horizon, as it were. My view on this is strengthened by  the  fact
      that the applicant had always been aware of his father's  conscription
      and open-ended military service, a fate which it is highly  likely  he
      wished to avoid at any cost.

 107. As to the claimed date of birth provided by  the  applicant's  mother,
      there are three distinct possibilities. First, that the applicant knew
      his date of birth (or at least his approximate age) whilst in Eritrea.
      This would appear to be consistent with the importance of  the  threat
      posed by conscription into military service at the age of 18.  Second,
      that the applicant's mother did provide the date of birth  of  2  July
      2002, but that this was knowingly inaccurate  in  order  to  make  him
      appear younger than he in fact was. Third, that the mother provided an
      accurate date of birth (not 2 July 2002), but  the  applicant  himself
      then changed this in order to lower his age.  Whilst  these  scenarios
      are speculative, the fact is that I have rejected important aspects of
      the applicant's evidence as it relates to the date of birth and age he
      has put forward. Ultimately, it does not matter  whether  any  of  the
      three possibilities represent the "true" picture or not.

 108. In the final reckoning, I conclude that the applicant is an adult with
      an attributed date of birth of  2  July  1999.  It  follows  that  the
      applicant arrived in the United Kingdom at the age of 18, was aged  18
      at the time of the age assessment, and is currently 20 years old.

            Signed:    [pic]


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

        Dated:    3 January 2020


                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/6410/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice





                     The Queen on the application of T T
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                             Derby City Council
                                                                  Respondent


                  Before Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor




                                    ORDER

UPON consideration of all documents lodged and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms A Benfield, of Counsel, instructed by  Bhatia
Best Solicitors, on behalf of the applicant and Mr L Parkhill,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the respondent, at hearings  at  Field  House,  London  on  23
September and 12-13 December 2019.

AND UPON handing down the Decision in this application for  judicial  review
on 6 January 2020, at which neither party attended.

IT IS DECLARED THAT the applicant's attributed  date  of  birth  is  2  July
1999, and on his arrival in the United Kingdom on 31 January 2018 he was  18
years of age.


      AND IT IS ORDERED THAT

   1. This application for judicial review is refused.


   2. The Order for interim relief is discharged.


Permission to appeal
There has been no application for permission to appeal to the Court of
Appeal. In any event, I refuse permission on the basis that my decision
does not contain any arguable errors of law.

Costs
     1) The applicant shall pay the respondent's reasonable  costs,  to  be
        assessed.


     2) The applicant having the benefit of cost protection  under  section
        26 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and  Punishment  of  Offenders  Act
        2012, the amount that he is  to  pay  shall  be  determined  on  an
        application by the respondent under  regulation  16  of  the  Civil
        Legal Aid (Costs) Regulations 2013.

     3) There shall be a detailed assessment of the  applicant's  costs  in
        accordance with the Civil Legal Aid (Costs) Regulations 2013.

Whilst the applicant indicated in his draft order that there should be no
order as to costs, save for a detailed assessment of his own, no basis for
this course of action has been put forward. The applicant has been
unsuccessful on the substantive issue of his age, as that relates to the
assertion that the respondent has had, and continues to have, obligations
towards him under the Children Act 1989.


            Signed:    [pic]


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


        Dated:    6 January 2020




Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).
