
|[pic]         |In the Upper Tribunal                        |JR/6069/2019  |
|              |(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             |              |
|              |Judicial Review                              |              |
|                                                                           |
|In the matter of an application for Judicial Review                        |
|                                                                           |
|              |The Queen on the application of AI           |              |
|              |(a child by his litigation friend IN)        |              |
|              |                                             |Applicant     |
|              |Versus                                       |              |
|              |                                             |              |
|              |Secretary of State for the Home Department   |              |
|              |                                             |Respondent    |
|                                                                           |
|ORDER                                                                      |
|              |                                             |              |


BEFORE Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

HAVING considered all documents lodged and having heard Ms C Kilroy Q.C.
and Ms V Laughton of counsel, instructed by Simpsons Millar, for the
applicant and Mr Pennington- Benton of counsel, instructed by GLD, for the
respondent at a remote hearing on 9 November 2020 which has been consented
to by the parties. The form of the remote hearing was video by Skype. A
face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all
issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

UPON the Respondent having conceded that the delay from 14 July 2019  to  28
July 2020 comprised unlawful delay in breach of Dublin III.

AND UPON judgment being handed down on 10 May 2021.

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

    1) The application for judicial review is allowed in so far as there has
       been unlawful delay in transferring the applicant to the UK in breach
       of Dublin III.


    2) The applicant's claim that the respondent breached his Article 8 ECHR
       rights is dismissed for the reasons given in the attached judgment.


    3) The applicant's claim for damages for breach of Regulation (EU) No
       604/2013 is dismissed.


    4) Permission to appeal is refused because there is no arguable error of
       law in the decision dismissing the applicant's claims for breach of
       Article 8 ECHR and damages for the reasons given at [104] and [105]
       of the judgment.

   Costs

    5) The respondent conceded at the start of the hearing on 9 November
       2020 that there had been an unlawful delay of over 12 months in
       breach of Dublin III. The applicant succeeded in that respect. The
       applicant's claim for breach of Article 8 ECHR and his claim for
       Francovich damages was dismissed.

    6) The respondent to pay the applicant's reasonable costs prior to and
       including the hearing on 9 November 2020, subject to detailed
       assessment if not agreed. The cost of the hearing had already been
       incurred at the time of the concession and could have been reduced or
       avoided if the respondent had notified the applicant of the
       concession prior to the hearing.

    7) The applicant to pay the respondent's reasonable costs from 10
       November 2020 to date, subject to the costs protection pursuant to
       section 26(1) of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of
       Offenders Act 2012 and Reg. 12 of the Civil Legal Aid (Costs)
       Regulations 2013.

    8) There be a detailed assessment of  the  applicant's  publicly  funded
       costs.




      Signed:          J Frances


                 Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


      Dated:           10 May 2021


The date on which this order was sent is given below


For completion by the Upper Tribunal Immigration and Asylum Chamber

Sent / Handed to the applicant, respondent and any interested  party  /  the
applicant's, respondent's and any interested party's solicitors  on  (date):
12 May 2021

Solicitors:
Ref  No.
Home Office Ref:


Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
point of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal should apply to the  Upper
Tribunal for permission, at the hearing at which the decision is  given.  If
no application is made,  the  Tribunal  must  nonetheless  consider  at  the
hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule 44(4B)  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).


                                    [pic]

                                                       Case No: JR/6069/2019
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
(IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER)

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                            London, EC4A 1WR

                                                               10th May 2021
                                   Before:


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  Between:


                                  THE QUEEN
                          on the application of AI
                    (a child by his litigation friend IN)
                                                                   Applicant

                                   - and -


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


                     Ms C Kilroy Q.C. and Ms V Laughton
              (instructed by Simpson Millar) for the applicant

                           Mr R Pennington-Benton
     (instructed by the Government Legal Department) for the respondent

                       Hearing date: 9th November 2020

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                               J U D G M E N T

                   - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -





Judge FRANCES:

 1. The applicant challenges the respondent's refusals, dated 16 January
    2019 and 22 July 2019, of a take charge request [TCR] made on 14
    November 2018 and the delay in transferring the applicant to the UK
    under Article 8.2 of EU Regulation 604/2013 [Dublin III]. The applicant
    was transferred to the UK on 28 July 2020.


 2. It is the applicant's case that the refusals were unlawful and the
    respondent was in breach of her investigative duties. The delay in
    transferring the applicant to the UK was unlawful and in breach of the
    Dublin III time limits. Further, the unlawful delay breached the
    applicant's rights under Article 8 of the European Convention of Human
    Rights [ECHR] and Article 7 of the EU Charter of Fundamental Rights
    [CFR] informed by the Convention on the Rights of the Child [CRC]. The
    applicant seeks declarations and damages.

Facts


 3. The applicant is a national of Burundi who arrived in Greece in June
    2018 and registered a claim for asylum on 6 September 2018 when he was
    16 years old. On 14 November 2018, Greece made a TCR, on the basis that
    the applicant's uncle [IN] lived in the UK and the applicant wished to
    join him. Greece sent a 'best interests assessment' [BIA] on 3 December
    2018 and the respondent sent a letter and a pro-forma family
    undertaking form [proforma] to IN on 10 December 2018. IN responded on
    19 December 2018 and the respondent received the proforma on 24
    December 2018. Greece sent additional documents (an untranslated birth
    certificate and father's identity document) on 9 January 2019. The time
    limit for accepting the TCR expired on 14 January 2019.


 4. The respondent refused the TCR on 16 January 2019 on the basis that
    there was insufficient evidence to demonstrate a family link. Greece
    made a re-examination request on 6 February 2019 stating that DNA tests
    would be taken and the results sent to the respondent. On 7 February
    2019, Greece sent a family document (untranslated) confirming the
    family link and asked the respondent if DNA tests were still required.

 5. On 3 June 2019, Greece sought an update from the respondent. By letter
    dated 22 July 2019 (sent on 30 July 2019), the respondent refused the
    TCR (re-examination request), maintaining there was insufficient
    evidence to establish the claimed family link and stating that a
    translation was required. On 14 August 2019, Greece sent a further re-
    examination request with translated documents. This application for
    judicial review was filed on 6 December 2019. On 27 December 2019, the
    respondent advised Greece that the family link had been established and
    a new TCR, under Article 17.2 of Dublin III, should be made. Greece
    made a second TCR on 10 January 2020.



 6. On 22 January 2020, the respondent requested a family assessment from
    the local authority [LA]. The respondent sent two further letters to
    the LA chasing the family assessment on 17 February 2020 and 4 March
    2020. Permission to apply for judicial review was granted on 11 March
    2020. The LA expressed concerns about the welfare of other children in
    IN's household and requested further details of the applicant. On 23
    March 2020, the respondent sent the BIA to the LA. On 26 March 2020,
    Greece informed the respondent that all flights were suspended due to
    the outbreak of Covid 19 and the Dublin unit would resume transfers as
    soon as restrictions were lifted. The respondent received the LA
    assessment on 30 March 2020 and accepted the TCR on 1 April 2020. The
    applicant was transferred to the UK on 28 July 2020.

 7. On 22 October 2020, the respondent applied to stay the proceedings
    pending hand down of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in Secretary
    of State for the Home Department v R (FwF and FrF) (JR/1626/2019). I
    refused the application on the grounds that, on the information before
    me, the respondent had failed to demonstrate that the Court of Appeal's
    judgment would have a critical impact on the applicant's claim: AB
    (Sudan) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 921 at [30],[32]. Whether there was an
    interference with the applicant's rights under Article 8 is a fact
    specific exercise.

Relevant legal provisions

 8. The relevant articles of Dublin III, the Implementing Regulation
    1506/2003 as amended by Regulation 118/2014 [IR] and Home Office Policy
    are set out in Annex A. To satisfy the Article 8.2 Dublin III criteria
    it must be established that:


       a) The relative and child are related;
       b) The relative can take care of the child; and
       c) Reunification is in the child's best interests.

 9. A decision on the TCR must be made within two months. A failure to act
    within the two month period is tantamount to accepting the request
    [deemed acceptance] giving rise to the obligation to take charge and
    provide for proper arrangements for arrival. The transfer should take
    place as soon as possible and at the latest within six months of
    acceptance or deemed acceptance. The failure to observe the time limits
    for placing a minor shall not necessarily be an obstacle to continuing
    the procedure for determining responsibility or carrying out a
    transfer.


10. The following Dublin III cases were referred to in legal argument:


       i) FA & Others v SSHD (JR/5523/2018, JR/5405/2018, JR/5406/2018)
      ii) KF v SSHD (JR/1642/2019)
     iii) HN & MN v SSHD (JR/4719/2019)
      iv) R (MK, IK and HK) v SSHD [2016] UKUT 00231 (IAC)
       v) R (MS) v SSHD (Dublin III; duty to investigate) [2019] UKUT 00009
          (IAC)
      vi) BAA and TAA v SSHD [2020] UKUT 00227 (IAC)


Respondent's concession

  11. By letter dated 9 November 2020, received on the morning of the
      hearing by email, the respondent made the following concession:


      "1.   The following concession applies to this case only. The
           Secretary of State concedes that the overall delay between the
           transfer request and the Applicant's arrival in the UK was in
           breach of the longstop limit of 8 months (FA and KF) under
           Regulation (EU) No 604/2013 ('Dublin III'). The period of delay
           beyond 14 July 2019 comprised unlawful delay in breach of Dublin
           III. The Secretary of State maintains that this did not
           compromise a breach of the ECHR, CFR or common law process
           rights. Entitlement to damages is denied.


        2. We do not rely on Article 29 of Dublin III or Article 10 or
           12(2) of the Implementing Regulation either to extend time under
           Article 12(1) or to argue that the delay was lawful. We accept
           that the overall delay over 8 months was unlawful. We rely on
           article 12(2) in so far as we say that it confirms that the
           Secretary of State was entitled to continue to consider whether
           the family link was established, the care position and best
           interests.


        3. The decisions of 16 January and 30 July 2019 were nullities in
           as much as they purported to reject responsibility when it had
           already passed. However, we rely on the contents of those
           communications as a valid part of the ongoing exchanges of
           information about the family link, care position and best
           interests.


        4. The Secretary of State does not concede that the period of delay
           constituted a breach of common law process rights. Even though
           it is accepted that the overall delay was unlawful, it is not
           accepted that each and every (sic) of the failures along the way
           were in themselves unlawful or in themselves constituted an
           unlawful application of Dublin III. We will hear the argument
           and respond in the usual way.


        5. The only point being conceded is that the overall period of
           delay was unlawful being beyond the 8-month long stop. As to the
           individual reasons for that delay and whether they themselves
           give rise to liability these matters remain for the Applicant to
           persuade the court."

  12. In relation to the concession, Mr Pennington-Benton submitted the
      decisions of 16 January 2019 and 22 July 2019 (sent on 30 July 2019)
      could not do what they purported to do. He had to accept the decisions
      were wrong and unlawful. However, overall, those failures did not
      amount to a breach of Dublin III. What was being conceded was delay
      caused by administrative failures. The delay was far too long, over 12
      months, and amounted to an unlawful application of Dublin III.
      However, each failure was not enough, in itself, to breach Dublin III.


  13. Mr Pennington-Benton accepted the respondent was not entitled to
      refuse the TCR subject to continuing to assess the question of best
      interests. He accepted that the UK was deemed to be responsible from
      14 January 2019 and responsibility remained with the UK since that
      date. The respondent was not relying on Article 29. The respondent
      should have accepted the UK was responsible but stated that she was
      continuing to question the family link and the applicant's best
      interests. Mr Pennington-Benton accepted there was unlawful delay from
      14 July 2019 to 28 July 2020.


Applicant's submissions

  14. Ms Kilroy agreed that the respondent was not entitled to rely on
      Article 12(2) IR as a basis to refuse responsibility and submitted
      that the applicant's case on all those points in the grounds should be
      accepted. The matters in issue were breach of investigative duty and
      breach of Article 8 ECHR.


  15. Ms Kilroy relied on her skeleton argument dated 18 October 2020 and
      submitted that applying KF, the refusals to accept the TCR were
      unlawful and the delay was in breach of Dublin III. Ms Kilroy
      submitted that this case was 'on all fours' with KF save that the
      length of interference was longer. She submitted that, in KF, the
      Tribunal found the respondent's failure to contact the LA, to request
      translations and to notify the applicant of the respondent's concerns
      amounted to a breach of her investigative duties under Dublin III.
      There was a common law duty to make reasonable enquiries and there
      were procedural requirements under Article 8 (R (MK, IK and HK and R
      (MS)). The decision maker had to comply with procedural fairness and
      give the applicant an opportunity to participate.


  16. The Tribunal in KF applied this case law to the same failures which
      existed in that applicant's case. The time frame was similar. The
      respondent did not give the applicant an opportunity to comment and
      failed to contact the LA until after the family link was established.
      There was a pattern of conduct which impacted differently in each
      case. In this applicant's case, the respondent refused the TCR after
      the time limit because she did not accept the family link. This had a
      massive impact on children. Ms Kilroy submitted there was no evidence
      from the respondent and no explanation for the delay. The applicant's
      evidence and the psychiatric evidence was undisputed.

  17. Ms Kilroy summarised the facts which led to the applicant travelling
      to Greece and submitted, on 7 February 2019, the respondent had all
      the information which she ultimately relied on in accepting the TCR.
      HN & MN could be distinguished. After the purported refusal on 16
      January 2019, the Greek authorities responded with new material which
      ultimately proved the family link. There were lengthy delays by the
      respondent and no evidence that she had considered the best interests
      of the applicant. There was no 'best interests' argument to explain or
      justify the delay by the respondent.

  18. The BIA from Greece strongly supported reunification and this was
      accepted by the respondent in her email dated 23 March 2020 (at page
      533 of the trial bundle). The BIA should have been sent to the LA
      sooner. The respondent had all the information she needed to accept
      the TCR and she failed to do so until 20 January 2020. The position
      was clear from the untranslated document provided on 7 February 2019.
      Ms Kilroy relied on [40]- [45] of her skeleton argument.

  19. Ms Kilroy submitted Recitals 5 and 13 to 16 of Dublin III were
      relevant to the assessment of Article 8. The purpose of Dublin III was
      to achieve family unity (Recital 17 and Article 12 IR). Ms Kilroy
      submitted that in R (MA (Eritrea) v SSHD (ECJ) (C-648/11)[2013] 1 WLR
      2961, the court confirmed the muscularity of the 'best interests'
      principle and how it worked. The issue in this case was whether the
      delay and breaches of Dublin III amounted to a breach of Article 8.
      The respondent submitted there was no family life and no interference
      with private life because the threshold was high and the delay was not
      significant. Ms Kilroy submitted the justification for a decision must
      show that the child's substantive right to have his best interests
      assessed as a primary consideration had been explicitly taken into
      account (Mathieson v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2015]
      UKSC 47).

  20. In relation to the duty to investigate and procedural fairness, Ms
      Kilroy referred to R (MK, IK and HK) at [20] to [27] and [38], R
      (Citizens UK) at [68] to [84] and R (MS) at [120] to [125], [134] to
      [137], [171] and [202] to [208]. She submitted this approach was
      confirmed by the Court of Appeal in SSHD v MS  [2019] EWCA Civ 1340 at
      [51] to [64] and ZT (Syria) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 810 did not apply.

  21. Ms Kilroy submitted that BAA was the most recent authority and the
      Tribunal adopted the same approach as KF. The respondent should
      involve the LA and the applicant should be given an opportunity to
      address the reasons for refusal. The Tribunal should decide the matter
      for itself (BAA at [76] to [82], [170], [176] and [177] and KF [77] to
      [82] [84] [85]).

  22. In relation to Article 8, Ms Kilroy submitted that Kugathas concerned
      family life between adults and had no application in this situation.
      She submitted that the potential for the development of family life
      was relevant to whether family live existed and this was not confined
      to cases involving children and natural parents. She relied on Singh v
      Entry Clearance Officer [2004] EWCA Civ 1075 at [1], [2], [26] to [29]
      in which there was an informal adoption by cousins that was not
      recognised in UK. Reference was made to Pini v Romania (App No.
      78028/01 and 78030/01) in which the children had not met their
      adoptive parents and had been picked out from photographs. The
      relationship arising from a lawful adoption could be considered
      sufficient to warrant the respect required by Article 8.



  23. Ms Kilroy submitted Dublin III was a system set up by international
      treaty to reunify family members. The fact that the parties had not
      met did not mean Article 8 was not engaged. This applicant will not
      have a family life without reunification. Ms Kilroy submitted that
      family life must be extended to the potential relationship which may
      develop and cohabitation was likely to play a less significant role in
      assessing family life between uncles and nephews: Singh  at [33],
      [34], [38], [56], [76] and [77].

  24. Ms Kilroy submitted the existence of family life was fact sensitive
      and must include an assessment of the best interests of the child. The
      court in Pini concluded that orphans picked out from photographs was
      enough to engage Article 8. Dublin III recognised the importance of
      other family members to take care of children who did not live with
      their parents. She submitted the state should refrain from inhibiting
      the development of a real family life in the future: R (Ahmadi) v SSHD
      [2005] EWCA Civ 1721 at [18].

  25. Ms Kilroy submitted the CRC should be taken into account : R (SG) v
      Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2015] UKSC 16 at [116] to
      [121], [217] and [257]. She submitted that, in Mathieson at [39] to
      [44], the court recognised the relevance of General Comment No.14 on
      the rights of a child to have his or her best interests taken into
      account as a primary consideration. The right to reunification and the
      child's best interests ran throughout the CRC. The best interests of
      the child were a threefold concept and should be a primary
      consideration. The preservation of the family environment encompassed
      the preservation of the child's 'ties' in a wider sense. These 'ties'
      applied to extended family such as grandparents, aunts, uncles and
      friends.

  26. Ms Kilroy submitted the Applicant was an orphan trying to reunite with
      his uncle. The need to preserve that family link is required by Dublin
      III and other international instruments. The Applicant had established
      family life. A decision deciding reunification had to engage Article
      8.

  27. Ms Kilroy referred to [71] to [77] of her skeleton argument and
      submitted the respondent failed to contact IN to ask him to explain
      the discrepancies in surnames. If the family document had been
      translated and the local authority had been contacted, it would have
      made a difference. The LA assessment was relevant to the requirement
      to take care of the applicant under Article 8.2 Dublin III. It was
      necessary for the LA to visit the family. The request should have been
      made when the TCR was received. DNA was not required in this case, but
      if the respondent thought it was necessary, she should have indicated
      this to the Greek authorities and she did not. The delay that followed
      was worse than that in KF. There was a long delay after translations
      were provided and nothing was done for months.

  28. In response to a question from me, Ms Kilroy submitted there was no
      need for a second TCR because the respondent was not relying on
      Article 29. The respondent accepted she unlawfully refused the TCR and
      to ask for another one under Article 17.2 was obviously unlawful
      because there was no basis for it. The delay was not as a result of
      any investigation into the applicant's best interests under Article
      12(2) IR. The delay in this case was wholly unnecessary. The decisions
      were unlawful. The respondent's breach of her investigative duties and
      unreasonable conduct was not in compliance with Dublin III.

  29. In relation to Article 8, there was evidence of the relationship in
      the witness statements of the applicant and IN. Since August/September
      2018 they had spoken on a regular basis on the telephone and via
      WhatsApp. The social worker was one of the authors of the BIA and she
      stated that the applicant had already built a loving relationship with
      IN by November 2018. The applicant was feeling isolated and IN really
      cared about progressing matters. The psychiatric report at [16, 35,
      38, 62, 63] demonstrated the delay was relevant to the interference
      caused. The BIA demonstrated the importance of the bond between the
      applicant and IN. There was ample evidence that it was in the
      applicant's best interests to be reunited with IN in the UK, his only
      family member.

  30. Ms Kilroy submitted that the bonds built up while the applicant was
      awaiting reunification and IN's commitment to the applicant as his
      future carer demonstrated a strong emotional dependency. The applicant
      was part of IN's biological family and was an unaccompanied minor
      separated from his parents. On a proper application of international
      law, Article 8 was engaged. The applicant's private life was essential
      to his future development.

  31. Ms Kilroy referred to R (Mambakasa) v SSHD [2003] EWHC 319 (Admin) at
      [65],[107], [110] [115] and [116]. Richards J found that the delay of
      six months in granting asylum was unreasonable. In this case there was
      a delay of one year in which the respondent did nothing at all. She
      made no attempt to move matters on in a case where there was a need
      for expedition. The delay in this case was more than the longstop
      provided for under Dublin III. It clearly met the high threshold
      envisaged in ZT (Syria).

  32. Ms Kilroy submitted the delay was unlawful and the respondent was in
      breach of her investigative duties. This conduct was sufficient to
      engage Article 8 ECHR and Article 7 CFR. The respondent's decisions
      were unlawful and not in accordance with the law. There was no
      evidence from the respondent to justify the decisions. The
      interference could not be justified and was disproportionate. Ms
      Kilroy submitted that applying KF, BAA and R(MS) , the applicant
      succeeded on the two remaining issues.

Respondent's submissions

  33. Mr Pennington-Benton accepted that responsibility for the applicant's
      asylum claim had shifted to the respondent and she was wrong to
      purport to decline the TCR outside the two month time limit. However,
      relying on FA the respondent's failure to do what needed to be done
      within the relevant two month period was not unlawful and did not give
      rise to a breach of Dublin III. Following KF, the default position was
      that the UK was responsible. The failure to contact the LA, in breach
      of Home Office Policy, did not amount to an unlawful application of
      Dublin III. The applicant had to show the failures gave rise to an
      independent and self-standing breach of Dublin III.


  34. Mr Pennington-Benton submitted the failure to contact the LA, or to
      notify the applicant of the case against him were common law failures
      which did not amount to an unlawful application of Dublin III.
      Further, he relied on [34] to [46] of the respondent's skeleton
      argument and submitted that, on the facts, these individual
      allegations were denied.

  35. The respondent sent a proforma to IN asking him to provide detailed
      information to demonstrate the family link and this was taken into
      account prior to the decision to refuse the TCR. Thereafter, the Greek
      authorities sent further information, but this was still insufficient
      to establish the family link. Mr Pennington-Benton submitted the
      respondent acted reasonably and in good faith even though the
      responses were dilatory. The delay was unacceptable because there were
      periods which were unexplained. The respondent had to be satisfied the
      Article 8.2 Dublin III criteria were met and considered the best
      interests of the applicant. The process was right and proper but too
      slow. The Tribunal should focus on the delay.

  36. The applicant had a Greek lawyer, a social worker and regular contact
      with IN. The concerns about the family link were communicated and the
      applicant and IN would have been aware of the need to provide
      translated documents. The LA assessment was relevant to whether IN
      could take care of the applicant, not to establish the family link.
      The only breach of Dublin III was the failure to make decisions and
      transfer the applicant within the time limit. The reasons for the
      delay were not relevant because it was conceded the delay breached
      Dublin III. Following FA, there would be no unlawful application of
      Dublin III if the time limits had been complied with.

  37. Mr Pennington-Benton submitted that Dublin III did not give rights to
      migrate on a permanent basis and did not assist in the interpretation
      of family life. Dublin III assigned responsibility for determining an
      asylum claim. It did not determine family reunification and had
      nothing to do with adoption or marriage. If the applicant's asylum
      claim was refused, he may have no basis to remain in the UK. It was
      unhelpful to view the engagement of Article 8 through the lens of
      Singh and Pini. These cases were concerned with a recognised adoption
      process and were fundamentally different. In the applicant's case
      there was recognition of a temporary requirement to transfer him to
      the UK to have his asylum claim considered. Dublin III was not
      concerned with long term familial commitment and it was inappropriate
      to compare the applicant's case with cases about adoption. The
      applicant's position was a wholly transitory form of engagement of
      Article 8 and could be distinguished from Mambakasa on its facts.
      There was no question of IN replacing the applicant's missing parents
      save for a temporary period.

  38. Mr Pennington-Benton submitted that, in Mambakasa, Richards J was
      wrong to conclude that the unlawful delay would preclude the
      respondent's successful reliance on Article 8(2) ECHR because any
      breach of the claimant's rights under Article 8(1) could not be said
      to have been wholly 'in accordance with the law'. Article 8 was
      concerned with a positive interference by the state. In cases of delay
      there was a failure to make a decision. It was inappropriate to assess
      whether the delay was not 'in accordance with the law'. The Tribunal
      should adopt the same approach as in a case of maladministration in
      assessing the delay under Dublin III. The issue was whether the
      maladministration under Dublin III was sufficiently egregious to
      amount to a disproportionate interference with the applicant's Article
      8 rights.

  39. Mr Pennington-Benton submitted the Tribunal had failed to adopt the
      correct approach in FwF. If Ms Kilroy's submission was correct then
      any unlawful delay would render a decision not 'in accordance with the
      law'. That proposition could not be correct. Mr Pennington-Benton
      submitted the Tribunal should adopt the same approach as in Anufrijeva
      v Southwark LBC [2004] EWCA Civ 1406. There was a legal obligation to
      transfer the applicant but it was exercised too slowly. The issue was
      whether the delay amounted to a disproportionate interference with
      Article 8. It was not appropriate to consider the question of 'in
      accordance with the law' when there was no appropriate measure.

  40. Alternatively, the transfer decision could be treated as the
      interfering measure and it had been made too late. There was a legal
      and valid decision which was 'in accordance with the law'. The issue
      was whether the delay was disproportionate. In this case, however,
      there was no family life or it was of such a minimal and transitory
      nature that the delay could not lead to a breach of Article 8. The
      applicant had never met IN and there was no pre-existing family life
      or dependency. The applicant's relationship with IN was formed within
      two months of claiming asylum when he was housed in reasonable
      conditions and his basic needs provided for. The applicant had the
      assistance of a lawyer, a social worker and a UK legal team. He had
      regular contact with IN and had received psychiatric assistance for
      his difficulties. He had spent one year longer in Greece than he
      should have done. This did not amount to a breach of Article 8.

Applicant's response

  41. Ms Kilroy submitted there was no distinction between positive and
      negative obligation cases when considering the issue of 'in accordance
      with the law'. The central issue was whether a fair balance had been
      struck between the interests of the family in maintaining family life
      and the public interest in immigration control: R (MM Lebanon) v SSHD
      [2017] UKSC 10 at [43]. Ms Kilroy submitted 'in accordance with the
      law' was a useful analytical tool relevant to justification and
      proportionality. Whether the interference was 'in accordance with the
      law' was a necessary part of the analysis relevant to whether a fair
      balance is struck: R (Quila) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 45.
  42. Ms Kilroy submitted Dublin III was adopted to comply with Article 8
      and was concerned with the best interests of children and family
      reunification. It could not be said that the respondent had struck a
      fair balance when she failed to comply with the requirements of Dublin
      III and in doing so the respondent failed to respect the applicant's
      Article 8 rights for that period of time: BAA at [177]. It was
      apparent from ZT (Syria) that Dublin III is compliant with Article 8
      because only a compelling case would justify circumvention of Dublin
      III requirements. If Dublin III obligations are met, the member
      state's actions will comply with Article 8. If not, there will be a
      breach. That was the case here.

  43. Ms Kilroy submitted that family life can be engaged even when the
      parties have not met because of the potential to develop family life.
      In this case there was evidence of a strong bond between the applicant
      and IN, and evidence that the applicant's best interests had not been
      taken into account. Family life had been found to exist in all the
      previous Dublin III cases save for HN & MN and none of the cases
      concluded that Article 8 was not engaged. There was clearly family
      life in the applicant's case and a failure to comply with Dublin III
      was likely to result in a breach of Article 8.

  44. Ms Kilroy submitted there was no justification for the delay in this
      case. The respondent had taken double the amount of time to transfer
      the applicant. There was a very strict timetable aimed at protecting
      the rights of children. The applicant was 16 years old when he claimed
      asylum. In Mambakasa there was unintentional delay as a result of
      administrative failures. In this case there was a deliberate refusal
      of family reunification which was unlawful under Dublin III. The
      respondent unlawfully refused the TCR and failed to comply with her
      investigative obligations. These were not just common law failings but
      breaches of Dublin III and the ECHR: KF and BAA at [76] [80] and
      [117].

  45. Ms Kilroy submitted the letters refusing the TCR's could not be viewed
      as requests for further information or notice of the respondent's
      concerns. The respondent requested a new TCR under Article 17.2
      because there was no valid reconsideration request outstanding. The
      respondent's argument that the letters were part of a dialogue should
      not be entertained given the late abandonment of the argument under
      Article 29.

  46. In response to a question from me, Ms Kilroy submitted that once
      responsibility had passed to the UK, on 14 January 2019, the
      respondent was not entitled to continue to consider the requirements
      of Article 8.2 Dublin III. This was contrary to the findings in HN &
      MN, FA and KF. Member states must collaborate. Where the respondent
      was responsible, only if there was a positive risk of harm to the
      applicant could his best interests result in a refusal of his transfer
      to the UK. In this case, where there was automatic acceptance of
      responsibility, establishing the family link was relevant to the
      applicant's best interests not to the application of the Article 8.2
      Dublin III criteria. The respondent could only refuse to accept the
      transfer of the applicant if there were strong reasons that it was not
      in his best interests to be transferred to the UK. The fact that the
      applicant may not be related as claimed did not preclude transfer.
  47. Ms Kilroy accepted it was appropriate for the respondent to continue
      to establish the family link, but she did not accept that the
      respondent was entitled to refuse the transfer because the applicant
      did not qualify under Article 8.2 Dublin III. She submitted that from
      7 February 2019 there was information before the respondent to
      establish the family link.

  48. The respondent accepted she did not comply with her obligations under
      Dublin III. Ms Kilroy submitted the respondent breached her
      investigative duties which had contributed to the delay. The refusals
      of the TCR were unlawful because the respondent had failed to act as
      soon as she received the TCR and she accepted she could not lawfully
      refuse the TCR after the expiry of the two-month time limit. If the
      respondent could not make a decision within two months, she could have
      refused the TCR on the basis there was not enough information. She did
      not do so. The respondent did not tell IN the information she already
      had nor did she take reasonable steps to inform IN of what information
      she required. The proforma sent to IN on 10 December 2018 was
      insufficient to comply with the respondent's investigative duties: R
      (MK, IK and HK). The respondent did not notify IN of her concerns
      about the discrepancies in names and there was no onus on the
      applicant to prove the relationship.

  49. Ms Kilroy submitted there was no reference to the applicant's best
      interests in any of the respondent's evidence. The respondent's policy
      accepts that re- establishment of family links would normally be
      regarded as being in accordance with the section 55 duties, but this
      may not always be the case, and gives a non-exhaustive list of
      examples. None of those considerations applied in this case. The
      respondent could not refuse the transfer under Article 12(2) IR: HN &
      MN at [86] and [87].  The issue of damages could be resolved in
      further written submissions.

Conclusions and reasons

  50. The following matters are not in dispute. Default acceptance of the
      TCR occurred on 14 January 2019 and the applicant should have been
      transferred to the UK by 14 July 2019. The transfer was not effected
      until 28 July 2020. The respondent did not rely on Article 29 Dublin
      III or Articles 10 or 12(2) IR to extend time or argue that the delay
      was lawful. The respondent accepted there had been an unlawful delay
      of just over one year in breach of Dublin III.

  51. In his oral submissions, in relation to the concession, Mr Pennington-
      Benton accepted the decisions refusing the TCR were unlawful. However,
      if I have understood his position correctly, these unlawful decisions
      would not have breached Dublin III if the time limits had been
      complied with. Since the respondent did not seek to derogate from her
      responsibility and accepted an unlawful delay of just over one year,
      the legality of the decisions refusing the TCR was not material to the
      breach of Dublin III on the facts of this case.

  52. In any event, I agree with the Panel's conclusions at [77] of HN & MN
      that Article 12 IR operates in parallel with deemed acceptance of the
      TCR. The respondent was not bound to accept the transfer of the
      applicant under any circumstances and there was scope for the
      disapplication of time limits, provided it was in the applicant's best
      interests. The respondent's duty of investigation was not extinguished
      once responsibility was accepted explicitly in a decision or deemed
      under Article 22(7). If it was established (after deemed acceptance of
      responsibility) that the minor was not related to the claimed
      relative, it was unlikely to be in the minor's best interests to be
      united with that claimed relative in the UK. The decisions of 14
      January 2019 and 22 July 2019 were not unlawful simply by reason of
      deemed acceptance of responsibility (HN & MN at [86]).

  53. I am not persuaded by Ms Kilroy's submission that the respondent is
      not entitled to consider the requirements of Article 8.2 Dublin III
      once there is deemed acceptance of responsibility. In any event, the
      distinction she makes is not material. It is hard to envisage a
      situation where it would be in the best interests of an unaccompanied
      minor to be transferred to another country where he/she has no
      relatives nor an asserted family and private life within Article 8
      ECHR.

  54. Ms Kilroy accepted that there were two matters in issue before me:


        i) Breach of investigative duty and procedural fairness
           obligations; and
       ii) Breach of Article 8 ECHR/Article 7 CFR. I shall treat these two
           Articles as equivalent.

Investigative duties and procedural fairness

  55. The respondent has a duty to investigative the basis upon which the
      TCR is made and whether the requirements of Dublin III are met. The
      duty is to act reasonably and take reasonable steps. Fairness requires
      that the applicant must know the gist of what is being said against
      him and he must have an opportunity to make representations on issues
      and material being relied on: R(MS) and BAA.

  56. The respondent sent a letter and proforma request for information to
      IN on 10 December 2018. The letter made it clear to provide as much
      detail as possible and to provide all the evidence or information to
      prove the relationship. IN responded stating that he was the younger
      brother of the applicant's father. IN did not disclose the name of the
      applicant's father or the names of his parents. The applicant and IN
      were aware that they had to prove the family link and they were given
      an opportunity to do so.

  57. At the time the respondent sent the letter and proforma to IN, she was
      not in possession of the birth certificate or identity document and
      therefore she was not in a position to notify IN of any discrepancies
      or lack of translation. These documents were sent to the respondent on
      9 January 2019, five days before the two month time limit expired. The
      material before the respondent on 16 January 2019 was very limited.
      The applicant's birth certificate and father's identity document, even
      if translated, were insufficient to establish the claimed family link.
      The respondent's conclusion that the family link was not established
      was open to her on the evidence before her.

  58. On the facts of this case, the respondent's failure to contact IN
      prior to the refusal of the TCR was not procedurally unfair and did
      not amount to a failure to take reasonable steps. The applicant and IN
      knew the 'gist' of the case against them and had not been denied the
      opportunity to meet the respondent's concerns. The respondent
      considered the information in the proforma before refusing the TCR on
      the basis the family link was not established. This case differs from
      KF in this respect.

  59. The letter of 16 January 2019 notified the Greek authorities of the
      discrepancies and the lack of translation. It was accepted, in the
      factual and procedural summary to the applicant's skeleton argument,
      that the Greek authorities provided a brief summary to the applicant's
      Greek lawyer. The applicant submitted his Greek lawyer was not
      informed that translated copies of the documents were required. In my
      view, the letter of 16 January 2019 was sufficient to show that the
      respondent informed the applicant of the gist of the case against him
      and the need to provide translated documents. The respondent cannot be
      held responsible for the actions of the Greek authorities.

  60. The family document establishing the family link was sent to the
      respondent on 7 February 2019, but the translation was not sent until
      14 August 2019. I agree with Upper Tribunal Judge Blum in KF that the
      duty to take 'reasonable steps' did not extend to translating
      documents. The letter of 22 July 2019 maintaining the family link was
      not established was not irrational and there was no procedural
      unfairness in the decision making process.


  61. However, the respondent failed to comply with her investigative duties
      under Dublin III. There were periods of unexplained delay from 7
      February 2019 to 22 July 2019 and 14 August 2019 to 27 December 2019.
      The respondent could not be said to be taking all reasonable steps to
      investigate the TCR during this time. The respondent failed to liaise
      with the Greek authorities in relation to whether the documentation
      was sufficient or a DNA test was required. There was no explanation
      for why the family link was not accepted soon after receipt of the
      translated document on 14 August 2019. This unreasonable delay
      contributed to the respondent's failure to transfer the applicant to
      the UK within the Dublin III time limit.


  62. In addition, the respondent failed to notify the LA when the TCR was
      received in November 2018 and did not do so until 22 January 2020. The
      failure to contact the LA was in breach of the respondent's policy and
      could have assisted in establishing the family link (BAA at [80]). The
      failure to contact the LA until January 2020 contributed to the delay
      in transferring the applicant to the UK. The family link was accepted
      on 27 December 2019, but the TCR was not accepted until 1 April 2020.
      By this time all transfers had been suspended due to the global
      pandemic.

  63. Responsibility for the applicant's asylum claim passed to the UK on 14
      January 2019 and remained with the UK since then. The respondent was
      entitled to continue to assess the family link after deemed acceptance
      had taken place. Once the family link was established, on the facts of
      this case, there were no best interests reasons for not effecting the
      transfer to the UK.

  64. The respondent's failure to comply with her investigative duties
      contributed to the delay. It did not, and could not, give rise to a
      further breach of Dublin III because the time limits provided for the
      consequences of such a failure. The unlawful delay prevented the
      arrangements that should have been made in the transfer period from
      taking place within the time limit in Article 29. The respondent has
      rightly conceded there had been an unlawful delay of just over one
      year in breach of Dublin III.

Article 8

  65. The existence of family life is a fact sensitive exercise and the best
      interests of the child are relevant to the extent to which respect
      should be given to family life or whether interference with family
      life is justified. I accept it is possible for Article 8 to be engaged
      where the parties have not met or do not live together. The potential
      for development of family life is relevant and is not confined to
      cases involving children and their natural parents. However, in Singh
      at [38] Dyson LJ acknowledged that, unless some degree of family life
      is already established, the claim to family life will fail and will
      not be saved by the fact that at some point in the future it could
      flower into a full blown family life or that the applicant has a
      genuine wish to bring this about.

  66. A BIA was conducted on 29 November 2018 and sent to the respondent on
      3 December 2018. It states that the shelter [the Four Seasons Hotel,
      Thessaloniki] provides a hospitable and secure environment for the
      applicant and he feels safe there. The assessors considered that "the
      only thing that gives [the applicant] hope and a sense of happiness is
      his only relative, his uncle [IN], as he thinks that he is the only
      one who can understand him due to the common memories of his father
      and his family. He thinks of [IN] as they share a strong bond. In
      conclusion, it seems the only possible way to soothe the stressful
      symptoms of his (sic) and therefore to achieve a life of security and
      positive thinking for the future, is if he proceeds with the
      reunification with his uncle." The assessors concluded that if the
      applicant did not go "directly to a secure environment, his mental
      health and emotional health will be at high risk" and that he was "in
      severe need of being with a person that he trusts, loves and feels
      secure". The assessor emphasised the "need to act without further
      delay for his bests interests."

  67. The applicant expressed his views in the BIA as follows: "My uncle is
      the only family I have. We talk very often, and I know that he has a
      good life in England with his family. I have never met his children,
      but I am looking forward to be a part of their life. I need his
      support and I know that, with him, I will live in a supportive and
      secure environment. I cannot imagine starting a new life away from
      him. Greece is a good country that welcomed me. Many people here
      helped me, but my greatest desire always was and remains to be able to
      reunify with my uncle."

  68. In his witness statement dated 6 December 2019, the applicant stated
      that he thought he had met IN as a baby or as a small child, but since
      IN had left Burundi in 1995, he could not have met him. His parents
      talked about uncle IN so he thought he had met him. The applicant
      talked to IN over the telephone when he was 'a kid'. The applicant was
      able to contact IN when he got to Greece because he had his number on
      a piece of paper which his mother had given him. The applicant spoke
      to IN by telephone a few days after he arrived in Greece. He initially
      spoke to him on a daily basis and then on a weekly basis. The
      applicant also spoke with his aunt Mariam in Burundi by WhatsApp once
      a week at the weekends. The applicant stated, "This has been going on
      for so long now and I just want to start making a life in the UK with
      uncle [IN]."

  69. In the BIA, IN expressed his views as follows: "I love my nephew and I
      care for him. I feel responsible for him because he is a member of my
      family and I knew him when he was a baby. I don't want him to suffer
      anymore, struggling for the basics while at the same time I can offer
      him a safe haven. I can offer him the necessary living conditions." In
      his statement, IN stated that he contacted his sister Mariam in
      Burundi who sent the applicant's birth certificate, his father's
      identity document and the family composition document to him by
      WhatsApp and IN sent them to the applicant. IN has spoken to the
      applicant regularly over the telephone. They speak frequently about
      the applicant coming to live in IN's home. IN states, "as he is my
      blood and I have grown very close to him, I want nothing more than to
      look after him as my own son here in the UK."

  70. In his interview with Dr Hillen on 16 December 2019, the applicant
      stated that the staff in the shelter in Thessaloniki were treating him
      well, but he still felt unhappy because there was nothing for him to
      do and he wanted to live with members of his family in England. The
      applicant reported to Dr Hillen that he was talking to them almost
      daily on the telephone and that he had developed a close relationship
      even though he had never met them in person. He was talking not only
      to his uncle, but to his uncle's wife and children. He felt
      comfortable talking to them even though his cousins only spoke
      English. The applicant said his uncle often gave helpful advice and
      encouragement and helped him to "put things into perspective and
      tolerate waiting." The applicant became upset and agitated when he was
      asked what he would do if he was not allowed to join IN.

  71. Dr Hillen was of the opinion that the applicant suffered from PTSD and
      a moderate depressive episode. His symptoms were present before he
      entered Greece and there had been a marked worsening in the autumn of
      2019. The applicant had no complaints about his treatment by
      professionals supporting him in Greece, however, the denial of his
      relationship with IN and the delay were further negative life events
      which undermined any remaining trust in the world as a safe place and
      the benevolence of people in any position of authority. The applicant
      had lost two friends at the shelter. One was involved in a fight and
      moved to another provision. The other friend left to be reunited with
      his family. This aggravated the applicant's sense of isolation and not
      mattering to anyone.


  72. The applicant had started to form a relationship with IN in his own
      mind when he left Burundi and was making his dangerous and protracted
      journey to Europe. The applicant's hopes for finding someone who would
      be willing to take him in and see him as one of their own was
      fulfilled when the applicant established telephone contact with IN.
      The applicant had formed a close and supportive relationship with IN.
      Members of the same family can quickly form strong emotional bonds,
      even if they had not met before.

  73. The delay and ongoing separation from IN were significant factors
      responsible for the maintaining and worsening of the applicant's PTSD.
      The worsening of the applicant's presentation included the emergence
      of suicidal ideation. The current moderate suicide risk would increase
      to severe if the applicant received further negative decisions from
      the Home Office. The damage caused fell into the moderate (sic) severe
      category of psychiatric damage.

  74. Dr Hillen was of the opinion that joining IN in the UK would afford
      the applicant many development opportunities and allow him to make up
      for the lack of support which he experienced during his early
      adolescence. However, joining a new family at his age would be a
      complex and testing process which may require access to support and
      professional help. The risk of breakdown of this family placement
      could be significantly reduced if help was offered early on.

  75. Ms Kilroy submitted the applicant and IN have established family life
      by virtue of their biological relationship, their regular contact, the
      care and affection that already exists and the future potential for
      family life. The applicant was an orphan and his only chance of family
      life was with IN. To suggest this did not amount to family life was
      inconsistent with Article 8 ECHR read in the light of the CRC.

  76. I am not persuaded by Ms Kilroy's submission and conclude, on the
      particular facts of this case, the applicant has not established
      family life with IN sufficient to engage Article 8. My reasons are set
      out at below. In coming to this conclusion I have taken into account
      the following matters. The applicant's best interests are a primary
      consideration and it was in his best interests to join IN in the UK.
      Any unlawful action on the part of the respondent did not prevent the
      eventual transfer. The unlawful delay of just over one year resulted
      in the applicant having lost the opportunity to have been united with
      IN sooner.

  77. The applicant was 17 years old at the date of default acceptance and
      18 years old when he was transferred to the UK. IN is his uncle and
      they had never met. Their relationship started in June 2018, at the
      earliest, and they have had regular contact by telephone and WhatsApp
      since then. There was no pre-existing family life (Ahmadi and Singh).
      There was a genuine desire to develop family life and a potential for
      family life at some point in the future.
  78. On the totality of the evidence, the relationship between the
      applicant and IN (described by Dr Hillen in his report and in the BIA)
      was insufficient to establish real, committed or effective support.
      The concern and affection associated with blood ties was not enough to
      establish family life under Article 8 ECHR or Article 7 CFR read in
      the light of the CRC.

  79. In any event, there was no interference with the applicant's Article 8
      rights. The delay in transferring the applicant to the UK did not
      interfere with the relationship he had developed with IN since June
      2018. The applicant had regular contact with IN which continued until
      he was transferred to the UK.

  80. There was no interference with the applicant's private life because
      the applicant had accommodation and support at the shelter, he was
      able to maintain contact with IN, he could function on a daily basis
      and he was transferred to the UK on 28 July 2020. Although the
      professionals supporting the applicant were concerned for his mental
      well-being, the applicant did not self-harm. The delay did not result
      in the applicant being unable to achieve a basic quality of private
      life. The consequences of the delay were not sufficiently serious so
      as to engage Article 8.


  81. The applicant's case can be distinguished from HN & MN. In that case,
      the applicants were not living in a safe, stable or healthy
      environment suitable for two vulnerable teenage boys and there was an
      ongoing delay in making the arrangements for transfer which was
      detrimental to the applicants' physical and moral integrity. In this
      case, the unlawful delay did not prevent transfer, the applicant had
      professional support in Greece and he considered himself to be well
      cared for by staff at the shelter. He had contact via telephone and
      WhatsApp with IN in the UK and his aunt Mariam in Burundi. On the
      facts of this case, there was no lack of respect for the applicant's
      family or private life (physical and moral integrity).

  82. Further and alternatively, even if I accept that there has been an
      interference with the applicant's Article 8 rights (for the reasons
      given at [73] above), the unlawful delay of one year was proportionate
      in the circumstances. The quality and nature of the applicant's family
      life has remained the same notwithstanding the delay. The
      interference, if accepted, amounted to a delay in uniting the
      applicant with IN, his uncle whom he had never met. During the period
      of unlawful delay, the applicant was living in the Four Seasons Hotel
      in Thessaloniki where he was supported and well cared for. The
      applicant suffered significant trauma prior to his arrival in Greece
      and was suffering from PTSD. The delay resulted in the maintaining and
      worsening of his PTSD and the development of suicide ideation.
      Fortunately, the applicant did not harm himself. He had support from
      two psychologists in Greece and regular contact with IN.

  83. Establishing the family link with IN was in the applicant's best
      interests. This was a legitimate aim. However, the process took longer
      than it should have done. The unlawful delay did not prevent the
      applicant from joining IN in the UK, but it did postpone unification.
      I accept the delay has impacted on the applicant's mental health.
      However, the applicant's relationship with IN, established while the
      applicant was in Greece, was able to continue until his transfer and
      IN has provided encouragement and support during this time. The
      applicant was living in a safe and stable environment with adequate
      support for his mental health until he was transferred to the UK. On
      the totality of the evidence, a fair balance had been struck. The
      delay in transferring the applicant to the UK did not amount to a
      disproportionate interference with his right to family and private
      life.

  84. Given my findings above, I shall deal with the remaining points in Ms
      Kilroy's submissions very briefly. I am not persuaded by the argument
      that having conceded unlawful delay under Dublin III, the respondent's
      actions were not 'in accordance with the law' and the interference
      could not be justified. This point was considered in SSHD v R(FwF)
      [2021] EWCA Civ 88 which was handed down on 28 January 2021. I invited
      written submissions from the parties and have considered those
      submissions in coming to the following conclusions.

  85. I am not persuaded by Ms Kilroy's written submission that the judgment
      has no application in cases where the Secretary of State has not
      complied with Dublin III time limits. Laing LJ. came to reasoned
      conclusions relevant to the application of Dublin III and Article 8
      ECHR which were of general application and not limited by compliance
      with the Dublin III overall time limit.

  86. The principles which can be distilled from the judgment of Laing LJ.
      in FwF are:


        i) The obligations imposed by Dublin III are not a mirror image of
           the obligations imposed by Article 8 [137].
       ii) A breach of Dublin III was not ipso facto a breach of Article 8
           [139].
      iii) The mere engagement of Article 8 was not enough to mean that any
           breach of the provisions of Dublin III, or any incidental
           unlawfulness, amounts to a breach of Article 8 [143].
       iv) If Article 8 applies, it can at most impose a positive
           obligation on the Secretary of State [143].
        v) The 'in accordance with the law' criterion was not applicable in
           positive obligation cases: MM (Lebanon) [143].
       vi) Absent Dublin III, it could not be argued that, in failing to
           admit an unaccompanied minor to the UK the Secretary of State
           was interfering with his/her Article 8 rights because he/she had
           no right to be in the UK [144].

  87. The decisions of 16 January 2019 and 22 July 2019 refusing to accept
      the TCR were unlawful but had no legal effect. This 'incidental
      unlawfulness' did not amount to a breach of the respondent's positive
      obligation under Article 8 ECHR. Absent Dublin III, the applicant had
      no right to be in the UK. The unlawful delay of one year did not
      breach the respondent's positive duty to admit the applicant and a
      fair balance had been struck for the reasons given above.

  88. In summary, the unlawful delay, in breach of Dublin III did not breach
      Article 8 ECHR or Article 7 CFR. I decline to make a declaration.
      There is no need to issue a declaration that the respondent has
      breached Dublin III because the respondent conceded the point.

Damages

  89. Having concluded there was no breach of Article 8 ECHR, the claim for
      damages is only in respect of the respondent's failure to comply with
      the time limits in breach of Dublin III. I have considered the written
      submissions of the applicant dated 25 April 2021. It is the
      respondent's position that no question of damages arises because the
      claim failed.


  90. Ms Kilroy submitted that Francovich damages are clearly appropriate
      because Articles 3.1, 6, 8, 18.1(a) and 22 Dublin III and Article 3(2)
      IR give rise to individual rights and those rights were breached.
      Moreover, the breach of EU law adversely affected the individual
      enforceable rights of family reunification of unaccompanied minors
      which are given the highest priority by Dublin III. The breach was
      'sufficiently serious' and caused delay in reunification and access to
      asylum procedures, impacting on the applicant's mental health and well-
      being, for which he was entitled to compensation. Ms Kilroy submitted
      that exemplary damages were appropriate given the respondent's ongoing
      failure to accept responsibility for the applicant's claim.

  91. Ms Kilroy submitted the three conditions in Francovich were satisfied:


           1) The rule of EU law that has been infringed was intended to
              confer rights on individuals;
           2) The breach of EU law was sufficiently serious; and
           3) There was a direct causal link between the breach and the
              damage sustained.

  92. Ms Kilroy submitted the damages judgment in KF (18 September 2020)
      could be distinguished and was not binding. She submitted the
      respondent's unlawful decisions breached Article 8.2 Dublin III
      because the applicant was not transferred pursuant to Article 8.2
      Dublin III but following a further TCR under Article 17.2 Dublin III
      and the breach of the longstop provisions was much longer in this
      case. Alternatively, KF was wrongly decided and should not be followed
      because an applicant could only claim damages if the breach was not
      corrected by legal proceedings. Further, the existence of prescribed
      consequences for failing to make a decision within the relevant time
      period did not mean the applicant could not claim damages because
      those prescribed consequences were not complied with in this case. The
      respondent issued decisions refusing to accept the TCR after deemed
      acceptance had taken place which prevented the transfer of the
      applicant. A remedy was only obtained through a legal challenge under
      Article 27 Dublin III which led to the respondent conceding these
      issues.


  93. Further and/or alternatively, Ms Kilroy submitted the breach of
      investigatory duty contained in Articles 6, 8 and 22 Dublin III
      amounted to breaches of rights conferred on individuals. These duties
      were neither imprecise nor unclear and the Tribunal in KF was wrong to
      conclude otherwise, and to distinguish between substantive and
      procedural rights. The procedural safeguards that ensure the rights
      are effective were also intended to confer rights on individuals.
      Checks had to be conducted properly and within the timescales or the
      rights, arising from Article 8 Dublin III, would not be effective or
      compatible with the speedy allocation of claims or the protection of
      the child's best interests.

  94. Condition 2 was satisfied because Dublin III was directly applicable
      and the provisions relevant to this case were mandatory. The applicant
      was entitled to have his reunification claim investigated with basic
      standards of procedural fairness and to have his asylum claim
      determined in the UK. The respondent's unlawful actions led to an
      unlawful delay of over 12 months amounting to a clear and admitted
      breach of Dublin III. The infringement was a sufficiently serious
      breach of EU law. The Factotame test was also met.

  95. Condition 3 was met because the delay deprived the applicant of the
      swift determination of responsibility and access to asylum procedures
      to which he was entitled under Dublin III, delay in family
      reunification of over 12 months and associated instability which
      caused psychiatric harm and distress. The applicant was entitled to
      compensatory damages.

  96. Ms Kilroy submitted that exemplary damages were also appropriate
      because of the respondent's sustained failure to give effect to the
      applicant's EU rights over an extended period. The respondent's
      unlawful conduct frustrated the objective of rapid allocation of
      asylum claims and the reunification of an unaccompanied minor. A
      punitive response was appropriate given the respondent's breach of her
      investigative duties in defiance of a series of binding judgments. The
      respondent failed to acknowledge responsibility for the applicant's
      asylum claim until after legal proceedings were brought and the
      applicant's transfer was further delayed by the respondent's unlawful
      actions in defence of the refusal of the TCR.

Conclusions on damages

  97. There is no dispute that responsibility for the applicant's asylum
      claim passed to the UK on 14 January 2019 and remained with the UK
      since then. I found at [64] that the respondent's failure to comply
      with her investigative duties contributed to the delay, but did not
      give rise to a further breach of Dublin III. The respondent's unlawful
      delay of just over one year breached the long stop time limits in
      Articles 22 and 29 Dublin III.


  98. I am not persuaded that Dublin III confers a right to actually be
      transferred within the long stop time limit and therefore condition 1
      of Francovich is not satisfied. I agree with Judge Blum's conclusion
      at [46] of KF. My reasons are as follows.


  99. I am not persuaded that the decision in KF was wrong and should not be
      followed. The applicant's claim for damages was not contingent upon
      the applicant issuing proceedings but upon whether the conditions in
      Francovich are satisfied. The submission that a remedy was only
      obtained through a legal challenge had no foundation in fact and did
      not demonstrate an error in the application of Francovich. The
      respondent's breach of her investigative duty did not give rise to a
      further breach of Dublin III. In any event, those rights are too
      imprecise to be capable of conferring rights on individuals sufficient
      to give rise to a claim for Francovich damages. The points made by Ms
      Kilroy do not establish an error in the decision of KF.

 100. I am not persuaded by Ms Kilroy's submission that KF can be
      distinguished.  The applicant was transferred to the UK on 28 July
      2020. On the facts of this case, it was accepted responsibility passed
      to the UK on 14 January 2019 and remained with the UK thereafter. The
      respondent did not argue that responsibility had reverted to Greece.
      In any event, it was irrelevant whether the transfer was made in
      response to a TCR under Article 8.2 or Article 17.2 Dublin III. There
      was no breach of Article 8.2 or 17.2 Dublin III in this case. The
      transfer was made in breach of the time limits as in KF. The length of
      the unlawful delay was not a basis upon which to distinguish the case.



 101. The time limits in Dublin III reflect the aim of ensuring rapid
      processing of asylum applications and the consequences for the failure
      to comply with time limits is provided for within Dublin III. The
      failure to comply with those time limits was not intended to confer
      rights on individuals. Dublin III is concerned with the actions of
      member states. The applicant had a right under Article 8.2 to have his
      asylum claim determined in the UK. That right has been delayed but not
      denied.

 102. Accordingly, I conclude that condition 1 of Francovich is not
      satisfied and the applicant has failed to establish he is entitled to
      damages. Exemplary damages are not appropriate in the circumstances.

Permission to appeal

 103. The applicant applies for permission to appeal on five grounds. The
      Upper Tribunal erred in finding that:


        a. The decision of 22 July 2019 was not procedurally flawed;
        b. There was no family life sufficient to engage Article 8;
        c. There was no interference/breach of positive obligation under
           Article 8 given the accepted unlawful delay and the damage to
           the applicant's mental health which significantly inhibited the
           applicant's relationship with his uncle and his ability to
           develop and enjoy family life;
        d. The respondent's admitted unlawful actions were proportionate
           and struck a fair balance; and
        e. The UT's findings were inconsistent with HN.

 104. I refuse permission to appeal for the following reasons. The
      respondent's decision of 22 July 2019 was not procedurally flawed. The
      applicant was aware of the need to provide translations and failed to
      do so until 14 August 2019. In any event, this finding was not
      material because any procedural unfairness did not give rise to a
      separate breach of Article 8 ECHR. The unlawful delay was conceded.


 105. There was no arguable error of law my assessment of Article 8. On the
      facts, there was no family life, but in any event, there was no
      interference with the Applicant's family and private life because the
      status quo was maintained notwithstanding the unlawful delay. Given
      the nature and quality of the applicant's family and private life, if
      accepted, and taking into account all relevant circumstances, the
      delay was proportionate. HN could be distinguished on its facts and
      was not binding.

Costs

 106. The applicant has succeeded in establishing unlawful delay. The
      respondent conceded this issue on the day of the hearing. Thereafter
      the applicant's claims were dismissed. The respondent's breach of her
      investigative duties contributed to the delay and did not give rise to
      a separate breach of Dublin III. Accordingly, the applicant is
      entitled to his reasonable costs up to and including the day of
      hearing on 9 November 2020. The cost of the hearing having already
      been incurred by the time of the concession. The applicant to pay the
      respondent's reasonable costs from 10 November 2020 to date.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family.  This direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                                  J Frances
            Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
ANNEX A



Dublin III



Article 2 (h) - A relative for the purposes of Article 8.2 includes an
uncle



Article 8 - Minors

1.    Where the applicant is an unaccompanied minor, the Member State
      responsible shall be that where a family member or a sibling of the
      unaccompanied minor is legally present, provided that it is in the
      best interests of the minor. Where the applicant is a married minor
      whose spouse is not legally present on the territory of the Member
      States, the Member State responsible shall be the Member State where
      the father, mother or other adult responsible for the minor, whether
      by law or by the practice of that Member State, or sibling is legally
      present.

2.    Where the applicant is an unaccompanied minor who has a relative who
      is legally present in another Member State and where it is
      established, based on an individual examination, that the relative can
      take care of him or her, that Member State shall unite the minor with
      his or her relative and shall be the Member State responsible,
      provided that it is in the best interests of the minor.



Article 21 - Submitting a take-charge request

1.    Where a Member State with which an application for international
      protection has been lodged considers that another Member State is
      responsible for examining the application, it may, as quickly as
      possible and in any event within three months of the date on which the
      application was lodged within the meaning of Article 20(2), request
      that other Member State to take charge of the Applicant

      Notwithstanding the first sub-paragraph, in the case of a Eurodac hit
      with data recorded pursuant to Article 14 of Regulation (EU) No
      603/2013, the request shall be sent within two months of receiving
      that hit pursuant to Article 15(2) of that Regulation.

      Where the request to take charge of an applicant is not made within
      the periods laid down in the first and second subparagraphs,
      responsibility for examining the application for international
      protection shall lie with the Member State in which the application
      was lodged.

2.    The requesting Member State may ask for an urgent reply in cases
      where the application for international protection was lodged after
      leave to enter or remain was refused, after an arrest for an unlawful
      stay or after the service or execution of a removal order. The request
      shall state the reasons warranting an urgent reply and the period
      within which a reply is expected. That period shall be at least one
      week.





Article 22 - Replying to a take charge request

1.    The requested Member State shall make the necessary checks, and shall
      give a decision on the request to take charge of an applicant within
      two months of receipt of the request.

      ...

4.    The requirement of proof should not exceed what is necessary for the
      proper application of this Regulation.

5.    If there is no formal proof, the requested Member State shall
      acknowledge its responsibility if the circumstantial evidence is
      coherent, verifiable and sufficiently detailed to establish
      responsibility.

6.    Where the requesting Member State has pleaded urgency in accordance
      with the provisions of Article 21(2), the requested Member State shall
      make every effort to comply with the time limit requested. In
      exceptional cases, where it can be demonstrated that the examination
      of a request for taking charge of an applicant is particularly
      complex, the requested Member State may give its reply after the time
      limit requested, but in any event within one month. In such situations
      the requested Member State must communicate its decision to postpone a
      reply to the requesting Member State within the time limit originally
      requested.

7.    Failure to act within the two-month period mentioned in paragraph 1
      and the one-month period mentioned in paragraph 6 shall be tantamount
      to accepting the request, and entail the obligation to take charge of
      the person, including the obligation to provide for proper
      arrangements for arrival.



Article 29 - Modalities and time limits

1.    The transfer of the applicant or of another person as referred to in
      Article 18(1)(c) or (d) from the requesting Member State to the Member
      State responsible shall be carried out in accordance with the national
      law of the requesting Member State, after consultation between the
      Member States concerned, as soon as practically possible, and at the
      latest within six months of acceptance of the request by another
      Member State to take charge or to take back the person concerned or of
      the final decision on an appeal or review where there is a suspensive
      effect in accordance with Article 27(3).

2.    Where the transfer does not take place within the six months' time
      limit, the Member State responsible shall be relieved of its
      obligations to take charge or to take back the person concerned, and
      responsibility shall then be transferred to the requesting Member
      State. This time limit may be extended up to a maximum of one year if
      the transfer could not be carried out due to imprisonment of the
      person concerned or up to a maximum of eighteen months if the person
      concerned absconds.





The relevant provisions of the Implementing Regulation 1560/2003 (as
amended by Regulation 118/2014)

Article 8(1) - Co-operation on transfers

It is the obligation of the Member State responsible to allow the asylum
seeker's transfer to take place and to ensure that no obstacles are put in
his way.

Article 10 - Transfer following default acceptance

   1) Where... the requested Member State is deemed to have accepted a
      request to take charge ... the requesting Member State shall initiate
      consultations needed to organise transfer.

   2) If asked to do so by the Member State, the Member State must confirm
      in writing, without delay, that it acknowledges its responsibility as
      a result of its failure to reply within the time limit. The Member
      State responsible shall take the necessary steps to determine the
      asylum seeker's place of arrival as quickly as possible and, where
      applicable, agree with the requesting Member State the time of arrival
      and the practical details of the handover to the competent
      authorities.

Article 12 - Unaccompanied minors

(2)   The fact that the duration of procedures for placing a minor may lead
      to a failure to observe the time limits set in Article 22(1) and (6)
      and 29(2) of [Dublin III] shall not necessarily be an obstacle to
      continuing the procedure for determining the Member State responsible
      for carrying out a transfer.

(6)   The requested Member State shall endeavour to reply within four weeks
      from the receipt of the request [to exchange information]. Where
      compelling evidence indicates that further investigations would lead
      to more relevant information, the requested Member State will inform
      the requesting Member State that two additional weeks are needed. The
      request for information shall be carried out ensuring full compliance
      with the deadlines in Article 21(1), 22(1) etc of Dublin III.



Home Office Policy on Dublin III (November 2017)

Unaccompanied children: notifying local authorities and or social services

You must ensure that both local authority children's social services at the
child's point of entry and where the child's family member, sibling or
relative reside are notified of the transfer request under the Dublin III
Regulation. This must be done as soon as possible after the formal request
to take charge is received from the requesting State.

You must engage the local authorities' children's social services
throughout the process, seeking their advice in every case.


