

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/7460/2016


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







               The Queen on the application of Gulpasa Cicekli
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                          Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr G  Lee,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Gareth
Coates Solicitors, on  behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Mr  R  Adkinson,  of
Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department,  on  behalf  of  the
Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on 3 October 2018.

      Decision: the application  for  judicial  review  is  granted  to  the
extent that the decision of 17 May 2016 is quashed

Summary of challenge

   1. The applicant challenges a decision  by  the  respondent  refusing  to
      issue her Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR) as the spouse of a  Turkish
      national businessperson who was lawfully resident in the  UK  pursuant
      to the provisions of the Agreement establishing an Association between
      the European Economic Community and  Turkey  (the  European  Community
      Association  Agreement  [ECAA],  or  "Ankara   Agreement")   and   its
      Additional Protocol, and who was granted ILR on the same occasion. The
      respondent refused the ILR application on the basis that Article 41(1)
      of the Additional Protocol (the 'standstill clause'), which  prohibits
      the Contracting Parties  to  the  Ankara  Agreement  from  introducing
      between  themselves  'any  new  restrictions   on   the   freedom   of
      establishment and the freedom to provide services', does not apply  to
      family  members  of  Turkish  businesspersons,  and  that   settlement
      applications from these  family  members  were  to  be  considered  in
      accordance with the Turkish ECAA Guidance, described as a 'concession'
      outside the immigration rules.


   2. There are two  separate  prongs  to  the  applicant's  challenge.  She
      contends that the respondent was not entitled to rely on  the  Turkish
      ECAA Guidance, which stipulated that the applicant had to have resided
      in the UK with her  spouse  for  at  least  two  years.  The  two-year
      requirement was in the nature of a rule and, as such, should have been
      contained within the immigration rules. Reliance on  the  Guidance  to
      refuse the application therefore offended the  principles  established
      in R (on the application of Alvi) (Respondent) v  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department (Appellant) [2012] UKSC 33, and the respondent
      consequently took account of an irrelevant consideration.


   3. The second prong of the applicant's challenge seeks to overturn R  (on
      the application  of  Aydogdu)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department (Ankara Agreement - family  members  -  settlement)  [2017]
      UKUT 00167 (IAC) (Aygogdu), a decision of the former President of  the
      Upper Tribunal. The applicant contends that the refusal to  grant  her
      ILR was unlawful as the issue of settlement falls within the scope  of
      the Ankara Agreement, and that the contrary view  reached  in  Aydogdu
      was wrong. The applicant argues that any  restriction  or  requirement
      governing the granting of ILR, other than that contained in  the  1973
      immigration rules, constitutes an  impermissible  restriction  on  the
      spouse of  a  Turkish  businessman  and  breaches  Art  41(1)  of  the
      Additional Protocol.

Background

   4. This judicial review challenge has a somewhat turbulent  history.  The
      principle facts however are not in dispute.


   5. The applicant is a national of Turkey. On 14 July 2015 she was granted
      entry clearance to  join  her  spouse,  a  Turkish  national  lawfully
      present in the UK as a businessperson under the Ankara Agreement.  She
      entered the UK on 26 July 2015 with entry  clearance  valid  until  21
      October 2015, this being the date that her spouse's  extant  Leave  to
      Remain (LTR) was due to expire.


   6. On 15 October 2015 the respondent published guidance  in  relation  to
      business applications under the Turkish ECAA. Under this guidance  the
      spouse of a Turkish ECAA businessperson could only be granted  ILR  if
      they had been living in the UK with  the  ECAA  businessperson  for  a
      period of at least 2 years. This guidance mirrored, for  all  material
      purposes, earlier guidance issued in April 2015.


   7. On 16 October 2015 the applicant's spouse applied  for  ILR,  and  she
      applied as his dependent. On 15 February 2016 the  applicant's  spouse
      was granted ILR. The applicant however was refused ILR as she had  not
      been living in the UK with a Turkish ECAA businessperson for at  least
      2 years. This decision was  maintained  in  an  Administrative  Review
      dated 13 April 2016  but,  following  the  service  of  a  Pre-Action-
      Protocol Letter, the respondent conceded that the  decision  dated  15
      February 2016 did not incorporate the correct refusal paragraphs.  The
      decision was remade on 17 May 2016. The respondent again  refused  the
      ILR application.


The decision of 17 May 2016

   8. The application was refused because the applicant failed to  meet  all
      the relevant conditions of the guidance,  which  was  described  as  a
      "concession outside the Immigration Rules that applies  to  dependents
      of Turkish ECAA businesspersons wishing to be granted indefinite leave
      to remain." The relevant condition  required  the  applicant  to  have
      lived in the UK with her sponsor for a period of at least 2 years.


   9. The respondent explained,


           You have applied for indefinite leave to remain under  HC510  as
           the dependent of a Turkish ECAA business  person  on  the  basis
           that you are entitled to do so under  the  'standstill  clause'.
           However, the standstill clause only concerns the  conditions  of
           establishment for those Turkish nationals who wish to set  up  a
           business in the UK. It is not applicable to  family  members  of
           Turkish ECAA businesspersons who apply for  settlement  on  that
           basis.


           Rather,  dependents  of   Turkish   ECAA   businesspersons   are
           considered as a concession outside the  Immigration  Rules.  The
           requirements of this concession are detailed at pages  65-66  of
           the Turkish ECAA modernise guidance, available  to  the  general
           public at:


           https://www.gov.uk/government/publications/turkish-ecaa-business-
           guidance


           Amongst the requirements that are set out in the concession  are
           that the spouse/partner of a Turkish ECAA business  person  must
           have resided with the sponsor in the UK for  at  least  2  years
           before becoming eligible for indefinite leave to remain.


  10. As the applicant had not resided in the UK as the spouse  of  an  ECAA
      businessperson for a period  of  at  least  2  years,  the  settlement
      application was refused.


  11. An Administrative Review dated 16 June 2016  maintained  the  refusal.
      The respondent concluded that the applicant failed  to  meet  all  the
      requirements  of  the  'concession  outside  the  immigration  rules'.
      Although acknowledging that ILR was granted  in  another  application,
      the respondent said he had considered the  individual  merits  of  the
      application and did not consider it appropriate to exercise discretion
      in the applicant's favour, and that an assessment had been  undertaken
      in accordance with the correct use of  the  guidance.  The  respondent
      reiterated that the standstill clause was  not  applicable  to  family
      members of ECAA businesspersons who applied  for  settlement  on  that
      basis.


  12. The applicant initiated judicial review proceedings on  6  July  2016.
      Thereafter confusion  arose.  It  was  believed  that  permission  was
      granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on 9 September 2016.  No  such
      grant of permission is however on the Tribunal file. Judge Canavan was
      aware that the (then) President of the Upper Tribunal was due to  hear
      a JR challenge (Aydogdu), which, according to the  respondent,  turned
      on the same point. Enquiries should have been made as to whether  this
      was the case, as directed by Judge Canavan, but there was some  muddle
      and it was believed that the current JR was stayed behind the decision
      in Aydogdu.


  13. Once Aydogdu was promulgated there was a flurry of  activity,  but  it
      soon became apparent that permission to proceed with the JR  challenge
      had never been granted. Upper Tribunal Judge King  refused  permission
      in a decision sealed on 6 February 2018. However, following a  renewed
      oral application,  Upper  Tribunal  Rimington  granted  permission  to
      proceed with the judicial review challenge on 31 May 2018.


  14. I am additionally aware  that,  on  6  July  2018,  a  change  to  the
      immigration rules provided by HC 1154  came  into  force,  introducing
      Appendix ECAA, and that fresh guidance came into  force  on  the  same
      date.  In  August  2018  the  respondent  proposed  a  stay  of  these
      proceedings to allow the applicant to make an application for leave to
      remain under Appendix ECAA, but the applicant declined  the  proposal.
      The new immigration rules and the new guidance are  not  relevant  for
      the purposes of determining whether the decision under  challenge  was
      lawful.


  15. I heard oral submissions from Mr G Lee, on behalf  of  the  applicant,
      and from Mr R Adkinson, on behalf of the respondent, at the hearing on
      3 October 2018.  The  oral  submissions  expanded  upon  the  skeleton
      arguments provided by both representatives. I most grateful for  their
      eloquent and insightful submissions.

Relevant law

 The Ankara Agreement

  16. The Ankara Agreement was established in 1963. Art 2(1) of the Ankara
      Agreement reads,


           The aim of this Agreement  is  to  provide  the  continuous  and
           balanced strengthening of trade and economic  relations  between
           the Parties, while taking full account of the need to ensure  an
           accelerated development of the Turkish economy  and  to  improve
           the level of employment and the living conditions of the Turkish
           people.

  17. Article 13 of the Ankara Agreement states,

           The contracting parties agree to be guided by Articles 52 to  56
           and Article 58 of the Treaty establishing the Community for  the
           purpose of abolishing restrictions on freedom  of  establishment
           between them.

  18. Articles 52 to 56 and 58 of the EC Treaty related to the right of
      establishment.

Council Regulation (EEC) 2760/72 (Additional Protocol to the Ankara
Agreement)

  19. The so-called 'standstill  clause'  was  introduced  into  the  Ankara
      Agreement by an Additional  Protocol.  This  prevented  Member  States
      introducing new restrictions on the conditions of access to employment
      in relation to Turkish nationals. It was signed in November 1970,  and
      the UK became bound to it on 1 January 1973.


  20. The 1st provision of Chapter II,  entitled  "Right  of  Establishment,
      Services and Transport", is Article 41(1). This provides,


           The Contracting Parties shall refrain from  introducing  between
           themselves any new restrictions on the freedom of  establishment
           and the freedom to provide services.


  21. Article 41(2) provides,


           The  Council  of  Association  shall,  in  accordance  with  the
           principles set out in Articles 13 and 14  of  the  Agreement  of
           Association,  determine  the  timetable  and   rules   for   the
           progressive  abolition  by  the  Contracting  Parties,   between
           themselves, of restrictions on freedom of establishment  and  on
           freedom to provide services.


           The  Council  of  Association  shall,  when   determining   such
           timetable and rules for the various classes  of  activity,  take
           into account  corresponding  measures  already  adopted  by  the
           Community in these fields and  also  the  special  economic  and
           social circumstances of  Turkey.  Priority  shall  be  given  to
           activities making a particular contribution to  the  development
           of production and trade.

  22. Article 59 of the Additional Protocol states,


           In the fields covered by this Protocol Turkey shall not  receive
           more favourable treatment than that which Member States grant to
           one another pursuant to the Treaty establishing the Community.

  23. Also  of  relevance  is  Decision  1/80,  which  was  adopted  by  the
      Association Council under the Ankara Agreement, which came into  force
      on 1 December 1980, and in particular Articles 6 and Article  13,  the
      latter being a "standstill clause" relating to Turkish workers.


  24. Article 6(1) of Decision 1/80 provides:
           Article 6
           (1) Subject to Article  7  on  free  access  to  employment  for
           members of his family,  a  Turkish  worker  duly  registered  as
           belonging to the labour force of a Member State:
           . shall be entitled in that Member State, after one year's legal
           employment, to the renewal of his permit to work  for  the  same
           employer, if a job is available;
           . shall be entitled in that Member State, after three  years  of
           legal employment and subject to the  priority  to  be  given  to
           workers of Member States of the Community, to respond to another
           offer of employment, with an employer of his choice, made  under
           normal conditions and registered with the employment services of
           that State, for the same occupation;
           .  shall  enjoy  free  access  in  that  Member  State  to  paid
           employment of his choice, after four years of legal employment.
  25. Article 13 of Decision 1/80 provides:
           Article 13
           The Member States of the Community and Turkey may not  introduce
           new restrictions on  the  conditions  of  access  to  employment
           applicable to workers and  members  of  their  families  legally
           resident and employed in their respective territories.

  26. The relevant immigration rules in force in the UK on  1  January  1973
      were those contained in the Statement of Immigration Rules for Control
      of Entry (HC 509) and in the  Statement  of  Immigration  Rules  after
      Entry (HC 510).


      Paragraph 35 of HC 509 states,


           The wife and children under 18 .... of a person admitted to  the
           United Kingdom to take or seek employment, or as a business man,
           a person of independent means or a self-employed person,  should
           be given leave to enter for the period of  his  authorised  stay
           ....

      Paragraph 28 of HC 510 states,


           A person who is admitted in the first  instance  for  a  limited
           period and who has remained here  for  four  years  in  approved
           employment or as a businessman or a self-employed  person  or  a
           person of independent means, may have the time limit on his stay
           removed  unless  there   are   grounds   for   maintaining   it.
           Applications for removal of the time limit are to be  considered
           in the light of all the relevant circumstances, including  those
           set out in paragraph 4.  Once  the  time  limit  is  removed  no
           further permission from the Home Office  or  the  Department  of
           Employment is needed to  engage  in  any  kind  of  business  or
           employment. Applications for variation of leave to enter with  a
           view to settlement may also be received from  people  originally
           admitted as, for example, visitors; but  permission  has  to  be
           limited to  close  relatives  of  people  already  accepted  for
           settlement. Particulars are set out in paragraphs 37-44  of  the
           Rules for Control on Entry dated October 1972 (HC 509).

  27. Page 66 of the "Business applications under the Turkish EC Association
      Agreement" Guidance (ECAA Guidance), of October 2015 stated:


           The applicant and the Turkish ECAA  business  person  have  been
           living together in the UK in a relationship similar to  marriage
           or civil partnership for a period of at least 2 years.

Aydogdu

  28. Aydogdu was promulgated on 8 March 2017. The headnote, reflecting  the
      essential elements of the Upper Tribunal's declaratory order, reads,


           (I) The settlement of migrant Turkish nationals and their family
           members does not fall  within  the  scope  of  the  "stand-still
           clause"  in  Article  41(1)  of  the  Ankara  Agreement   (ECAA)
           Additional Protocol as it is not necessary for the  exercise  of
           freedom of establishment under Article 13. Thus  the  status  of
           settlement in the UK for such Turkish nationals and their family
           members cannot derive in any way from the ECAA or its Additional
           Protocol;


           (II) Where a Turkish national who  exercised  rights  under  the
           ECAA has been granted settlement in the UK the  rights  of  such
           person and his family members are not derived from the  ECAA  or
           its Additional Protocol.

  29. The facts of Aydogdu are very similar to those in the instant case. In
      November 2013 Ms Anydogdu lawfully entered the UK pursuant to a  grant
      of entry clearance as the spouse of a  Turkish  businessperson,  valid
      until April 2015 (the same date as the expiry of her spouse's  limited
      leave to remain as a businessperson). In  August  2015  Ms  Anydogdu's
      spouse was granted ILR, but in September 2015 she and her  infant  son
      were refused ILR. The applications were refused  because  Ms  Anydogdu
      had not lived in the UK with her spouse for a period  of  at  least  2
      years, as required by paragraph 72 of the ECAA Guidance, published  in
      April 2015.


  30. It became apparent during the course of the hearing that the Secretary
      of State's stated position was at odds with his guidance (see  [13]  &
      [14]) and that, to the extent that the challenged decision  was  based
      on the guidance and paragraph 4 of HC 510, it  was  "fundamentally  in
      error"  as  the  decision  should  have  been   considered,   on   the
      respondent's analysis, under Appendix FM  of  the  immigration  rules.
      Having noted the fundamental error in the respondent's  decision,  the
      Upper Tribunal nevertheless  considered  it  appropriate  to  "provide
      important guidance."


  31. The Upper Tribunal heard argument, some of which  was  echoed  in  the
      instant challenge, that  a  settlement  application  from  Ms  Aydogdu
      should be determined by reference to the 1973 immigration rules rather
      than  the  current  immigration  rules  or  guidance  issued  by   the
      respondent. The Upper Tribunal additionally  considered  a  number  of
      decisions from the ECJ and the CJEU including Sahin  (Case  C-242/06),
      Genc (Case C-561/14) and Dereci and Others (European citizenship) Case
      C-256/11, and the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  Buer,  R  (On  the
      Application Of) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2014]
      EWCA Civ 1109.


  32. In its conclusions the Upper Tribunal stated, at [29] & [30]


           I consider that the first main principle to  be  distilled  from
           the cases considered above is that any EU Member  State  measure
           introduced post-1980 which has the effect  of  rendering  family
           reunification or the  enjoyment  of  family  life  difficult  or
           impossible may constitute a "new restriction" on the ability  of
           a Turkish national to work or to provide services or  to  become
           established in the Member State concerned. The  second,  related
           principle is that  family  reunification  may  be  an  essential
           element of a Turkish national's ability to  become,  or  remain,
           economically active in the host Member State  under  the  Ankara
           Agreement. In both of these scenarios the applicable stand-still
           clause may be contravened.
           In my judgement, the main question to be  determined  is  to  be
           formulated in the following terms:  could  a  refusal  to  grant
           indefinite leave to remain (i.e. settlement) to  the  dependants
           of a Turkish national who has entered  the  United  Kingdom  and
           established a business therein in  accordance  with  the  Ankara
           Agreement frustrate, or extinguish, the ability of  the  Turkish
           national to continue to do so? [Original emphasis]

  33. Having assessed the Ankara Agreement,  its  Additional  Protocol,  the
      jurisprudence of the ECJ and the CJEU, and domestic  authorities,  the
      Upper Tribunal concluded, at [34]

           The grant of limited leave to enter and  remain  to  the  family
           members of a Turkish national exercising  rights  will,  in  all
           cases  bar  the  most  exceptional,  suffice   to   ensure   the
           efficacious exercise and enjoyment  of  the  economic  right  in
           play. The higher, optimum status of settlement is not  necessary
           for  this  purpose.   In   the   language   of   the   governing
           jurisprudence, the grant  of  settlement  status  is  neither  a
           prerequisite to nor a corollary of the exercise of  the  primary
           rights engaged. There is no evidence warranting  the  assessment
           that only settlement will suffice to ensure that the  rights  in
           question can be efficaciously exercised. Nor is there any  basis
           upon which judicial notice of  this  detriment  is  justifiable.
           Furthermore, nothing has been identified in evidence or argument
           to warrant any  distinction  between  Turkish  self  -  employed
           entrepreneurs and Turkish workers.

  34. And at [35] the Upper Tribunal held,

           Thus I apply the principles in Sahin, Buer and the  other  cases
           noted above to  the  discrete  context  of  establishment  under
           Article 13 of the Ankara  Agreement.  In  particular,  there  is
           nothing in the Ankara  measures  to  suggest  that  the  heavier
           investment in the economy of EU Member States which some Turkish
           national entrepreneurs might  achieve,  depending  on  the  fact
           sensitive  context  of  individual  cases,  justifies  treatment
           preferential to that accorded to  Turkish  workers.  In  passing
           (obiter) there is  no  apparent  reason  why  the  provision  of
           services (Article 14) should be treated any differently.

  35. The Upper Tribunal then reinforced its conclusion by reference to  Art
      59 of the Additional Protocol. The President stated, at [36]

           ... Stated succinctly, it would be  incongruous  if  the  Ankara
           Agreement and its Additional Protocol were to confer on  Turkish
           nationals and their family  members  rights  superior  to  those
           available to EU nationals and their family  members.  Parity  is
           the most which, in this Article 59,  clearly  contemplates.  Any
           other conclusion is, in my judgement, confounded  by  the  terms
           and aims of the two main  Ankara  instruments  considered  as  a
           whole, basic principles of EU law  and  the  applicable  EU  and
           domestic jurisprudence considered above.

  36. And at [37] the Upper Tribunal observed,

           There is a further, subsidiary question: does the answer to  the
           main question formulated above differ if the economically active
           Turkish national has acquired the status of indefinite leave  to
           remain (i.e. settlement) in the  United  Kingdom?  In  my  view,
           where this is  the  case  the  economic  rights  of  the  person
           concerned derive from the  status  of  settlement  and  not  the
           Ankara Agreement.  The  fact  that,  historically,  the  Turkish
           national was exercising rights under the Ankara  Agreement  does
           not in my estimation alter this analysis. The rights asserted by
           family members of the Turkish national concerned - such as  this
           Applicant - depend upon  the  status  of  the  relevant  Turkish
           national.  They  are  contingent  rights.  It  follows,  in   my
           judgement, that the Ankara Agreement and its Additional Protocol
           have no application to the matrix of the present challenge. Thus
           in such cases the main question posed in [30] does not arise.  I
           agree with Ms Rhee's submission to this effect.

  37. The Upper Tribunal quashed the  respondent's  decision  based  on  the
      acceptance by the Secretary of State  that  Ms  Aydogdu's  application
      should have been considered under the then current immigration rules.

BA(Turkey) v Advocate General for Scotland [2017] CSOH 27

  38. The decision in BA(Turkey) was promulgated on 21 February  2017,  some
      16 days before Aydogdu.  The  reasoning  and  conclusions  reached  in
      Aydogdu are mirrored to a very significant  degree  in  the  Court  of
      Session's (Outer House) decision. This decision was not considered  by
      the  President  in  Aydogdu.  Both  representatives  agreed  that  the
      decision in BA(Turkey) is  not  binding  on  me  but  that  it  is  of
      persuasive relevance. The facts of BA(Turkey) were materially  similar
      to those in the instant challenge, as were the arguments  advanced  by
      the parties. A Turkish  businessperson  arrived  in  the  UK  in  2011
      pursuant to the Ankara Agreement. His wife and children joined him  in
      the UK in July 2014 with leave to remain until May 2015.  The  husband
      was granted ILR in October 2015 but the ILR applications of  the  wife
      and children were  refused  because  they  did  not  meet  the  2-year
      requirement contained in the ECAA Guidance.

  39. The Court of Session considered whether the Article 41(1) restrictions
      were limited to the economic aspects of the freedom of  establishment,
      and whether  settlement  was  a  corollary  of  establishment  or  was
      distinct and separable because of its primarily social component.


  40. At [49] the Court of Session stated,


           Although  it  is  correct  to  state  that  the  EEC  -   Turkey
           Association Agreement includes, in its  preamble,  reference  to
           the aspirations of the parties in the context of improved social
           cohesion, the principal stated context of the agreement is  that
           of accelerated economic progress, expansion  of  trade  and  the
           reduction of disparity between the economies of the parties, all
           with a view to the facilitation of  the  intended  accession  of
           Turkey to the EEC at a later date. Against that  background,  it
           is to be noted that the terms  of  Article  41  are  brief,  and
           limited in their scope to the freedom of establishment  and  the
           freedom to provide services. In that regard, I am satisfied that
           the character of the activity involved in establishment, in  the
           sense set out  in  paragraph  21  of  HC  509,  that  is,  by  a
           businessman setting up in business and thereafter operating  it,
           is primarily economic.


  41. At [50] and [51] The Court of Session held,

           It is accepted, rightly, that in this  context  residence  is  a
           corollary   of   establishment.   Were   it    otherwise,    the
           practicability  of  the  freedom  of  establishment   would   be
           defeated.  For  the  petitioners,  however,  the  argument  went
           further. It was submitted that settlement is a corollary of  the
           right of establishment, since, if the position were otherwise, a
           material   disincentive   would   frustrate   the   freedom   of
           establishment. That issue, in various contexts, and  to  varying
           extents, has been the subject of a number of  decisions  of  the
           European Court of Justice, analysed and applied by the Court  of
           Appeal in R (Buer), supra. On the basis of the reasoning in that
           decision (paragraphs 35 -  43),  which  applies  as  equally  to
           Article 41 as to the provision under consideration in that case,
           I am persuaded that settlement is not a corollary of the freedom
           of establishment, but that, rather, the nature of the  residence
           which is a corollary of that freedom is that necessary to render
           the freedom effective in the sense of allowing the setting up of
           a business and thereafter the maintaining of it. I do not accept
           that longer-term residence,  of  the  nature  of  settlement  or
           indefinite leave to remain, is necessary for that  purpose.  All
           that is necessary is residence of a character which subsists  so
           long as the  freedom  of  establishment  is  exercised,  and  is
           sufficient to allow the pursuit of that economic goal.  In  such
           circumstances, where a lesser grant of leave to  remain  may  be
           granted, the concern expressed in Dogan, supra, in relation to a
           situation where stable economic  activity  could  be  negatively
           affected by measures which made family reunification  difficulty
           or impossible, does not arise.
           On that basis, I find that the effect of  Article  41  does  not
           extend to affect measures relating to settlement  put  in  place
           since 1 January 1973. In consequence, it  is  correct  to  state
           that the content of paragraph 21 of HC 509, which  concerns  the
           economic activity of businessmen, is preserved  by  Article  41,
           whereas paragraph 28, concerning settlement, which was the basis
           of the applications  made  by  the  second,  third,  and  fourth
           petitioners, is not.

  42. The Court of Session did however accept the  argument  that  the  ECAA
      Guidance was a rule as it was a requirement which, if  not  satisfied,
      would lead to an application for leave to remain being refused.  As  a
      purported rule it had not been the subject of  parliamentary  scrutiny
      and offended the principles established in Alvi (see [52]).

Principles  governing  the  departure  from  a   decision   of   co-ordinate
jurisdiction

  43. Mr Lee invited me to depart from the decision in Aydogdu on that basis
      that it was wrongly decided. Mr Adkinson submitted  that  Aydogdu  was
      correctly decided and that I should follow it as a matter of comity as
      a decision of co-ordinate jurisdiction. I was referred to decisions on
      the 'comity' principle, in particular R v Greater Manchester  Coroner,
      ex parte Tal  [1985]  QB  67  and  Gilchrist  v  Revenue  and  Customs
      Commissioners  [2014]  UKUT  169  (TCC),  [2015]  2  WLR  1.   I  have
      additionally considered R(Jollah) v SSHD [2017] EWHC 330  (Admin)  (on
      appeal but not raising this point: [2018] EWCA Civ 1260)  and  Willers
      [2016] UKSC 43.


  44. I am satisfied, having regard to Secretary of State for Justice  v  RB
      [2010] UKUT 454 (AAC) at [39]-[47]), that the  doctrine  of  precedent
      applies in a like way to decisions  of  the  UT  when  exercising  its
      judicial review jurisdiction as it does to decisions of the High Court
      (the  exception  being  those  decisions  of  the  UT  identified   as
      "authoritative" by designation, either  as  starred  decisions  or  as
      Country Guidance cases). It is also clear that the High Court, and  by
      extrapolation, the Upper Tribunal (see RB  at  [40]),  is  not,  as  a
      matter of stare decisis bound by a decision of the High Court or Upper
      Tribunal but should  as  a  matter  of  'comity'  follow  the  earlier
      decision unless persuaded it is wrong.  In ex parte Tal,  Robert  Goff
      LJ (as he then was) said this (at p.81A-C):


           If a judge of the High Court  sits  exercising  the  supervisory
           jurisdiction of the High Court then  it  is,  in  our  judgment,
           plain that the  relevant  principle  of  stare  decisis  is  the
           principle applicable in the case of a judge  of  first  instance
           exercising the jurisdiction of the High  Court,  viz.,  that  he
           will follow a decision  of  another  judge  of  first  instance,
           unless he is convinced that that judgement is wrong, as a matter
           of judicial comity; but he is not bound to follow  the  decision
           of a  judge  of  equal  jurisdiction  (see  Huddersfield  Police
           Authority v. Watson [1947]  K.B.  842,  848,  per  Lord  Goddard
           C.J.),  for  either  the  judge  exercising   such   supervisory
           jurisdiction is (as we  think)  sitting  as  a  judge  of  first
           instance, or his position  is  so  closely  analogous  that  the
           principle of stare decisis applicable in the case of a judge  of
           first instance is applicable to him.


  45. In Jollah, Lewis J returned to this issue  at  [46]  of  his  judgment
      where, citing ex parte Tal, he said this:


           A judgment of a judge of  the  High  Court  is  not  binding  on
           another judge of the High Court but that judge will  follow  the
           earlier decision unless he or she is convinced that it is wrong:
           see R v Manchester Coroner ex p. Tal [1985] 1 Q.B. 67  at  81A-C
           and Police Authority for Huddersfield v Watson [1947] 1 K.B. 842
           at 848. The Privy Council has observed that  High  Court  judges
           are not technically bound  by  decisions  of  other  High  Court
           judges "but they should generally follow a decision of  a  court
           of co-ordinate jurisdiction unless there is  a  powerful  reason
           for not doing so" (see paragraph 9 of the judgment of the  Privy
           Council (sic) in Willers v Joyce (No. 2) [2016] 3 WLR 534). Such
           principles contribute to  coherence  and  certainty  within  the
           legal system. They are likely to  contribute  to  efficient  and
           more cost-effective use of resources as the same point will  not
           normally be re-argued at length and cost before  different  High
           Court judges.


  46. In Willers, a decision of the Supreme Court, Lord Neuberger  held,  at
      [9] (with whom the other eight Justices agreed):


           So far as the High Court is concerned,  puisne  judges  are  not
           technically bound by decisions of their peers, but  they  should
           generally  follow  a  decision  of  a   court   of   co-ordinate
           jurisdiction unless there is a powerful reason for not doing so.
           And, where a first instance judge is faced with a point on which
           there are two previous inconsistent decisions from judges of co-
           ordinate jurisdiction, then the second of those decisions should
           be followed in the absence of cogent reasons  to  the  contrary:
           see Patel v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  1
           WLR 63, para 59. I would have thought that Circuit Judges should
           adopt much the same  approach  to  decisions  of  other  Circuit
           Judges.


  47. There is no reason in principle why  the  same  reasoning  should  not
      equally apply to the Upper Tribunal.  Consequently,  I  should  follow
      Aydogdu unless I am convinced it is 'wrong'  or  there  are  "powerful
      reasons' for doing so.

The legal challenge

  48. The applicant contends that Aydogdu was wrongly decided. She  contends
      that Art 41(1) covers the grant of ILR (settlement) to the  spouse  of
      an ECAA business person and the respondent ought to have  applied  the
      1973 immigration rules in respect of the applicant's  application.  If
      those rules were applied, the applicant would be entitled  to  ILR  in
      line with that of her spouse. The applicant  notes  that  it  was  the
      respondent's  practice,   reflected   in   the   earlier   Immigration
      Directorate Instructions (IDIs), to grant ILR to the spouses  of  ECAA
      businesspersons until the recent changes, and that the ECAA  prohibits
      the imposition of a practice more  restrictive  than  that  previously
      conducted.


  49. In his skeleton argument and oral submissions Mr  Lee  identifies  the
      key question as being whether or not the imposition of a condition  on
      the grant of ILR to an ECAA spouse that was  not  in  the  1973  Rules
      amounts to a restriction on 'the  freedom  of  establishment  and  the
      freedom to provide services'.


  50. Mr Lee identifies four  principal  reasons  why  Aydogdu  was  wrongly
      decided:


   i) It fails to take into account the  limited  scope  of  Article  13  of
      Decision 1/80 and the proper context of the Court of Appeal's decision
      in Buer;


  ii) It fails to properly appreciate that the aims of the Ankara  Agreement
      go beyond the purely economic and include the progressive  integration
      of Turkish nationals and their family members;


 iii) It fails to properly take into account the effect of a refusal of  ILR
      in a case such as this and the effect on the ECAA Turkish national  to
      continue to invest and plan for the future;


  iv) It overstates the effect of Article 59.


  51. I will consider each of Mr Lee's four general arguments in turn.

Scope of Art 13 and Buer

  52. Buer concerned the scope and interpretation of the 'standstill' clause
      in Article 13 of Decision No 1/80, relating to the rights  of  Turkish
      workers to access employment. The appellant had been working in the UK
      for 4 years pursuant to the Ankara Agreement and  Decision  1/80.  His
      application for ILR was rejected and he was instead  granted  3  years
      further LTR. The appellant contended that he was entitled  to  ILR  by
      virtue of Art 13.


  53. In reliance on Sahin (Case C-242/06) the  Court  of  Appeal  concluded
      that Art 13 did not apply  to  Turkish  workers  who  already  enjoyed
      rights under Art 6(1) of Decision 1/80 (i.e.  those  who  had  already
      been continuously employed for a year). The Court nevertheless went on
      to conclude that Art  13  did  not  extend  to  the  imposition  of  a
      standstill in respect of conditions governing the right of settlement.
      In reaching this conclusion the Court acknowledged arguments based  on
      the integrative aspects of the Ankara Agreement, but  concluded  that,
      while residence was a  corollary  of  employment,  the  focus  of  the
      jurisprudence of the ECJ and the CJEU was on rights of residence  that
      rendered effective the  right  of  access  to  work,  which  was  very
      different from a right to settlement (see [40]).


  54. Mr Lee contends that, because of the limited scope of  Article  13  of
      Decision 1/80, which is only concerned with individuals who do not yet
      qualify for rights under Article 6(1), it is difficult to see  how  it
      could ever be relied upon to found the right of  permanent  residence.
      Although Article 13 of decision 1/80 and  Article  41  could  both  be
      properly described as 'standstill' clauses, it is crucial to be  clear
      what provisions  they  are  in  fact  'standing  still.'  There  is  a
      distinction between the worker and self-employed regimes and the Upper
      Tribunal in Aydogdu failed to appreciate the differences, a point  not
      explored in detail by the Court of Appeal.

  55. In Buer, at [15], the Court of Appeal made  clear  that  there  was  a
      distinction between the domestic regime applying to  workers  and  the
      domestic regime applying to those who are self-established.

        ... the Secretary of State operates a different regime in  relation
        to self-employed Turkish nationals. Under that regime (contained in
        Immigration  Directorate  Instructions,  Chapter  6,   Section   6:
        "Business applications under the Turkish-EC  Association  Agreement
        (ECAA)") an applicant may  qualify  for  ILR  if  he  has  spent  a
        continuous period of four years lawfully in the United Kingdom,  of
        which the most recent period has been spent with leave as a Turkish
        ECAA businessperson, and certain other conditions are met.

  56. Mr Lee submits that the Court of Appeal  did  not  fully  explore  the
      difference between the two regimes and that,  although  the  Court  in
      Buer confirmed that the standstill clauses  contained  within  Article
      41(1) and Article 13 of Decision 1/80 operated in the same way, it  is
      important to examine what they were standing still. The Court in  Buer
      made clear the limited scope of Article 13, being  intended  to  apply
      only to those who did not yet qualify for rights under  Article  6(1).
      As such it was concerned with residence up to the point  where  rights
      were acquired under Article 6(1), not with longer term  residence.  He
      submits that Article 41(1) was not so restricted.


  57. I accept that the respondent operated different regimes in respect  of
      workers under the Ankara Agreement and those  establishing  themselves
      in business, with the latter previously being entitled, after 4  years
      lawful  residence,  to  qualify  for  residence,  but  no  such  route
      available for workers. I also acknowledge that  the  reasons  for  the
      difference in treatment were not fully explored in the evidence before
      the Court of Appeal in Buer. It is unclear why the regimes differed in
      respect of settlement. The Court of Appeal did  not  however  consider
      that  the  different  between  the  regimes  could   assist   in   the
      interpretation of Article 13 (see [44]). In any event, the  respondent
      is now  clear  in  his  position  that  settlement  for  Turkish  ECAA
      businesspersons does not  flow  from  the  provisions  of  the  Ankara
      Agreement, and his position in respect of  workers  under  the  Ankara
      Agreement has always been that the standstill clause in  Art  13  does
      not apply to settlement.


  58. Nor am I persuaded that the differences between Article 41(1)  of  the
      Additional Protocol and Article 13 of Decision 1/80 are material  when
      assessing the discreet  issue  of  whether  settlement  rights  are  a
      corollary to either the rights  of  establishment  or  the  rights  of
      workers in respect of the conditions of access to employment.  Neither
      Article 13 of  Decision  1/80  nor  Art  41(1)  refer  to  or  require
      settlement for the protected rights to be efficaciously secured.  Both
      focus on the prohibition of new  restrictions  on  workers  and  those
      seeking to establish themselves in business without reference  to  the
      need for settlement. Although what is being 'stood still' under Art 13
      are the initial rights of workers to enter a Member State before  they
      become  duly  registered  as  belonging  to  the  labour  force,  this
      distinction is immaterial in  respect  of  the  issue  of  settlement.
      Moreover, the CJEU held, in Abatay  and  Others  v  Bundesanstalt  f�r
      Arbeit C-317/01; C-369/01 (considered by both the Court  in  Buer  and
      the Upper Tribunal in Aydogdu) that Art 13 was to  be  interpreted  in
      the same way as Article 41(1) as they had the same  meaning,  were  of
      the same kind, and had the same objective.


  59. Mr Lee additionally relies on the unreported decision  of  Mr  Justice
      Collins in Ustun (JR/15748/2015), given as an extempore judgment on 20
      June 2017. The facts of this case are, once again, materially  similar
      to those in the instant challenge and in Aydogdu. Ms  Ustun's  husband
      was granted ILR but she was refused  ILR  based  on  the  respondent's
      Turkish ECAA Guidance. Mr Lee relied  in  particular  on  [5]  of  the
      judgment.


           There is powerful jurisprudence from the European Court that  it
           is necessary that family reunion is recognised and  achieved  so
           far  as  those  who  are  exercising  rights  under  the  Ankara
           Agreement are concerned, and the submissions made to  me  by  Ms
           Daykin on behalf of the applicant are that the  decision  of  Mr
           Justice McCloskey does  not  properly  take  into  account  that
           jurisprudence. He relied for example  on  the  decision  of  the
           Court of Appeal in a case called Regina (Buer)  v  Secretary  of
           State [2014] EWCA Civ 1109. That case involved the settlement of
           someone to join a partner  who  was  settled  here.  It  is  not
           entirely clear whether the  partner  was  still  exercising  the
           rights  under  the  Ankara  Agreement.  The  Court  of  Appeal's
           decision was that her case fell outside the Ankara Agreement.  I
           am far from satisfied that that decision affects  the  situation
           of someone such as this applicant  who  was  joining  a  working
           husband (I say working, in fact he is a businessman and runs his
           own business) and therefore she falls more obviously within  the
           scope of the Ankara Agreement. However, Mr  Justice  McCloskey's
           decision covers such as her.


  60. Mr Justice Collin's description of Buer does not fit comfortably  with
      the factual matrix described  in  Buer  itself.  Mr  Justice  Collin's
      judgment, as it was given extemporaneously, does not contain the  same
      level of detail or analysis as that contained in Aydogdu. There is  no
      assessment of the jurisprudence of the ECJ/CJEU, and the reasoning  as
      to why Ms Ustun fell "... more  obviously  within  the  scope  of  the
      Ankara Agreement" is, with the greatest respect, opaque. Nor  does  it
      appear that the decision in  BA(Turkey)  was  brought  to  Mr  Justice
      Collins'  attention.  Ultimately,  despite  having  doubts  about  the
      correctness of  Aydogdu,  Mr  Justice  Collins  was  not  sufficiently
      persuaded to  depart  from  that  decision.  At  [6]  he  applied  the
      principles in ex parte Tal and explained that he was not  prepared  to
      say that the decision was so clearly wrong that he should regard it as
      one that should not be followed. Mr Justice Collins refused permission
      to appeal to the Court of Appeal.

  61. For the reasons given above I am not persuaded  that  any  distinction
      between the scope of Art 13 of Decision 1/80  and  Art  41(1)  of  the
      Additional Protocol is material. I endorse  and  adopt  the  reasoning
      contained in Aydogdu at [34].

The integration of Turkish nationals under  the  Ankara  Agreement  and  the
effect on the businessperson's ability to invest and plan for the future

  62. I will consider (ii) and (iii), summarised in my paragraph  50  above,
      together given the conceptual overlap. Mr Lee submits that the aims of
      the Ankara Agreement  go  beyond  pure  economic  ends  and  that  the
      progressive integration of Turkish nationals and their family  members
      was acknowledged by the CJEU in Dulger C-451/11 and Genc C-561/14.  Mr
      Lee relied in particular on [45] of Dulger, where the CJEU stated,


           Although it is true that, under Article 2(1) of the  Association
           Agreement, that agreement  has  the  purpose  of  promoting  the
           continuous and balanced  strengthening  of  trade  and  economic
           relations between the European Economic  Community  and  Turkey,
           the fact remains that, by providing in the  first  paragraph  of
           Article 7 of Decision No 1/80 for the possibility for the family
           members of a Turkish worker to join  him  in  the  Member  State
           where he works, the Contracting  Parties  took  as  their  basis
           grounds that go well beyond considerations of a purely  economic
           nature.

  63. Mr Lee submits that, in circumstances where the applicant was informed
      she had no right to remain and should leave the  United  Kingdom,  her
      economically active spouse faced a stark choice between  his  business
      and family life. It was important for a Turkish national  establishing
      a business in the UK, which included investing money, that  there  was
      certainty in his or her position  and  certainty  in  the  immigration
      status of his or her partner. Mr  Lee  submits  that  the  applicant's
      spouse, although now settled, did not 'exit' the Ankara  category  for
      the purpose of continued  residence  rights  of  his  family,  and  to
      conclude otherwise would be to rob Art 41 of its substance.


  64. Dulger was focused on Art 7 of  Decision  1/80.  It  involved  a  Thai
      national who married a Turkish national who was residing  and  working
      in Germany. Ms Dulger entered Germany  and  lived  there  for  over  3
      years, before she and her husband divorced. The issue was whether  Art
      7, which provided  rights  for  family  members  of  Turkish  workers,
      included a family member who was not a Turkish  national.  Dulger  was
      not concerned with the standstill clauses, and no reference  was  made
      to the standstill clauses by the CJEU. Nor was the CJEU concerned with
      issues of settlement. Art 7  related  to  family  reunification  as  a
      corollary to the rights of workers under Art 6 of Decision 1/80. It is
      not however in dispute that family reunification may be  an  essential
      element of a Turkish national's ability to remain economically  active
      under the Ankara Agreement (see Aydogdu, at [29]).


  65. I find force in the President's assessment of the terminology  of  Art
      13 of the Ankara Agreement, and in particular the  term  "guided  by",
      used  with  reference  to  the  rights  of  establishment,  as   being
      'striking', and his observation that  the  Ankara  Agreement  did  not
      purport to extend any of the three  core  Treaty  rights  (freedom  of
      movement of workers, freedom of establishment and freedom  to  provide
      services) to the Turkish population, and that "their function  was  to
      steer, rather than mandate" (see also Abatay, at [64]). The view  that
      the  principle  context  of  the  Ankara  Agreement  is  economic  was
      independently reached in BA (Turkey). I do not find the assessment  of
      the scope of Art 7 of Decision 1/80 in Dulger, which was not concerned
      with an  entitlement  to  rights  of  settlement,  to  undermine  this
      conclusion.

  66. At [37] of Aydogdu the President stated that, "... the economic  right
      of the person concerned derive from the status of settlement  and  not
      the Ankara Agreement."  I  find  this  is  an  accurate  statement  of
      principle. Once a person is settled, they are not restricted as to the
      type of employment they  can  undertake,  and  do  not  even  need  to
      continue to be employed or self-employed. There is no residue attached
      to the grant of ILR linking it in any material manner with the reasons
      for the grant. Contrary to Mr Lee's submission, I  find  there  is  an
      'exit' from the provisions of the Ankara Agreement once ILR  has  been
      granted.

  67. Nor am I satisfied that there would  necessarily  be  a  stark  choice
      faced by a Turkish businessperson granted ILR between having to remain
      in the UK to carry on with his or her business, and  having  to  leave
      the UK in order to maintain his or her family  life  relationship.  As
      long as there is provision for someone in the applicant's position  to
      obtain further leave to remain (or to return to  Turkey  and  make  an
      application for entry  clearance),  such  as  the  provisions  of  the
      immigration rules covering family life (Appendix FM), there  will  not
      necessarily  be  a  breach  of  that  family  life   relationship.   I
      additionally observe that, although it will be desirable to a  Turkish
      EEAA  businessperson  to  become  settled,   and   therefore   to   be
      unencumbered by restrictions on the nature of one's employment and  to
      have a more secure immigration status, it is  not  necessary  for  the
      businessperson to be settled in order for his or her rights under  the
      Ankara Agreement to be given full effect. The absence of  a  route  to
      settlement under the provisions  of  the  Ankara  Agreement  does  not
      prevent a businessperson from establishing  his  or  her  business.  I
      agree with and endorse the reasoning contained in [34] of Aydogdu  and
      [50] of BA(Turkey).

  68. Mr Lee relies on the previous IDIs, "In Country  Guidance  On  Persons
      Intending  To  Establish  Themselves  In  Business  Under   Turkish-EC
      Association Agreement", dating  from  September  2008.  This  provides
      that,

           Dependants already in the UK may be granted substantive leave in
           line with the main applicant if that  main  applicant  has  been
           granted leave under the 1973 rules.

  69. Mr Lee additionally contends that Article 41(1) prevents Member States
      from reversing a more relaxed provision even if the new tightening  of
      the provision does not make the conditions more  stringent  than  they
      were at the time of entry into force of the Additional  Protocol,  and
      he drew upon, inter alia, paragraph 93  of  Dereci  in  support.  This
      reads,

           Moreover, the Court has held that Article 13 of Decision No 1/80
           must be interpreted as meaning that a tightening of a  provision
           which provided for a relaxation of the provision  applicable  to
           the conditions for the exercise of the freedom  of  movement  of
           Turkish workers at the time of the entry into force of  Decision
           No 1/80 in  the  Member  State  concerned,  constitutes  a  'new
           restriction', even where that tightening  does  not  make  those
           conditions  more  stringent  than  those  under  the   provision
           applicable at the time of the entry into force  of  Decision  No
           1/80 in that Member State (see, to that effect, Toprakand  Oguz,
           paragraph 62).

  70. The principle described in the above extract, and  further  considered
      in paragraphs 94 and 95, is however  concerned  with  provisions  that
      fall within the scope of the standstill clause. The  principle  relied
      on in Dereci has no material bearing in delineating the scope  of  Art
      41(1) itself. If the conditions attached to grants  of  settlement  do
      not fall within the scope of Art  41(1),  reliance  on  Dereci  cannot
      advance the applicant's argument. The  fact  that,  even  for  a  very
      significant  period  of  time,  the  respondent   previously   granted
      substantive leave to dependants of EEAA businesspersons  by  reference
      to the 1973 immigration rules, has little material bearing on  whether
      he was legally obliged to have  done  so,  and  cannot  establish  the
      boundaries of Art 41(1) given its construction and the  assessment  of
      the decisions of the CJEU and ECJ contained in Buer.

Art 59 of the Additional Protocol

  71. Mr Lee submits, in relation to Art 59 of the Additional Protocol, that
      the respondent erred in comparing the provisions of HC510 for  Turkish
      applicants with the current EEA Regulations rather than the provisions
      for EEA nationals at the time of the  standstill  clause,  which  were
      significantly analogous to the position of Turkish nationals and their
      dependents in  terms  of  settlement.  He  submits  that  the  overall
      position of Turkish dependents was no more favourable than that of  EU
      citizens as there were a number of restrictions applicable to  Turkish
      dependents that were not applicable to the dependents of EU citizens.


  72. Mr Lee's submission  however  falters  when  one  considers  what  was
      decided in Sahin, where the ECJ drew on Article 59 of  the  Additional
      Protocol holding that, within the compass  of  the  Ankara  Agreement,
      Member States may introduce  new  restrictions  on  Turkish  nationals
      provided that the same restrictions apply also to Community nationals.
      The potential conflict between Art 59 and Art 41(1) was recognized  in
      BA(Turkey), but the decision in Sahin nevertheless undermines Mr Lee's
      contention that one must consider the position of EU nationals as they
      were in 1973.

Conclusion on departing from Aydogdu

  73. For the reasons given above I find that grants of  settlement  do  not
      fall within the scope of the standstill clauses. As I agree  with  the
      reasoning and conclusions of the Upper Tribunal in  Aydogdu,  and  the
      Court of session in BA(Turkey), I find that Aydogdu was not wrong  and
      that there are no powerful reasons for departing from it.

Whether the respondent is entitled to rely on the Turkish ECAA  Guidance  in
refusing the applicant's application

  74. The respondent refused the applicant's ILR application because she did
      not meet the 2 years residency requirement contained  in  the  Turkish
      ECAA  Guidance,  which  he  described  as  a  concession  outside  the
      immigration rules. The applicant contends that the respondent was  not
      lawfully entitled to impose the two-year residency requirement in  the
      form a policy as this offended the principles established in R (on the
      application of Alvi) (Respondent) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
      Department (Appellant) [2012] UKSC 33.

  75. I have no hesitation  in  concluding  that  the  two-year  requirement
      contained in the Guidance is a requirement that  operates  as  a  rule
      under the  Immigration  Act  1971  and,  as  such,  should  have  been
      contained within the immigration rules as  it  required  parliamentary
      approval.  It  makes  no  material  difference  that  the   respondent
      described the Guidance as a 'concession', or that a shorter period  of
      lawful residence was the requirement for a  grant  of  ILR  under  the
      Guidance than generally under the immigration rules.  The  requirement
      is self-evidently in the nature of a rule. This approach is consistent
      with the conclusions reached by Mr Justice Collins in Ustun, and  with
      the  decision  independently  reached  by  the  Court  of  Session  in
      BA(Turkey).

  76. I consequently find that the decision is unlawful and must be quashed.


  77. This is likely to be a somewhat pyric victory  for  the  applicant.  I
      note however that she may meet the requirements for a grant of further
      limited  leave  to  remain  under  Appendix  ECAA  7.1  and  that  the
      respondent has already invited such an application to be made.


Summary of Order


  78. The details of my order are contained  in  a  separate  document.  The
      judicial review application is however granted.




                   [pic]


            Signed:


                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




        Dated:         1 November 2018










Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3.


                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/7460/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







               The Queen on the application of Gulpasa Cicekli
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                          Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


                                    ORDER

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr G  Lee,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Gareth
Coates Solicitors, on  behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Mr  R  Adkinson,  of
Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department,  on  behalf  of  the
Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on 3 October 2018.

   1. The judicial review application is granted.


   2. The respondent's decision of 17 May 2016 is quashed and a new decision
      on the applicant's application shall be made within 3  months  of  the
      date of this order.


Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

   3. Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is  refused.  No  arguable
      error has been identified in  the  Upper  Tribunal's  conclusion  that
      issues of settlement do not  fall  within  the  scope  of  the  Ankara
      Agreement.


Costs

4. The order as to costs shall be as follows:


a) The Respondent shall pay the Applicant's costs of the Application  up  to
   and including 8 August 2018;
b) Each party shall bear their own costs after that date; and
c) The costs payable shall be assessed if not agreed between the parties.






            Signed:


                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Blum




        Dated:    1 November 2018










Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3.


