



                                                 JR/7367/2017 & JR/9066/2017




                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review







                       The Queen on the application of
                             (1) NXA and (2) NHN
                                                                  Applicants
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



         Before: Mrs Justice O'Farrell and Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


                                  JUDGMENT





Ms Shu Shin Luh (instructed by Elder Rahimi, Solicitors) for the Applicants
Mr Vinesh Mandalia (instructed by the Government Legal Department)  for  the
Respondent

Hearing date: 25th April 2018

Field House
15-25 Breams Buildings
London





   1. This is a claim for judicial review made on behalf  of  NXA  and  NHN,
      young people who arrived in the  UK  as  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking
      children. In each case the claim is  that  the  respondent  failed  to
      investigate, examine or determine their claims in  respect  of  modern
      slavery or for asylum within a reasonable time, having regard to their
      best interests given their age, vulnerability and the  impact  of  any
      delay.

   2. The relief sought by the applicants is as follows:

        i) a declaration that the delay in examining  and  determining  the
           asylum and/or trafficking claims is unlawful, in  breach  of  EU
           law, section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
           2009 ("the 2009 Act") and Article 8 of the  European  Convention
           on Human Rights ("the ECHR");

       ii) orders requiring the  respondent  to  complete  examination  and
           determination of the outstanding claims  within  specified  time
           periods; and

      iii) an order requiring the respondent to formulate a transparent and
           published process  or  mechanism  by  which  asylum  claims  for
           unaccompanied  children  can  be  considered  on  an   expedited
           timescale on the basis of an individualised assessment of  their
           best interests and circumstances.

   3. The respondent's position is that the claims are academic  and  of  no
      benefit to the  applicants.  NXA  has  been  granted  asylum  and  the
      respondent has offered a timetable for determining NHN's asylum claim.
      The issue of what constitutes a reasonable timescale for determination
      of asylum claims  is  fact  sensitive.  Any  wider  challenge  to  the
      respondent's practices and procedures for determining applications for
      protection  made  by  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  children  is  not
      suitable for these judicial review proceedings.

NXA Chronology

   4. NXA was born in Eritrea on 10 May 2000. On 11 November 2015 he arrived
      in the UK as an unaccompanied minor and was taken  into  the  care  of
      London Borough of Bexley.

   5. On 29 February 2016 the respondent carried  out  an  asylum  screening
      interview. On 3 May 2016 NXA returned his statement of  evidence  form
      to the respondent, detailing the basis of his asylum claim.

   6. For over a year, there  was  no  communication  from  the  respondent,
      despite emails from NXA's social worker, Kayleigh Jennings, asking for
      updates. It appears that at least some Eritrean cases were  stayed  in
      2016, pending a country  guidance  appeal,  which  was  determined  in
      October 2016.

   7. On 15 May 2017, the respondent replied to Ms  Jennings,  stating  that
      there was a backlog of cases but it was hoped that the claim would  be
      dealt with within two months.

   8. On 18 June 2017, NXA's solicitors, Elder Rahimi, sent a letter  before
      claim to the respondent. On 30 June  2017,  the  respondent  sent  its
      letter  of  response,  indicating  that  that  country  guidance   was
      available so that  consideration  of  the  claim  could  proceed.  The
      timescale indicated was that NXA would  be  interviewed  within  12-14
      weeks and an asylum decision would be made within 10 to  14  weeks  of
      the interview.

   9. On 10 July 2017 a case tele-conference was convened by the respondent,
      at which Ms Jennings expressed concerns regarding NXA's  physical  and
      mental health. The respondent indicated that  determination  of  NXA's
      case might be delayed until January 2018.

  10. On 24 July 2017 the  respondent  indicated  that  it  would  be  in  a
      position to progress the asylum claim  in  the  near  future  but  was
      unable to provide a timeframe for that process.

  11. On 9 August 2017 Elder Rahimi sent a letter before  claim  and  on  24
      August 2017 the respondent provided its reply.

  12. On 31 August 2017 the claim for judicial review was filed and issued.

  13. On 22  September  2017  the  respondent  filed  an  acknowledgment  of
      service, stating that NXA would be interviewed on 4 October 2017 and a
      decision would be made within 21 days thereafter. On  that  basis,  it
      was contended that there was no live issue  and  the  judicial  review
      claim was academic.

  14. On 28 September 2017 the respondent invited NXA to  attend  an  asylum
      interview and on 4 October 2017 that interview took place.

  15. On 10 October 2017 the  respondent  notified  the  applicant's  social
      worker that there were reasonable grounds to believe that he had  been
      a victim of modern slavery (trafficking) and at the end of the 45  day
      recovery period a conclusive grounds decision would be made.

  16. On 30 November 2017 the respondent informed NXA's solicitors that  she
      was unable to make a decision on the asylum claim until a decision had
      been made on the trafficking claim.

  17.  On  7  February  2018  the  respondent  determined  that  there  were
      conclusive grounds that NXA was a victim of child trafficking.

  18. On 15 March 2018 the asylum interview took place. On 19 March 2018 the
      respondent determined that the claim for asylum should succeed and NXA
      was granted asylum in the  UK  for  5  years.  On  1  April  2018  the
      respondent notified NXA that  his  application  for  asylum  had  been
      considered and he had been granted leave to remain.

NHN Chronology

  19. NHN was born in Vietnam on 8  March  2000.  In  about  March  2016  he
      arrived in the UK and was taken to  work  in  a  cannabis  cultivation
      facility.

  20. On 4 May 2016, having escaped from the cannabis factory, he was  taken
      into the care of London Borough of Tower Hamlets and  claimed  asylum.
      An asylum screening interview  took  place  at  which  NHS's  age  was
      disputed but the presumption was made at that he was a child.

  21. On 10 May 2016 the respondent made a reasonable grounds decision  that
      the applicant was a child victim of modern slavery (trafficking).  NHN
      was entitled to a period of 45 days for reflection and recovery, which
      expired on 23 June 2016.

  22. On 31 May 2016 the London Borough of Tower Hamlets completed  his  age
      assessment and concluded that NHN was 16 years' old.

  23. On 21 June 2016 NHN's solicitors  sent  a  witness  statement  to  the
      respondent in support of his claim for asylum and on 5 July  2016  NHN
      sent a copy of that statement  to  the  respondent  as  the  competent
      authority in support of the trafficking claim. On  19  September  2016
      the respondent invited NHN to complete a statement  of  evidence  form
      for children to assist with the determination of his asylum claim.  On
      17 October 2016 NHN's solicitors, Elder Rahimi, sent that form to  the
      respondent.

  24. On 9 December 2016 the respondent wrote to NHN, informing him that she
      would not be able to make a decision on  the  asylum  claim  within  6
      months of the claim. No explanation was given for  the  delay  and  no
      indication was given as to when the claim might be determined.

  25. Over the subsequent 9 months, NHN's solicitors and his social  worker,
      Karlie Jackson, sent letters, expressing concern that NHN's asylum and
      trafficking claims had not been determined and setting out the adverse
      impact of the delay on his physical and mental health. The  respondent
      failed to reply to any of that correspondence.

  26. On 20 September 2017 NHL issued a letter before claim.  On  4  October
      2017 the respondent replied, apologising for the delay and  indicating
      that, barring exceptional circumstances, NHN would  be  invited  to  a
      substantive asylum interview within 14 to 18 weeks.

  27. On 31 October 2017 the claim for judicial review was filed and issued.



  28. On 16 January 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge  O'Connor  granted  permission
      for the judicial review claim to proceed.

  29. On 12 February 2018 the respondent invited NHL to an asylum  interview
      and on 13 February 2018 detailed grounds of defence were filed.

  30. On 8 March 2018, NHN turned 18 years' old.

  31. On 13 March 2018 the substantive asylum interview was completed.

  32. NHN's representatives asked for time to make further  representations,
      which were made on 13 April 2018.

  33. The determination  of  NHN's  trafficking  and  asylum  claims  remain
      outstanding.

Broader basis of application

  34. The applicants wish to raise a general allegation of  systemic  delays
      to  the  decision-making  relating  to  unaccompanied   asylum-seeking
      children. Ms Luh, on behalf of the applicants, seeks to persuade  this
      court that it should grant wider relief, namely,  an  order  requiring
      the respondent to formulate a transparent  and  published  process  or
      mechanism by which asylum claims for  unaccompanied  children  can  be
      considered on an expedited timescale on the basis of an individualised
      assessment of their best interests and circumstances.

  35.  The  respondent's  position  is  that  any  wider  challenge  to  the
      respondent's practices or procedures  to  determine  applications  for
      protection made by unaccompanied asylum-seeking children is misplaced.
      Mr Mandalia, on behalf of the respondent, submits that  the  issue  of
      what is reasonable in any given case is particularly  fact  sensitive.
      Specific circumstances may create a particular  need  for  expedition.
      Similarly, the particular facts and  circumstances  of  an  individual
      claim may be such that more prolonged investigation is required.

  36. The court is not prepared to widen the scope  of  the  enquiry  beyond
      that necessary in order to determine the two  individual  claims  that
      are before it. The court can deal with the allegations  of  delay  and
      unlawfulness.  It is accepted  that  those  raise  points  of  general
      importance which can be ventilated  as  part  of  the  application  in
      relation to the two specific cases before the court.  However,  it  is
      not for this  court  to  provide  general  guidance,  or  to  grant  a
      mandatory order, regarding wider policy  issues,  or  to  require  the
      formulation of any particular policy by the respondent.

  37. The purpose of judicial review is to  maintain  the  rule  of  law  by
      ensuring that a public body does not misuse its powers or  exceed  its
      authority. The court is concerned with the lawfulness of the  exercise
      of power. It may quash an unlawful  decision,  policy  or  scheme,  or
      declare that the  absence  of  a  policy  results  in  the  arbitrary,
      oppressive or abusive exercise of power.  In  appropriate  cases,  the
      court may enforce an obligation of a public body by way  of  mandatory
      order. However, rarely will the court dictate to  a  public  body  the
      policies or guidelines that should be put in place as that  is  likely
      to trespass on executive or legislative powers.

  38. In this case the question is whether the respondent has fulfilled  her
      legal obligation to  examine  and  determine  the  applicants'  asylum
      claims  within  a  reasonable  time,  having  regard  to  their   age,
      vulnerability and the adverse impact of delay on  their  physical  and
      emotional health. To determine that question, the court does not  need
      to identify the means by which such  obligation  might  be  satisfied,
      either now or in the future; it is sufficient to consider whether,  on
      the facts of this case, the time taken to reach a  decision  has  been
      reasonable.

  39. For those reasons, as indicated in the hearing, we decline to consider
      the wider grounds of challenge  or  to  grant  the  general  mandatory
      relief sought.

Additional evidence

  40. On 16 April  2018  the  applicants  issued  an  application  to  admit
      additional  evidence,   comprising   witness   statements   from   the
      applicants, their solicitors, social workers and other refugee groups,
      and reports on general delays by  the  respondent  in  processing  the
      asylum claims of unaccompanied children. That application was  refused
      by Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson  on  18  April  2018.  The  applicants
      indicated  that  they  wished   to   renew   their   application   for
      consideration by this court. However,  in  the  light  of  our  ruling
      excluding the wider basis of challenge in this case, Ms  Luh  has  not
      pursued the application.

  41. Ms Luh does pursue an application for permission to rely on two recent
      statements by the applicants, that of NXA dated 8 March 2018  and  NHN
      dated 4 April 2018. No objection  is  taken  to  the  application  and
      permission is granted to adduce that limited additional evidence.

Whether the claims are academic

  42. Mr Mandalia submits that the claims are academic. In the case of  NXA,
      asylum was granted on 19 March  2018.  There  is  now  no  live  issue
      between the parties in respect of this claim for judicial  review  and
      nothing further that the applicant could achieve. In the case of  NHN,
      the respondent has agreed that an order should be made requiring it to
      make a conclusive grounds decision determining whether NHN is a victim
      of trafficking within 3 months and to make a decision  on  his  asylum
      claim within 28 days thereafter. Therefore, any public law issue  that
      arises in respect of the delay in making a decision on his  claim  for
      asylum also is academic.

  43. Ms Luh submits that the challenges by way of judicial review should be
      allowed to go ahead because they raise important points  of  principle
      as to the adequacy of the respondent's system for deciding  claims  in
      respect of unaccompanied minors. The points of law are not  restricted
      to complaints about individual delays and the negative impact suffered
      by the individual applicant. The delay, which has  caused  significant
      detriment to the applicants, is pervasive and impacts on unaccompanied
      asylum-seeking children across the UK. It would be a significant drain
      on public resources to expect each applicant in a similar position  to
      have to issue an application for judicial review. It is in the  public
      interest for the  issue  to  be  determined.  NXA  is  entitled  to  a
      vindication of the violation of his Article 8 rights and NHN  has  yet
      to receive an asylum decision.

  44. The court has discretion to continue to hear a claim  even  where  the
      outcome has become academic. However, the  court  generally  will  not
      determine a claim which will not affect the rights and obligations  of
      the parties unless there is good public interest for doing so, such as
      a discrete point of statutory construction or a test  case  that  will
      resolve a significant issue: R v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department ex.p. Salem [1999] 1 AC 450 per Lord Slynn  at  pp.  456  -
      457.

  45. In R (Zoolife International Ltd) v  SS  Environment,  Food  and  Rural
      Affairs [2007] EWHC 2995 Mr Justice Silber considered whether a  court
      should permit a party to pursue an academic point in a public law case
      at paragraphs [32] to [37] and stated that such cases  should  not  be
      determined by the courts unless there are exceptional circumstances.

  46. In the case of NXA, the substantive relief  sought  has  already  been
      granted by  the  respondent.  Cases  alleging  unlawfulness  based  on
      unreasonable delay are necessarily fact sensitive,  having  regard  to
      the legal obligations, policy guidelines, situation of  the  applicant
      and the factual circumstances of the case. The cases cited by  Ms  Luh
      in her response  to  the  respondent's  position  statement  concerned
      points of principle that the court was asked  to  determine.  In  this
      case, the applicants have not challenged the validity or  legality  of
      the relevant immigration rules or the policy guidelines applicable  to
      such cases. Rather, they require the court to consider  whether  those
      rules and policies  have  been  implemented  in  accordance  with  the
      respondent's legal obligations on the facts of this case. Although the
      NXA claim raises matters of public importance, such matters  that  are
      relevant can be raised in the context  of  the  NHN  claim.  In  those
      circumstances, no useful purpose would  be  served  by  allowing  this
      claim for judicial review and the court declines to grant any relief.

  47. In the case of NHN, the position is different. The substantive  relief
      claimed has not been granted or agreed by the  respondent.  There  has
      been no conclusive determination  of  the  trafficking  claim  and  no
      determination of his claim for asylum.  Although  the  respondent  has
      offered to consent to an order that provides much of what  is  sought,
      NHN does not accept that it is sufficient. Therefore, there is a  live
      issue between the parties and it is appropriate  that  the  claim  for
      judicial review should be considered on its merits.

Legal framework

  48. Article 18 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European  Union
      affords to refugees a guaranteed right to asylum.

  49. Article 24 of the Charter provides that children shall have the  right
      to such protection and care as is necessary for their well-being  and,
      further, that in all actions relating to children,  the  child's  best
      interests must be a primary consideration.

  50. Those guarantees are reflected in Council Directive 2003/9/EC (minimum
      standards for the reception  of  asylum  seekers),  Council  Directive
      2004/83/EC (minimum  standards  for  persons  who  need  international
      protection),  Council  Directive  2005/85/EC  (minimum  standards   on
      procedures for granting and withdrawing refugee status) and  Directive
      2011/36/EU (preventing and combating trafficking).

  51.  Section  55  of  the  2009  Act  requires  the  respondent  to   make
      arrangements for ensuring that  any  function  of  the  respondent  in
      relation to immigration, asylum or nationality  is  discharged  having
      regard to the need to safeguard and promote the  welfare  of  children
      who are in the United Kingdom.

  52. The statutory guidance issued to the UK Border Agency states:

           "Children should have their applications dealt with in a  timely
           way and that minimises the uncertainty that they may experience.

           ...

           There should also be recognition that  children  cannot  put  on
           hold their growth or personal development  until  a  potentially
           lengthy application  process  is  resolved.  Every  effort  must
           therefore be made to achieve timely decisions for them."

  53. Paragraph 333A of the Immigration Rules provide:

           "The Secretary of State shall ensure that a decision is taken on
           each  application  for  asylum  as  soon  as  possible   without
           prejudice to an adequate and complete examination.

           Where a decision on an application for asylum  cannot  be  taken
           within 6 months of the date it was recorded,  the  Secretary  of
           State shall either:

           (a) inform the applicant of the delay; or

           (b) if the applicant has made a specific written request for it,
           provide information on the timeframe within which  the  decision
           on their application is to be expected. The  provision  of  such
           information shall not oblige the Secretary of State  to  take  a
           decision within the stipulated timeframe."

  54. Paragraph 350 of the Immigration Rules provides:

           "Unaccompanied children may also apply for asylum and,  in  view
           of their potential vulnerability, particular priority  and  care
           is to be given to the handling of their cases."

  55. The material policy and procedures to be followed when dealing with an
      asylum claim by a child are set out in  the  respondent's  instruction
      documents: "Processing an asylum application from a  child"  dated  16
      April 2013 ("the 2013 Policy"), "Processing children's asylum  claims"
      dated 12 July 2016 ("the 2016 Policy") and "Children's Asylum  Claims"
      dated 9 October 2017 ("the 2017 Policy"). The 2013 Policy contains  an
      indicative timescale of 35 days for dealing with  asylum  applications
      from children but does not guarantee such timescale, which is  subject
      to intake, resources and the circumstances  of  the  particular  case.
      There is no indicative timescale  in  the  2016  Policy  or  the  2017
      Policy.

  56. The "Victims of modern slavery - Competent Authority  guidance"  dated
      21 March 2016 sets out the process to be followed to establish whether
      a person  is  a  victim  of  modern  slavery,  including  trafficking.
      Initially, a reasonable grounds decision is made to establish  whether
      someone is a  potential  victim.  Subsequently  a  conclusive  grounds
      decision is made on whether they are in fact a victim. The expectation
      is that  the  competent  authority  will  make  a  reasonable  grounds
      decision within 5 working days of a referral to the National  Referral
      Mechanism. A reasonable grounds decision triggers  a  45-day  recovery
      and reflection period. The timescale indicated in the guidance is:

           "The expectation is that a conclusive grounds decision  will  be
           made as soon as possible following day 45 of  the  recovery  and
           reflection period. There is  no  target  to  make  a  conclusive
           grounds decision within 45 days.  The  timescale  for  making  a
           conclusive  grounds  decision  will  be   based   on   all   the
           circumstances of case.

           ...

           If they cannot make a conclusive grounds decision based  on  the
           evidence available, they must gather evidence  or  make  further
           enquiries during the 45 day recovery and reflection period.

           ...

           The Home Office may make a positive decision on an asylum  claim
           whilst a person  is  being  considered  under  the  NRM  process
           although it is not obliged to do so.

           The Home Office should not make  [a]  negative  decision  on  an
           asylum claim whilst a person is being considered under  the  NRM
           process. Once a conclusive grounds decision has been taken,  any
           outstanding claim for asylum should be decided."

Applicable legal principles

  57. There  is  a  public  law  duty  on  the  respondents  to  decide  any
      application for asylum as soon as possible  and  within  a  reasonable
      time: Paragraph 333A of the Immigration  Rules;  R  (FH  &  others)  v
      Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2007]  EWHC  1571  per
      Collins J at paragraphs [6] to [11].

  58. The indicative timescales in the respondent's published policies  are:
      (i) for determination of an asylum  claim,  6  months;  and  (ii)  for
      determination of a trafficking claim,  45  days  from  the  reasonable
      grounds decision.

  59. Those time limits are  not  fixed  and  there  can  be  no  legitimate
      expectation that a decision in a given case will be made within a  set
      timescale: R (S) v Secretary of State for  the  home  Department  2007
      EWCA Civ. 546 per Carnwath LJ at paragraph [51].

  60. In R (FH & others) v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      (above) Collins J stated at paragraph [8]:

           "No doubt, delays of 12  months  or  more  in  dealing  with  an
           initial claim to asylum  may  well  need  an  explanation,  but,
           provided the approach of the defendant was  based  on  a  policy
           which was fair and applied consistently, such delays  could  not
           be regarded as unlawful."

  61. However, in those cases the court was not considering the position  of
      unaccompanied children who make asylum claims. Children have different
      timescales to adults and any delay in making decisions affecting their
      lives is likely to be detrimental to their wellbeing.  The  reasonable
      time limit for determination of an asylum claim affecting a  child  is
      likely to be shorter than the reasonable time limit applicable  to  an
      adult. This is recognised by the statutory guidance, which  emphasises
      the need for timely decisions to be made in the case of children.

  62. Section 55 of the 2009 Act imposes an obligation on the respondent  to
      have regard to the need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of
      children when taking any asylum decisions. In  such  cases,  the  best
      interest of the child is a  primary  consideration:  ZH  (Tanzania)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011]  UKSC  per  Baroness
      Hale  at  paragraph  [23],  although  not  always  the  only,  primary
      consideration:  Zoumbas  v  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
      Department [2013] UKSC 74 per Lord Hodge, giving the judgment  of  the
      court, at paragraph [10].

  63. Unaccompanied  children  who  apply  for  asylum  are  a  particularly
      vulnerable group. Like all children, they need security and  stability
      if they are to thrive. Until a  determination  has  been  made  as  to
      whether they will remain in  the  United  Kingdom  or  be  removed  to
      another country, long-term decisions about their care  and  education,
      which might provide such security and stability, can't be taken. Their
      special vulnerability is recognised by the respondent in paragraph 350
      of the Immigration Rules, which provides that priority and care should
      be given to the handling of their cases.

Delay in determining NHN's claim

  64. NHN made his claim for asylum in May 2016. By the end of May  2016,  a
      reasonable grounds decision had been made that  he  was  a  victim  of
      trafficking and that he was  a  child.  Despite  that,  no  conclusive
      grounds decision was made and arrangements were not made  for  him  to
      attend an asylum interview until March 2018, nearly 2 years later, and
      after his 18th birthday.

  65. The indicative timescale of 6 months for the asylum decision has  been
      exceeded by a substantial margin and is continuing. In the absence  of
      good explanation, based on policy  considerations  or  the  particular
      facts of the case, it appears to be excessive and unreasonable.

  66. It is recognised that there are pressures on the respondent caused  by
      the  volume  of  applications  and  limited  resources.  However,   no
      explanation has been given for the delay in progressing his claim.  No
      explanation has been given for the failure to  prioritise  his  claim,
      given his age. No explanation has been given for the  failure  on  the
      part of the respondent to  reply  to  correspondence  or  provide  any
      information to NHN between December 2016 and October 2017.

  67. NHN needs to know whether he will remain in the UK  or  sent  back  to
      Vietnam. That requires a decision to be made on his asylum claim.  The
      delay in this case is excessive and unreasonable.

Conclusion

  68. For the above reasons, we are satisfied that the respondent's  failure
      to reach a decision in respect of NHN's trafficking and asylum  claims
      is unlawful. We grant the following relief:

        i) a declaration that the delay in examining and determining  NHN's
           asylum and/or trafficking claims is unlawful, in  breach  of  EU
           law, section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act
           2009 and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights;

       ii) an order requiring the respondent to  complete  examination  and
           determination of NHN's trafficking claim within 28 days and  for
           the  determination  of  NHN's  asylum  claim  within   14   days
           thereafter.







