
IAC-FH-LW-V4

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                                                JR/7887/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                                18 July 2019


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                           md safiul alam topadar
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr M Biggs, instructed by Hubers Law Solicitors appeared on  behalf  of  the
Applicant.

Mr W Hansen, instructed by  the  Government  Legal  Department  appeared  on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    JUDGE allen:


1.   The applicant challenges  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  of  27
    September 2018 refusing to grant him leave to remain under  Tier  2,  a
    decision which was upheld on administrative review on 31 October  2018.
    The applicant also seeks a declaration that his current status is  that
    of a person with section 3C leave.

2.   Permission to apply for judicial review was granted at an oral  hearing
    by Lang J on 7 March 2019.

3.   There are two grounds of challenge.  The first of  these  concerns  the
    nature of administrative review and its relationship with section 3C of
    the Immigration Act 1971.  The second issue is a  point  on  procedural
    fairness.

Chronology

4.   The relevant facts  and  dates  in  this  case  are  as  follows.   The
    applicant was granted leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    (General)  Student  on  19  November  2009.   He  was  granted  further
    subsequent periods of leave up to 6 July 2016.  On 6 July 2016 he  made
    an application in time for FLR(O).  On 22 August 2016  he  applied  for
    leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant.  On 24  August  2016  he
    submitted a letter to the Home Office varying his FLR(O) application to
    a Tier 2 (General) application.

5.   On 7 August 2018 a request was  made  by  the  respondent  for  further
    information from the applicant's sponsor.  The deadline for a  response
    to that letter expired on 14 September 2018 without a response.

6.   On 27 September 2018 the applicant was refused leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 2 (General) Migrant with a right  to  administrative  review.   He
    applied for administrative review on 8 October 2018.

7.   On 18 October 2018 the applicant sent  a  letter  to  the  Home  Office
    requesting  leave  to  remain  on  the  basis  of   Article   8.    The
    administrative review was concluded on 31 October 2018, maintaining the
    decision of 27 September.

8.   The essential argument of the  applicant  is  that  the  letter  of  18
    October amounted to a  variation  of  an  outstanding  application  for
    further leave to remain and hence the respondent erred  by  failing  to
    appreciate that the administrative review had become otiose as  it  had
    been taken over by the variation of the application for leave to remain
    which resulted in the decision of 27 September 2018.  As a  consequence
    it is argued that that application remains  outstanding  and  that  the
    applicant  has  leave  to  remain  by  virtue  of  section  3C  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971.  It is in particular argued that the  application
    of 18 October 2018 was  a  human  rights  claim  which  amounted  to  a
    variation of a pending application for further leave to remain for  the
    purposes of section 3C(4) and (5) of the Immigration Act 1971.

9.   As regards the second ground,  it  is  argued  that  the  decision  was
    procedurally unfair because the Secretary of State acted  unfairly  and
    exercised a discretion  under  paragraph  77J  of  Appendix  A  of  the
    Immigration Rules unlawfully in not extending the time granted  to  the
    sponsor to provide the further documents requested in the letter  of  7
    August 2018 and in not giving the applicant notice that  a  request  of
    information had been sent to the sponsor,  not  notifying  him  of  the
    timeframe that had been identified for a response and failing to inform
    him of the possible result if this was not responded to.   In  addition
    it is argued that the applicant should have been informed in advance of
    the decision of 27  September  2018  that  the  request  had  not  been
    complied with.

Submissions

10.  In his written and oral submissions Mr Biggs argued that the letter  of
    18 October 2018 amounted to a variation of a  pending  application  for
    further leave to remain for the purposes of section 3C(4)  and  (5)  of
    the Immigration Act 1971.  He noted what had been said in JH (Zimbabwe)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 78 including the point made at the end of paragraph  35
    that: "once a decision has been made, no variation to  the  application
    is possible since there is nothing left to vary".  He argued that  that
    was not an obstacle in the instant case.

11.  With regard to the nature of administrative  review,  Mr  Biggs  argued
    that the power to decide or refuse an  application  for  administrative
    review is provided by sections 3A-3B and 4 of the 1971  Act.   On  that
    basis the administrative review process is simply an extension  of  the
    decision-making application process available when an  application  for
    leave or further leave has been made.  He argued that as a  consequence
    until the administrative review process is  concluded  the  application
    for leave which underlines  it  remains  outstanding,  albeit  that  an
    initial, necessarily inchoate decision to refuse that  application  has
    been taken.  Unlike the situation in JH, which was decided  before  the
    abolition of appeal rights in the 2014 Act and the introduction of  the
    administrative review process, when an application  for  administrative
    review is pending there must necessarily be something left to vary  for
    the purposes of section 3C(5) of the 1971 Act.

12.  He supported his argument by reference to paragraph 2.2 of Appendix  AR
    of the Immigration Rules which provides that on  administrative  review
    the  presumptive  refusal  of   the   application   for   leave   under
    consideration can be "withdrawn" or,  where  the  initial  decision  is
    upheld, the basis of that decision can be modified by providing further
    or fresh reasons for the decision.  Paragraph 34N(2) of the Immigration
    Rules provides also that where the  decision  is  upheld  but  for  new
    reasons there is a further right to administrative review.

13.  Mr Biggs argued  that  those  features  of  the  administrative  review
    process strongly indicated that  while  an  administrative  review  was
    pending so too was the underlying application for leave.  If this  were
    not  so,  he  argued,  it  was  impossible  to   understand   how   the
    administrative  reviewer  could  remake  the  review  decision  in  the
    applicant's favour or maintain the refusal but for new and  potentially
    fundamentally different reasons.  He argued that  this  confirmed  that
    administrative  review  was  simply  an  extension  of  the  underlying
    application process.

14.  Mr Biggs referred also to paragraph 34X(4)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    which states that an application for administrative  review  which  has
    not been determined will be treated as withdrawn if the applicant makes
    an application for entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to  remain.
    He argued that when this was read together with paragraphs 34BB(1)  and
    (2), it was consistent with the argument that it was possible  to  vary
    an application for leave to remain while an  administrative  review  of
    the decision presumptively deciding that application  was  pending  and
    that indeed in respect of  an  application  for  administrative  review
    which had triggered an extension of leave  by  section  3C(2)(d),  Rule
    34X(4) could only work on this basis.  He argued that  it  must  follow
    that the words "an application for entry clearance, leave to  enter  or
    leave to remain" in paragraph 34X(4) must, by Rule 34BB(2), be read  to
    mean "a variation  of  an  application  ...".   Mr  Biggs  argued  that
    paragraph 34X(4) when read with paragraph 34BB(2) could not work if  by
    section 3C(2)(d) and (4) an application made  while  an  administrative
    review was pending was invalid.  There would in that  situation  be  no
    "application"  to  trigger  the  withdrawal  of  the  application   for
    administrative review because the "application" was invalid ab  initio.
    It would not be appropriate to read the word "application" as including
    "invalid application".  A nullity would have the effect of  ending  the
    extension of leave under section 3C and involved depriving a migrant of
    the benefit of administrative review.

15.  With regard to the  arguments  made  by  Mr  Hansen  in  reliance  upon
    paragraphs AR2.10(b) and AR2.6 of  Appendix  AR,  it  was  argued  that
    paragraph AR2.6 was irrelevant since  the  result  of  the  applicant's
    argument was that the administrative review had  been  overtaken  as  a
    result of the variation of the continuing  application  which  occurred
    while the administrative review was pending.  The administrative review
    should therefore be treated as having been  withdrawn  and  the  varied
    application should have been decided  in  lieu  of  the  administrative
    review.

16.  As regards paragraph AR2.10(b), this would not apply,  as  it  referred
    to a "fresh  application"  rather  than  a  "variation"  of  a  pending
    application which was in fact the case.  The  retrospective  effect  of
    AR2.10(b) could not make an application for leave to remain  which  was
    at the time it  was  made  invalid  by  section  3C(4)  valid,  as  the
    retrospective operation of an Immigration Rule could not  render  valid
    what was made invalid ab initio in primary legislation.  It was  argued
    that as the Immigration Rules were currently expressed the only  way  a
    fresh application could be effective  would  be  if  it  was   properly
    understood as a variation of a pending application for further leave to
    remain as was the position in the instant case.

17.  It was further argued that the letter of 18 October was indeed a  valid
    variation.  Mr Biggs referred to paragraphs 37 to 39 of  JH  (Zimbabwe)
    in which the Court of Appeal adopted a broad concept of "variation"  of
    an application for leave to remain for  the  purposes  of  section  3C.
    This, it was argued, was consistent with the approach of the  Court  of
    Appeal in Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673 where the Court of Appeal  had
    accepted that a human rights claim could be  advanced  as  part  of  an
    application for further leave under the points-based system without any
    particular formality.  It was argued that as a consequence of the above
    contentions the respondent should have made or  should  in  due  course
    make a decision on the varied application of  the  human  rights  claim
    advanced in support of it and this would give rise to a right of appeal
    under section 82(1)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.

18.  As regards the procedural fairness ground, Mr Biggs  argued  that  even
    bearing in mind the highly  prescriptive  nature  of  the  points-based
    system, a discretion was conferred on the respondent by  paragraph  77J
    of Appendix A to HC 395, but this was not  a  case,  unlike  EK  (Ivory
    Coast)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  1517  where  the  unfairness  resulted  from
    erroneous actions  by  a  sponsor  for  whom  the  respondent  was  not
    responsible.  It was not a case where substantive  fairness  was  being
    argued,  only   procedural   unfairness.    The   respondent   in   the
    circumstances of the case was obliged to give notice to  the  applicant
    that a request for information had been sent  to  the  sponsor,  should
    have notified him of the timeframe  that  had  been  identified  for  a
    response and should have told him of the possible result  if  this  was
    not responded to and should also notified the applicant in  advance  of
    the decision of 27 September that the request  had  not  been  complied
    with.

19.  In his submissions on the section 3C ground, Mr Hansen argued that  the
    principles in JH (Zimbabwe) had to be applied to the  statutory  scheme
    as varied by the addition of the administrative  review  provisions  to
    the Immigration Act 1971 and Appendix AR to the Immigration Rules.

20.  It was clear from section 3C(2)(d), that section 3C leave  is  extended
    whilst an administrative review of the  decision  under  challenge  was
    pending, but that question had to be determined in accordance with  the
    Immigration Rules and in particular AR2.9 and 2.10.  It was argued that
    the applicant's administrative review ceased  to  be  pending  and  his
    section 3C leave ended when notice of the outcome of the administrative
    review was duly given on 31 October 2018.  Even if the "application" of
    18 October 2018 was a valid application for further leave, it  did  not
    have the effect contended for  of  extending  his  3C  leave.   On  the
    contrary, in accordance with AR2.10(b) it would mean that his 3C  leave
    ended even earlier, on 17 October 2018.

21.  The main point however, Mr Hansen argued, was  that  following  from  a
    proper application  of  section  3C  as  explained  in  JH  (Zimbabwe),
    following the decision of 27 September 2018 there was "nothing left  to
    vary" as expressed in JH (Zimbabwe).

22.  Administrative review was no  more  than  the  review  of  an  eligible
    decision to decide whether the decision was wrong due to a case working
    error, and the scope for introducing new  evidence  was  very  limited.
    The whole scheme of Appendix AR was inconsistent with  the  applicant's
    submissions.  The fact that  he  retained  a  right  of  administrative
    review and that his 3C leave was extended while it remained pending did
    not mean that he had a right under section 3C(5) to  vary  further  the
    decided application.  The mischief of the possibility of  a  series  of
    further  applications  leading  to  the  indefinite  extension  of  the
    original leave as adumbrated in JH  (Zimbabwe)  would  be  facilitated.
    The relevant Home Office Guidance Version 8.0 of 6 March 2017  made  it
    clear that  a  person  on  section  3C  leave  could  not  amend  their
    application  after  it  had  been  decided,  pending  any   appeal   or
    administrative  review.   This  was  in  accordance  with  Appendix  AR
    paragraph 2.10.  Reference was also made to  the  other  point  in  the
    Guidance that the administrative review could not be used to apply  for
    leave on another basis and this was in accordance with paragraph  AR2.6
    of Appendix AR.  Nor under the  Guidance  could  an  applicant  use  an
    application for administrative review of an eligible decision to  apply
    for leave on another basis, for example to claim that  they  should  be
    granted leave under a different tier of  the  points-based  system.   A
    human rights or protection  claim  made  in  an  administrative  review
    application would not be considered.

23.  As regards the procedural fairness ground, it  was  argued  that  there
    was no unfairness.  The Secretary of State's letter to the sponsor of 7
    August 2018 was signed for as  received  on  10  August  2018  and  the
    sponsor had been given 25 business days, much more the minimum  of  ten
    business days referred to in the Rules, in which to reply.  The  letter
    to the sponsor made it clear that the application might be  refused  if
    the information was not provided.  There  was  no  obligation  to  make
    separate contact with the applicant and warn  him.   The  Secretary  of
    State was entitled to  expect  that  there  would  be  regular  contact
    between the applicant and his sponsor in relation to  the  application.
    The response when it finally came, dated 11 October 2018,  referred  to
    additional documents covering varied areas of the business as a  result
    of which there was a need for more time to prepare and send them  back,
    but there had been no request  for  more  time  until  long  after  the
    decision had been made.  As a consequence, it was argued, the claim  on
    procedural fairness was not made out.

The Law

Immigration Act 1971

24.  "3C Continuation of leave pending variation decision

         (1)  This section applies if-

              (a) a person who has limited leave to enter or remain  in  the
                  United Kingdom applies  to  the  Secretary  of  State  for
                  variation of the leave,

              (b) the application for variation is  made  before  the  leave
                  expires, and

              (c) the leave expires without the  application  for  variation
                  having been decided.

         (2)  The leave is extended by virtue of  this  section  during  any
             period when-

              (a) the application  for  variation  is  neither  decided  nor
                  withdrawn,

              (b) an appeal under section 82(1) of the  Nationality,  Asylum
                  and Immigration  Act  2002  could  be  brought  while  the
                  appellant is in the United Kingdom against the decision on
                  the application for variation (ignoring any possibility of
                  an appeal out of time with permission),

              (c) an appeal under that section against that decision brought
                  while the appellant is in the United Kingdom,  is  pending
                  (within the meaning of section 104 of that Act).

             or

             (d)   an  administrative  review  of  the  decision   on   the
                  application for variation-

                  (i)  could be sought, or

                  (ii) is pending.

         ...

         (7)  In this section -

              'administrative review' means a  review  conducted  under  the
             immigration rules;

              The question of whether an administrative review is pending is
             to be determined in accordance with the immigration rules".

         "RELEVANT PASSAGES OF APPENDIX A

         Attributes for Tier 2 (General) Migrants

         76.  An applicant applying for entry or leave to remain as a Tier 2
                (General) Migrant must score 50 points for attributes.

         76A. Available points for entry clearance or leave  to  remain  are
                shown in Table 11A.

         76B. Notes to accompany Table 11A appear below the table.

         Table 11A
|Certificate of       |Points      |Appropriate    |Points         |
|Sponsorship          |            |Salary         |               |
|Job offer passes     |30          |Appropriate    |20             |
|Resident Labour      |            |salary         |               |
|Market Test          |            |               |               |
|Resident Labour      |30          |               |               |
|Market Test exemption|            |               |               |
|applies              |            |               |               |
|Continuing to work in|30          |               |               |
|the same occupation  |            |               |               |
|for the same Sponsor |            |               |               |


         Notes

         Certificate of Sponsorship

         77. Points may only be scored for one entry in the  Certificate  of
              Sponsorship column.

         ...

         77H. No points will be awarded for a Certificate of Sponsorship  if
                the Entry Clearance Officer or the Secretary  of  State  has
                reasonable grounds  to  believe,  notwithstanding  that  the
                applicant has  provided  the  evidence  required  under  the
                relevant provisions of Appendix A, that:

                (a)    the job as recorded by the Certificate of Sponsorship
                    Checking Service is not a genuine vacancy,

                (b)    the  applicant  is  not  appropriately  qualified  or
                    registered to do the job in question (or will not be, by
                    the time they begin the job), or

                (c)    the stated requirements of the job as recorded by the
                    Certificate of Sponsorship Checking Service and  in  any
                    advertisements for the job are inappropriate for the job
                    on offer and / or have been tailored to exclude resident
                    workers from being recruited.

         ...

         77J. To support the assessment in paragraph 77H(a)-(c),  the  Entry
                Clearance Officer or the  Secretary  of  State  may  request
                additional information and evidence from  the  applicant  or
                the Sponsor, and refuse the application if  the  information
                or evidence is not provided. Any requested documents must be
                received by the Entry Clearance Officer or the Secretary  of
                State at the address specified  in  the  request  within  10
                business days of the date the request is sent."

         "Multiple Applications

         34BB.     (1)   An  applicant  may  only   have   one   outstanding
                    application for leave to remain at a time.

              (2) If an application for leave  to  remain  is  submitted  in
                    circumstances where a previous application for leave  to
                    remain has not been decided, it will  be  treated  as  a
                    variation of the previous application.

              (3) Where more than one application for  leave  to  remain  is
                    submitted on the same day then subject to  sub-paragraph
                    (4), each application will be invalid and  will  not  be
                    considered.

              (4) The Secretary of State may give  the  applicant  a  single
                    opportunity to withdraw all but one of the  applications
                    within  10  working  days  of  the  date  on  which  the
                    notification  was  sent.   If  all  but   one   of   the
                    applications are not withdrawn  by  the  specified  date
                    each  application  will  be  invalid  and  will  not  be
                    considered.

              (5) Notice of invalidity will be given in writing  and  served
                    in accordance with Appendix SN of the Rules."

         "Notice of an eligible decision

         34L. (1) Unless sub-paragraph (2) applies, written notice  must  be
                    given to a person of any eligible decision.  The  notice
                    given must:

                    (a)    include or  be  accompanied  by  a  statement  of
                        reasons for the decision to which it relates, and

                    (b)    include  information  on  how  to  apply  for  an
                        administrative review and the time limit for making
                        an application.

                (2)    Sub-paragraph (1) does not apply where  the  eligible
                    decision is a grant of leave to remain.

         Making an application

         34M. An application for  administrative  review  must  be  made  in
                accordance with the requirements set out in  paragraphs  34N
                to 34S. If it is not it will be  invalid  and  will  not  be
                considered.

         34N. (1) Unless sub-paragraph (2) or (2A) applies  only  one  valid
                      application for administrative review may be made  in
                      respect of an eligible decision.

              (2) A further application for administrative review in respect
                      of an eligible decision as set out in Appendix AR may
                      be made  where  the  outcome  of  the  administrative
                      review  is  as  set  out  in  paragraph  AR2.2(d)  of
                      Appendix AR of these Rules.

              (2A)     A further application for  administrative  review  in
                      respect of an eligible  decision  under  Appendix  AR
                      (EU) may be made where a decision is withdrawn and  a
                      new  decision  made  in  accordance  with   paragraph
                      AR(EU)2.2. of Appendix AR (EU).

              (3) An application for administrative review  of  an  eligible
                      decision under Appendix AR may not  be  made  if  the
                      applicant has  previously  signed  an  administrative
                      review  waiver  form  in  respect  of  the   eligible
                      decision, in  accordance  with  paragraph  AR2.10  of
                      Appendix AR of these Rules.

              (4) If, after receiving notice of the  eligible  decision,  an
                      application for entry clearance, leave  to  enter  or
                      leave to remain is made during the time within  which
                      an  application  for  administrative   review   under
                      Appendix AR  may  be  brought  within  paragraph  34R
                      (including  any  possibility  of  an   administrative
                      review  out-of-time  under  paragraph   34R(3)),   an
                      application for administrative review of the eligible
                      decision may not be made under Appendix AR.

         34O. (1)      Where the eligible  decision  under  Appendix  AR  is
                      either a decision on  an  application  for  leave  to
                      remain or a decision to  cancel  leave  to  enter  or
                      remain which is in force on a person's arrival at the
                      UK, the application for administrative review must be
                      made in accordance with paragraph  34U  or  paragraph
                      34V.

              (2) Where the eligible decision under Appendix AR is a refusal
                      of  an   application   for   entry   clearance,   the
                      application for administrative review must be made in
                      accordance with paragraph 34VA.

              (3) Where the eligible decision has been made  under  Appendix
                      EU, the application for administrative review must be
                      made in accordance with paragraph 34U.

         34P. The application must  be  made  in  relation  to  an  eligible
                decision.

         34Q. An application under Appendix AR must be made:

                (a)    when the administrative review is in relation  to  an
                    eligible decision  on  an  in  country  application,  as
                    defined in paragraph AR3.2 of  Appendix  AR,  while  the
                    applicant is in the UK;

                (b)    when the administrative review is in relation  to  an
                    eligible decision made on arrival at the United Kingdom,
                    as defined in paragraph AR4.2 of Appendix AR, while  the
                    applicant is in the UK, unless the eligible decision  is
                    made in the Control Zone (as defined in Appendix  AR  of
                    these Rules), in which case  administrative  review  may
                    not be applied for and  will  not  be  considered  until
                    after the applicant has left or been  removed  from  the
                    Control Zone;

                (c)    when the administrative review is in relation  to  an
                    eligible decision on an application for entry clearance,
                    as defined in paragraph AR5.2 of Appendix AR, while  the
                    applicant is outside the UK.

       34QA.  An application under Appendix AR (EU) of these  Rules  may  be
             made from either inside or outside the UK.

       34R.   (1)  An application under Appendix AR must be made:

                  (a)  where the applicant is in the UK and not detained, no
                      more than 14  calendar  days  after  receipt  by  the
                      applicant of the notice of the eligible decision;

                  (b)  where the applicant is in detention in the  UK  under
                      the Immigration Acts, no more than  7  calendar  days
                      after receipt by the applicant of the notice  of  the
                      eligible decision;

                  (c)  where the applicant is  overseas,  no  more  than  28
                      calendar days after receipt by the applicant  of  the
                      notice of the eligible decision; or

                  (d)  where the eligible decision is a grant  of  leave  to
                      remain, no more than 14 calendar days  after  receipt
                      by  the  applicant  of  the   biometric   immigration
                      document which states the length  and  conditions  of
                      leave granted.

         34R. (1A)     An application under Appendix AR (EU) must be made no
                      more than 28 days after receipt by the  applicant  of
                      the notice of the eligible decision.

              (2) An application which is permitted under  paragraph  34N(2)
                      or 34N(2A) of these Rules must  be  made  within  the
                      relevant time limit stated in paragraph 34R(1) as  if
                      it was an initial application, and the notice of  the
                      outcome of the previous administrative review will be
                      treated as the notice of the eligible decision.

              (3) But the application may be accepted out  of  time  if  the
                      Secretary of State is  satisfied  that  it  would  be
                      unjust not to waive  the  time  limit  and  that  the
                      application  was   made   as   soon   as   reasonably
                      practicable.

              (4) DELETED

              (5) For provision  about  when  an  application  is  made  see
                      paragraph 34W.

         34S. An applicant may only include an application on  behalf  of  a
                dependant of the applicant if that dependant:

              (a) was a dependant on the application which resulted  in  the
                    eligible decision; or

              (b) was previously granted leave  to  enter  or  remain  as  a
                    dependant of the  applicant  and  that  leave  is  being
                    cancelled at the same time as that of the applicant

         Notice of invalidity

         34T. A notice of invalidity will be given in writing and served  in
                accordance with Appendix SN of these Rules.

         ...

         Withdrawal of applications

         34X. (1) An application which may only be brought from  within  the
                    UK and has  not  been  determined  will  be  treated  as
                    withdrawn if the applicant requests the return of  their
                    passport for the purpose of travel outside the UK.

              (2) An application which may only be brought from  within  the
                    UK and which has not been determined will be treated  as
                    withdrawn if the applicant leaves the UK.

              (3) The application for administrative review may be withdrawn
                    by the applicant. A request to withdraw  an  application
                    must be made in  writing  to  the  Home  Office  at  the
                    address provided for  that  purpose  on  the  visas  and
                    immigration pages of the gov.uk website. The application
                    will be treated as withdrawn on the date  on  which  the
                    request is received.

              (4) An application for administrative  review  which  has  not
                    been determined will be  treated  as  withdrawn  if  the
                    applicant makes  an  application  for  entry  clearance,
                    leave to enter or leave to remain.

              (5) Sub-paragraphs (1) and  (2)  above  do  not  apply  to  an
                    application  for  administrative   review   made   under
                    Appendix AR (EU)."


         "Immigration Rules Appendix AR: administrative review

         Administrative Review

         Introduction

         Administrative review is available where an eligible  decision  has
         been made. Decisions eligible for administrative review are  listed
         in paragraphs AR3.2, AR4.2 or AR5.2 of this Appendix.

         Administrative review will consider whether an eligible decision is
         wrong because of a case working error and, if it is  considered  to
         be wrong, the decision will be withdrawn or amended as set  out  in
         paragraph AR2.2 of this Appendix.

         Rules about how to make  a  valid  application  for  administrative
         review are set out at paragraphs 34M to 34Y of these Rules.

         Definitions

         AR1.1 For the purpose of this Appendix  the  following  definitions
         apply:

|Applicant       |the individual applying for administrative review|
|Case working    |an error in decision-making listed in paragraph  |
|error           |AR2.11                                           |
|Control Zone    |has the meaning given collectively by Schedule 1 |
|                |to the (International Arrangements) Order 1993,  |
|                |Schedule 1 to the Channel Tunnel (Miscellaneous  |
|                |Provisions) Order 1994 and regulation 2 of the   |
|                |Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002     |
|                |(Juxtaposed Controls) Order 2003. In these Rules |
|                |it also includes a "supplementary control zone"  |
|                |as defined by Schedule 1 to the Channel Tunnel   |
|                |(International Arrangements) Order 1993.         |
|Valid           |an application for administrative review made in |
|application     |accordance with paragraphs 34M to 34Y of these   |
|                |Rules                                            |
|Pending         |as defined in paragraph AR2.9                    |
|Reviewer        |the Home Office case worker, Immigration Officer |
|                |or Entry Clearance Manager conducting the        |
|                |administrative review.                           |
|Original        |the Home Office case worker, Immigration Officer |
|decision maker  |or Entry Clearance Officer who made the eligible |
|                |decision.                                        |


         General Principles

         What is administrative review?

         AR2.1 Administrative review is the review of an  eligible  decision
                to decide whether the  decision  is  wrong  due  to  a  case
                working error.

         Outcome of administrative review

         AR2.2 The outcome of an administrative review will be:

              (a) Administrative review succeeds and the  eligible  decision
                    is withdrawn; or

              (b) Administrative review does not succeed  and  the  eligible
                    decision remains in force and all of the  reasons  given
                    for the decision are maintained; or

              (c) Administrative review does not succeed  and  the  eligible
                    decision remains in force but one or more of the reasons
                    given for the decision are withdrawn; or

              (d) Administrative review does not succeed  and  the  eligible
                    decision  remains  in  force  but  with   different   or
                    additional reasons to those specified  in  the  decision
                    under review.

         What will be considered on administrative review?

         AR2.3 The eligible decision will be reviewed to  establish  whether
                there is a case working error, either as identified  in  the
                application for administrative review, or identified by  the
                Reviewer in the  course  of  conducting  the  administrative
                review.

         AR2.4    The Reviewer will not consider any evidence that  was  not
                before the original decision maker except where:

              (a) evidence that was not before the original  decision  maker
                    is submitted to demonstrate that a case working error as
                    defined in paragraph AR2.11 (a), (b)  or  (c)  has  been
                    made; or

              (b) the evidence is submitted to demonstrate that the  refusal
                    of an application under paragraph 322(2) of these  Rules
                    was a case working  error  and  the  applicant  has  not
                    previously been served with a decision to:

                    (i)    refuse an application for entry clearance,  leave
                           to enter or leave to remain;

                    (ii)   revoke entry clearance, leave to enter  or  leave
                           to remain;

                    (iii)  cancel leave to enter or leave to remain;

                    (iv)   curtail leave to enter or leave to remain; or

                    (v)    remove a person from the UK, with the  effect  of
                           invalidating leave to enter or leave to remain,

                    which relied on the same findings of facts.

         AR2.5 If the applicant has  identified  a  case  working  error  as
                defined in paragraph AR2.11 (a), (b) or  (c),  the  Reviewer
                may contact the applicant or his representative in  writing,
                and request relevant evidence. The requested  evidence  must
                be received at the address specified in the request within 7
                working days of the date of the request.

         AR2.6 The Reviewer will  not  consider  whether  the  applicant  is
                entitled to leave to remain on some other basis and  nothing
                in these rules shall be taken to mean that the applicant may
                make  an  application  for  leave  or   vary   an   existing
                application for leave, or make a protection or human  rights
                claim, by seeking administrative review.

         Applying for administrative review

         AR2.7 The rules setting out the process to be followed  for  making
                an application for administrative review are at 34M  to  34Y
                of these Rules.

         Effect of Pending administrative review on liability for removal

         AR2.8 Where administrative review is pending the Home  Office  will
                not seek to remove the applicant from the United Kingdom.







         When is administrative review pending?

         AR2.9  Administrative  review  is  pending  for  the  purposes   of
                paragraph AR2.8 of this Appendix and sections  3C(2)(d)  and
                3D(2)(c) of the Immigration Act 1971:

              (a) While an application for administrative review can be made
                    in accordance with 34M to 34Y of these  Rules,  ignoring
                    any possibility of an administrative review  out-of-time
                    under paragraph 34R(3);

              (b) While a further application for administrative review  can
                    be made in accordance with  paragraph  34M(2)  of  these
                    Rules following a notice of outcome at  AR2.2(d)  served
                    in accordance with Appendix SN of these Rules;

              (c) When an application for  administrative  review  has  been
                    made until:

                    (i)    the  application  for  administrative  review  is
                           rejected as invalid because it does not meet  the
                           requirements of paragraph 34N  to  34S  of  these
                           Rules;

                    (ii)   the  application  for  administrative  review  is
                           withdrawn in accordance with paragraph 34X; or

                    (iii)  the notice of outcome at AR2.2(a), (b) or (c)  is
                           served in accordance with Appendix  SN  of  these
                           Rules.

         AR2.10 Administrative review is not pending when:

              (a) an administrative review waiver form has been signed by an
                    individual in respect of whom an eligible  decision  has
                    been made. An administrative review  waiver  form  is  a
                    form where the person can declare that although they can
                    make an application in accordance with paragraphs 34M to
                    34Y of these Rules, they will not do so;

              (b) administrative review has previously been pending and  the
                    individual in respect of whom the eligible decision  has
                    been  made  submits  a  fresh  application   for   entry
                    clearance, leave to enter or leave to  remain.  In  this
                    case the day  prior  to  the  day  on  which  the  fresh
                    application is  submitted  is  the  last  day  on  which
                    administrative review is pending.

         What is a case working error?

         AR2.11   For the purposes of these Rules, a case working error is:

                  (a)  Where the original decision maker's decision to:

                      (i)  refuse an application on the basis of  paragraph
                             320(7A), 320(7B), 322(1A) or  322(2)  of  these
                             Rules; or

                      (ii) cancel leave to enter  or  remain  which  is  in
                             force under paragraph 321A(2) of  these  Rules;
                             or

                      (iii)    cancel leave to enter or remain which is  in
                             force under paragraph V9.4  of  Appendix  V  of
                             these Rules; or

                      (iv) refuse an application of the type  specified  in
                             paragraph AR3.2(d) of these Rules on grounds of
                             deception,

                      was incorrect;

                  (b)  Where  the  original  decision  maker's  decision  to
                      refuse an application on the basis that the  date  of
                      application was beyond any time limit in these  Rules
                      was incorrect;

                  (c)  Where the original decision maker's decision  not  to
                      request specified documents under paragraph 245AA  of
                      these Rules was incorrect;

                  (d)  Where the original decision maker  otherwise  applied
                      the Immigration Rules incorrectly; or

                  (e)  Where the original decision maker failed to apply the
                      Secretary of State's relevant  published  policy  and
                      guidance in relation to the application.

         AR2.12 Additionally, where the eligible decision is  one  specified
                  in paragraph AR3.2, a case working  error  is  also  where
                  there has been an error in calculating the correct  period
                  or conditions of immigration leave either held  or  to  be
                  granted.

         Administrative Review in the UK

         Decisions eligible for administrative review in the United Kingdom

         AR3.1 Administrative review is only  available  where  an  eligible
                 decision has been made.

         AR3.2    An eligible decision is:

                 (a)   A decision on an application  where  the  application
                      was made on or after 20th October 2014 for  leave  to
                      remain as:

                   (i) a Tier 4 Migrant under the Points Based System; or

                   (ii)    the partner of a Tier 4 Migrant  under  paragraph
                             319C of the Immigration Rules; or

                   (iii)   the child of a Tier  4  Migrant  under  paragraph
                             319H of the Immigration Rules.

                  (b)  A decision on an application  where  the  application
                      was made on or after 2nd  March  2015  for  leave  to
                      remain, as:

                      (i)  a Tier 1, 2 or 5 Migrant under the Points  Based
                             System; or

                      (ii) the partner of a Tier 1, 2 or  5  Migrant  under
                             paragraphs 319C  or  319E  of  the  Immigration
                             Rules; or

                      (iii)    the child of a Tier 1, 2 or 5 Migrant  under
                             paragraphs 319H  or  319J  of  the  Immigration
                             Rules.

                  (c)  A decision made on or after  6th  April  2015  on  an
                      application for leave  to  remain  made  under  these
                      Rules unless it is an application as  a  visitor,  or
                      where an application or human rights  claim  is  made
                      under:

                       (i) Paragraph 276B (long residence);

                        (ii)      Paragraphs  276ADE(1)  or  276DE  (private
                             life);

                       (iii)    Paragraphs 276U and 276AA (partner or  child
                             of a member of HM Forces);

                       (iv)     Paragraphs 276AD and 276AG (partner or child
                               of a member of HM Forces) where the  sponsor
                               is a foreign or Commonwealth  member  of  HM
                               Forces and has at least 4 years'  reckonable
                               service  in  HM  Forces  at  the   date   of
                               application;

                       (v) Part 8 of these Rules (family members) where  the
                               sponsor is present and  settled  in  the  UK
                               (unless  the  application  is   made   under
                               paragraphs 319AA to 319J of these Rules,  or
                               under paragraph 284, 287, 295D or 295G where
                               the sponsor  was  granted  settlement  as  a
                               Points Based System Migrant) or has  refugee
                               or humanitarian protection status in the UK;

                       (vi)     Part 11 of these Rules (asylum);

                       (vii)    Part 4 or Part 7 of  Appendix  Armed  Forces
                               (partner or child of a member of HM  Forces)
                               where the sponsor is a  British  Citizen  or
                               has at least 4 years' reckonable service  in
                               HM Forces at the date of application;

                       (viii)   Appendix FM (family members), but not  where
                               an application is made under  section  BPILR
                               (bereavement)  or  section  DVILR  (domestic
                               violence),

                  in which case the appropriate remedy is  an  appeal  under
                  section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
                  2002 rather than an application for administrative review.

                  (d) A decision made on or  after  6th  April  2015  on  an
                      application for leave to remain  made  by  a  Turkish
                      national or their family member pursuant to the  UK's
                      obligations  under  Article  41  of  the   Additional
                      Protocol  to  the  European   Community   Association
                      Agreement (ECAA) with Turkey, and under Article  6(1)
                      of  Decision  1/80   of   the   Association   Council
                      established by that agreement.

         AR3.3 An eligible decision in paragraph AR3.2 is either a  decision
                to refuse an application for leave to remain or  a  decision
                to grant leave to remain where a review is requested of  the
                period or conditions of leave granted."

Discussion

25.  It is relevant to begin with what was said by Richards LJ at  paragraph
    35 of JH (Zimbabwe). He said:

         "35. The key to the matter is an understanding of  how  section  3C
                operates. I have set the section out at para 10  above.  The
                section applies, by sub-section (1),  where  an  application
                for variation of an existing leave is made before that leave
                expires (and provided that there has  been  no  decision  on
                that application before the leave expires).  In  that  event
                there is, by sub-section (2), a statutory extension  of  the
                original leave until  (a)  the  application  is  decided  or
                withdrawn, or (b), if the application has been  decided  and
                there is a right of appeal against that decision,  the  time
                for appealing has expired, or (c), if  an  appeal  has  been
                brought, that appeal is pending: I paraphrase the  statutory
                language, but that seems to me  to  be  the  effect  of  it.
                During the period of the statutory extension of the original
                leave,  by  sub-section(4)  no   further   application   for
                variation of that leave can be made. Thus, there can be only
                one application for variation of  the  original  leave,  and
                there can be only one decision (and, where  applicable,  one
                appeal). The possibility of a series of further applications
                leading to an indefinite extension of the original leave  is
                excluded. However, by sub-section (5) it is possible to vary
                the one permitted application. If it is varied, any decision
                (and any further appeal) will relate to the  application  as
                varied. But once a decision has been made, no  variation  to
                the application is possible since there is nothing  left  to
                vary."

26.  To this must be added the provision for administrative review  made  in
    amendments to section 3C following the abolition of  appeal  rights  in
    the Immigration Act 2014.  So  section  3C(2),  under  which  leave  is
    extended by  virtue  of  this  section  during  any  period  specified,
    includes an administrative review of the decision  on  the  application
    for variation in circumstances where it could be sought or is  pending.
    It is clear  from  section  3C(7)  that  the  question  of  whether  an
    administrative review is pending is to be determined in accordance with
    the Immigration Rules, and the relevant provisions in that  regard  are
    AR2.9 and AR2.10 of Appendix AR.  It is, I think, uncontroversial  that
    the application for administrative review was made on  8  October  2018
    and was concluded on 31 October 2018, the request for leave  to  remain
    on the basis of Article 8, the purported variation, having been made on
    18 October.  It can be seen from  paragraph  34M  of  HC  395  that  an
    application for administrative review must be made in  accordance  with
    the requirements set out in paragraphs 34N to  34S  and  must  be  made
    within fourteen days from receipt of the eligible  decision  which  was
    the decision under  challenge  of  27  September  2018.   There  is  no
    question of a lack of timeliness in this case therefore.  The  decision
    under challenge is clearly an eligible decision as defined in AR3.2  of
    HC 395.

27.  A key point here is the application of AR2.10(b).  This states that  an
    administrative review is not  pending  where  it  has  previously  been
    pending and the individual in respect of whom the eligible decision was
    made submits a fresh application for entry clearance, leave to enter or
    leave to remain.  In such a case the day prior to the day on which that
    fresh application is submitted is the last day on which  administrative
    review is pending.

28.  In response to this, Mr Biggs argues that  the  letter  of  18  October
    2018 was not a fresh application but was a  variation  of  the  earlier
    application and as a consequence AR2.10(b) has  no  purchase  on  that.
    Against this, Mr Hansen argues that the  "application"  of  18  October
    2018 was not a valid application for further leave because it  did  not
    comply with the requirements of paragraph 34 of HC 395.   Paragraph  34
    sets out a number of formal requirements  that  must  be  satisfied  in
    order for an application for leave to remain to  be  valid.   Mr  Biggs
    argues that though the letter of 18 October  was  in  less  than  ideal
    terms it clearly sought leave on the basis of Article 8 and operated as
    a variation.

29.  Mr Hansen also  attaches  weight  to  the  Guidance  on  administrative
    review (Version 8.0) which among other things says that  administrative
    review cannot be used to apply for leave on another basis and the  Home
    Office will not consider any human rights, asylum or EEA  grounds  that
    are raised in the application, in accordance with  paragraph  AR2.6  of
    Appendix AR.

30.  The applicant's argument in response to this is that  what  was  sought
    is a variation of the original  application,  not  an  attempt  in  the
    administrative review  to  apply  for  leave  on  another  basis.   The
    administrative review application was made in respect of  the  original
    decision and then subsequently the variation application was made.

31.  It is relevant to note that the letter of 18 October 2018  states  that
    it is an application outside the Rules on the basis  of  human  rights.
    Unlike the applicant's letter of 24 August 2016 which expressly  states
    that it is a variation application, there is no reference to  variation
    in the letter of 18 October 2018.  There is reference  to  the  claimed
    failure on the part of the respondent to act  with  fairness  vis--vis
    the sponsor and a claim alternatively for leave to remain  outside  the
    Rules on the basis of compelling and  compassionate  circumstances  and
    private life under Article 8.  It is  also  relevant  to  observe  that
    section 3C(1) refers to a person who has  limited  leave  to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom  applying  for  variation  of  the  leave.
    There is no reference in the letter of 18 October 2018 to  a  variation
    of an outstanding application for further leave to remain being sought.
     That is,  perhaps,  unsurprising,  in  light  of  the  fact  that  the
    application of 22 August 2016 had been refused in the  decision  of  27
    September 2018.   There  is  also  force  to  Mr  Hansen's  point  that
    paragraph 34 of HC 395 sets out formal requirements for the making of a
    valid application for leave to remain in the United Kingdom, and  those
    requirements, such as the need to apply on an application form which is
    specified for the immigration category under  which  the  applicant  is
    applying, were not met in this case.  Even if  Mr  Biggs  is  right  to
    argue  that  authorities  such  as  Ahsan  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  2009  and
    Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673 enable the  making  of  a  human  rights
    claim without the need to follow  the  requirements  of  paragraph  34,
    there remains for the applicant the difficulty that there is nothing in
    the letter of 18 October 2018 to suggest that it is anything more  than
    a free-standing application for leave, rather than an attempt  to  vary
    an existing application.

32.  A further difficulty for  the  applicant  is  paragraph  34X(4),  which
    provides that an application for administrative review  which  has  not
    been determined will be treated as withdrawn if the applicant makes  an
    application for entry clearance, leave to enter or leave to remain.   I
    note Mr Biggs' argument that paragraph  34X(4)  has  to  be  read  with
    paragraph 34B(1)-(2), which provides that an applicant  may  only  have
    one outstanding application for leave to remain at a time,  and  if  an
    application for leave to remain is submitted in circumstances  where  a
    previous application for leave to remain has not been decided, it  will
    be treated as a variation of the previous application.   The  immediate
    point to be made is that the previous application for leave  to  remain
    had been decided, in the decision of  27  September  2018.   Mr  Biggs'
    argument is that an effect  of  paragraph  34BB(2)  is  that  paragraph
    34X(4) must be read as meaning: "a variation of  an  application  ...".
    He argues that, given the terms of section  3C(4)  it  is  only  if  an
    application for further leave is, properly analysed, a variation of  an
    outstanding application for further leave that the application could be
    valid.

33.  I see no scope for Mr Biggs' argument that paragraph 34X(4)  should  be
    read in the way he suggests.  Paragraph 34BB(2) is concerned  with  the
    situation where the previous application for leave to  remain  has  not
    been decided.  An application made  prior  to  that  decision  will  be
    treated as a variation of the undecided application.  But in this  case
    there was a decision prior to the application of 18 October  2018,  and
    hence paragraph 34BB(2) does not bite, and there is no warrant for  the
    argument that paragraph 34X(4) should be read in the way suggested.

34.  Mr Biggs' further argument is that paragraph 34X(4) can  only  work  in
    the manner he suggests in cases where section 3C(2)(d) applies, whereby
    an application for leave to remain has  the  effect  of  extending  the
    applicant's leave to  remain  until  that  application  is  determined.
    This, however, has to be seen in light of, first,  the  fact  that  the
    provisions of section 3C(2)(d) have effect only when an  administrative
    review is pending (or (not this case) could be sought), and AR  2.10(b)
    makes it clear that administrative review is not pending  when  it  has
    previously been pending and the  individual  in  respect  of  whom  the
    eligible decision has been made submits a fresh application  for  entry
    clearance.  That was the situation in this case, and hence the argument
    cannot succeed.  The administrative review was no longer  pending  when
    the further application was made, and hence the  difficulties  adverted
    to in paragraphs 23 and 24 of Mr Biggs' skeleton do not arise.

35.  Mr Biggs'  view  depends  upon  an  assumption  as  to  the  nature  of
    administrative  review.   He  argues  that  the  administrative  review
    process is simply an extension of the decision-making  and  application
    process that applies where an application for leave  or  further  leave
    has been made, and characterises the decision which is the  subject  of
    the administrative review as an "initial, inchoate" decision to  refuse
    the application, and hence the application for leave in  issue  remains
    outstanding until  the  administrative  review  process  is  concluded.
    That, however, is to ignore the definition of administrative review  in
    AR 2.1: "Administrative Review is the review of an eligible decision to
    decide whether the decision is wrong due to a case-working error".   It
    is a review of a decision, not a decision in its  own  right,  and  the
    fact that, under AR 2.2 an outcome of an administrative review  can  be
    that the eligible decision can be withdrawn or modified, does not alter
    that character.

36.  With regard to Mr Biggs' argument that the Court of  Appeal  adopted  a
    broad concept of "variation" of a leave to remain application  for  the
    purposes of section 3C, though this is true, it  is  relevant  to  note
    that at paragraph 36, the court remarked that a second application  can
    be treated as a variation of the first only up to the point  where  the
    Secretary of State makes a decision on the application.   And,  insofar
    as weight is placed on  what  Mr  Ockelton  said  in  Sukhwinder  Singh
    (JR/13615/2015: certified as being citable), it has  to  be  remembered
    that his conclusion that where there has been a valid  application  for
    administrative review the original decision cannot be regarded as final
    was a response to a contention that a challenge to a decision  refusing
    an application for indefinite leave to remain was out of  time,  as  it
    was more than three months after that decision,  but  less  than  three
    months after the decision on  administrative  review.   For  procedural
    purposes, therefore, time runs from the administrative  review  outcome
    maintaining the original decision, but  the  context  is  significantly
    different from that in the instant case, and there remains, as a matter
    of weight, the definition of administrative  review  at  AR2.1  as  the
    review of an eligible decision.  The Immigration  Rules  draw  a  clear
    distinction between a decision and the administrative review which,  as
    its name implies, is a review only.

37.  In conclusion on this issue, therefore, I find that the  letter  of  18
    October 2018 did not operate as a variation of the earlier application,
    and the administrative review ceased to be pending on 17 October 2018.

38.  Mr Biggs suggested at the outset of submissions that  if  I  were  with
    him on the first point there was no need to say much, if  anything,  on
    the fairness point.  Given my findings above, it is  clearly  necessary
    for me to address this issue.

39.  On this issue I am entirely in agreement with the  points  made  in  Mr
    Hansen's skeleton argument.  It is clear from paragraph  77J  that  the
    Secretary of State may request additional information and evidence from
    the sponsor and may  refuse  the  application  if  the  information  or
    evidence is not provided.   The  sponsor  was  given  a  period  of  25
    business days, much more than the minimum of ten business days referred
    to in the Rules, to respond and did  not  do  so  within  that  period.
    Indeed no response was received until 11 October 2018.  Bearing in mind
    the fact-sensitive nature of fairness in any given case, as set out  in
    EK (Ivory Coast) and the particular constraints of the PBS  system,  as
    referred to by Underhill LJ in Mudiyanselage  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  65  at
    paragraph 56, it is right in my view to conclude that the primary  onus
    was on the applicant to provide all the necessary information and there
    was no obligation on the Secretary of State  to  inform  the  applicant
    that information had been sought from the  sponsor  or  to  remind  the
    sponsor or give the sponsor any other indication other  than  what  was
    clearly set out in the letter  that  the  consequences  of  failure  to
    provide evidence and information might  lead  to  the  refusal  of  the
    application.  The claim for procedural fairness is not made out in this
    case. As a consequence the claim is dismissed on both bases.

                                  ~~~~0~~~~



                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                               JR/7887/2018.


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







           The Queen on the application of Md Saiful Alam Topadar
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective  representatives,  Mr  M  Biggs,   instructed   by   Hubers   Law
Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and Mr W Hansen,  instructed  by  the
Government Legal Department, on behalf of the Respondent, at  a  hearing  at
Field House, London on 18 July 2019.

     Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

(1)  For the reasons set out in the judgment,  I  order  that  the  judicial
review application be dismissed.

Order


(2)    I  order,  therefore,  that  the  judicial  review   application   be
      dismissed.




Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

(3)  I  refuse  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal.  I  have
considered the detailed  grounds  of  appeal  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
applicant. I do not consider that they identify an arguable error of law  in
the decision.




Costs

(4)  The applicant does not agree with the draft order for costs put  in  on
behalf of the respondent. I direct that each side files its  submissions  on
costs, the respondent no later than 7 days from the date of this  order  and
the applicant no later than 7 days thereafter.









         Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




        Dated:








Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).



