


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                JR/7482/2018

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1DZ


                                               11, 12, 13, and 15 March 2019
                                                Handed down on 16 April 2019


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                     M G
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

                          London Borough of Croydon

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr Azeem Suterwalla, instructed by Simpson Millar Solicitors, appeared
behalf of the Applicant.

Mr Hilton Harrop-Griffiths, instructed by London Borough of Croydon Legal
Services, appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
JUDGE GLEESON:
 1. The applicant is a citizen of Ethiopia and asserts that he is  a  minor
    with a date of birth of 21 November 2000.   He arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on  or  around  26  November  2017  and  claimed  asylum.   The
    respondent no longer  disputes  that  the  applicant  is  an  Ethiopian
    citizen from Addis Ababa.

 2. The respondent in two age assessments, one dated 7 March 2018  and  the
    second on 2 August 2018, considered that the  applicant  was  an  adult
    when he arrived in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  second  assessment  is
    expressly supplementary to the first, so that both decisions are before
    the Tribunal today.  The respondent considers that  the  applicant  was
    born on 21 November 1991, making him 26 years old  on  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The respondent considers that  the  applicant  is  not
    entitled to be treated as an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.

 3. Whichever date is correct, the applicant is an adult now, but a finding
    of fact as to his date of birth remains relevant because the  applicant
    may be entitled to Leaving Care support up to the age of 21, or  25  if
    he is in full time education.

 4. The applicant challenged the respondent's age  assessment  decision  in
    March 2018, and the August  2018  supplementary  decision,  by  issuing
    judicial review proceedings in the Administrative Court.

Procedural history

 5. On 16 May 2018, Deputy High Court Judge Nigel Poole QC granted  interim
    relief based on the March 2018 decision. In June  2018,  the  applicant
    issued proceedings to protect his position, challenging the March 2018.
    Following the August 2018 supplementary  decision,  the  applicant  was
    given leave to amend his grounds for review  to  challenge  that  later
    decision.

 6. On 1 November 2018,  the  application  was  transferred  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal from the High Court.

 7. The Upper Tribunal therefore has jurisdiction.

 8. That is the basis on which this application comes before me.

Background

 9. The applicant's asylum claim is based on his having been  a  victim  of
    trafficking and enslaved in Libya  en  route  to  the  United  Kingdom,
    having been detained and tortured before he left Ethiopia, and  on  his
    perceived status as a family member of a political  oppositionist,  his
    father, who is said to have been arrested and disappeared, and  on  the
    direct assistance the applicant  says  he  gave  his  father  with  his
    political activities.  He seeks  international  protection  because  he
    says there remains a risk to him in Ethiopia on return.  On 26 November
    2017, the applicant received a  positive  Reasonable  Grounds  decision
    from the Home Office as Competent Authority.

10. I am not concerned in these proceedings with  the  credibility  of  the
    applicant's asylum claim: this judicial review application  is  not  an
    asylum appeal and no questions were asked  during  the  age  assessment
    hearing which  could  lead  me  to  a  conclusion  as  to  whether  the
    applicant's asylum account  is  credible  or  whether  he  now  has  in
    Ethiopia a well-founded fear of persecution for  a  Refugee  Convention
    reason which would entitle  him  to  international  protection  in  the
    United Kingdom.  That is a matter for the  Home  Office  in  the  first
    instance: the Upper Tribunal is not seised of it today.

Upper Tribunal's task

11. The object of the present proceedings is to determine  the  applicant's
    age, as a finding of fact.  To that end, I have had regard  to  all  of
    the evidence that was placed before me and I  have  particularly  taken
    account of the fact that whatever his age, this applicant is young. The
    witness evidence is a matter of record, as  are  the  parties'  written
    submissions.  I will refer, therefore, only to the matters which may be
    determinative of the applicant's age.

12. For the applicant, I heard oral evidence from  the  applicant  himself,
    and from Dr Aklilu Amsala Taye, Ms Greta Nonni, Ms  Marian  Spiers,  Ms
    Elana Kaymer, Dr Ben Eder, and Mr Alon Harshak.   The  evidence  of  Ms
    Spiers, Ms Kaymer, Dr Eder and Mr Harshak relates  to  the  same  young
    leaders' camp attended by the applicant.

13. For the respondent, I heard evidence from  Mr  Abdul  Bangura.    There
    were witness statements from Mr Andrew Martin and Mr Marva Pickersgill-
    McKenzie, the age assessors, but  they  were  not  called.  Mr  Jeffrey
    Williams and Mr David Brooks  had  been  expected  to  testify  but  Mr
    Williams was prevented from attending by  serious  ill-health  and  the
    respondent  was  unable  to  reach  Mr  Brooks.   Neither  witness  was
    available at the hearing.

14. The hearing  bundle  contained  unsigned  documents  purporting  to  be
    witness statements for Mr Williams and Mr Brooks, but in the absence of
    adoption of that witness statement or a signature I am unable to  place
    much weight on either of those documents, which are really no more than
    a proof of evidence until signed and/or adopted in oral  evidence.   In
    his proof of evidence, Mr Williams is  said  to  have  stated  that  he
    worked with the applicant as a social worker from  17  May  2018  to  2
    August 2018, and again from 4 September 2018 to 20 November  2018.   Mr
    Brooks' proof of evidence says that he was  the  applicant's  allocated
    social worker from 3 September to 9 September  2018  and  supported  Mr
    Williams thereafter. It is  most  unfortunate  that  neither  of  these
    proofs of evidence bears  a  signature  showing  that  the  author  has
    approved it, and that neither Mr Williams nor Mr  Brooks  appeared  and
    was tested in cross-examination.

15. In addition to the witness statements of those who gave  oral  evidence
    and letters, or e-mails sent by them I also had  the  age  assessments,
    handwritten notes of the age assessments  where  they  were  available,
    social care records and immigration documents.

Preliminary matters

(1)  Vulnerable witness adjustments

16. My approach to the applicant's evidence was informed by guidance  given
    by the Court of Appeal in AM (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 and  the  Practice  Direction  and
    Guidance identified at [30] in the judgment of the Senior President  of
    Tribunals, with whom Lord Justice  Gross  and  Lord  Justice  Underhill
    agreed.

17. The applicant included in his evidence  a  medico-legal  report  by  Dr
    Debbie Benson BA DPhil BM BCh MRCGP under the auspices of  the  Medical
    Foundation.  Dr Benson considered that the applicant was  a  vulnerable
    person in the asylum context  and  should  be  so  treated.  Dr  Benson
    stopped short of saying that the applicant was not fit to testify.   He
    might experience difficulties with concentration during  his  evidence.
    If the applicant became distressed or agitated in a hearing,  it  would
    be more difficult for him to concentrate on  the  matter  at  hand  and
    remember specific events.

18. Dr Benson considered that if  the  applicant  were  'summoned  to  give
    evidence', she recommended that the Upper  Tribunal  should  apply  its
    Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance and  she  made
    the following specific recommendations:

           "156.  ... it is recommended that [the applicant] is  given  the
           opportunity to take breaks, have access to a drink of water, and
           be able to bring in someone he feels comfortable with  into  the
           Court room to make the process easier  for  him.  I  would  also
           recommend  extra  time  is  given  to  ensure  and   check   his
           understanding at regular points throughout the process,  as  his
           memory and concentration could (from my experience)  lead  to  a
           lack of understanding about the asylum system."

19. At the beginning of the hearing, I asked Mr Suterwalla to let  me  know
    if and when breaks were needed, and I ensured that there was water  for
    the applicant at all times.  The applicant was accompanied by Ms  Greta
    Nonni and his solicitor, Ms Verity Altaras, both people he  trusts  and
    with whom he is comfortable.

20. I explained to the applicant that he could let me know if he  needed  a
    break  and  reminded  Mr  Harrop-Griffiths  of  the   need   to   avoid
    retraumatising the applicant by detailed and (in  context)  unnecessary
    cross-examination about his journey  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  his
    asylum claim.

21. The applicant gave his  evidence  without  obvious  difficulty  and  Mr
    Harrop-Griffiths avoided asking about his  asylum  claim,  which  could
    have had the effect of triggering his  post-traumatic  stress  disorder
    symptoms. The applicant was asked whether his father had been  released
    from prison, and what happened on his father's  release:  his  evidence
    was that his father was arrested and never returned to the family home.



22. The applicant did not become distressed or agitated at any time  during
    his evidence, nor did Mr Suterwalla suggest that the applicant was  not
    being appropriately treated during his evidence, having regard  to  his
    vulnerable status.



(2)  School evidence from Addis Ababa

23. There was a preliminary issue concerning evidence about the applicant's
    schooling in Addis Ababa. The applicant gave details of the  school  he
    attended, and both the  applicant's  solicitors  and  the  respondent's
    legal department approached the school to  clarify  various  points  of
    evidence without mentioning the applicant's name.

24. The respondent was minded to, but did not, ask the school what date  of
    birth it had recorded for this applicant.   The  respondent  approached
    the applicant's solicitors, Simpson Millar, to ask whether  they  would
    agree to that enquiry being made.  Simpson Millar checked with  Wilsons
    Solicitors, who represent the  applicant  in  his  asylum  proceedings.
    Following that contact, Simpson Millar  opposed  the  applicant's  name
    being  disclosed  to  the  school  and  that  has  not  happened.   The
    information which was disclosed by the school is  not  disputed  and  I
    refer to it below.

(3)  Ethiopian calendar

25. I take account of the difficulty of conversion  between  the  Gregorian
    calendar  and  the  local  Ethiopian  calendar.  Unlike  the  Gregorian
    calendar, the Ethiopian calendar has 12 months of 30 days exactly, plus
    a thirteenth month of 5 or 6 balancing days.

26. According to the evidence before me, the first  day  of  the  Ethiopian
    year is normally 11 September in the Gregorian  calendar,  but  in  the
    Ethiopian leap year (which falls every four years, but comes  the  year
    before the Gregorian leap  year),  it  falls  on  12  September  as  an
    additional day is added to the Ethiopian calendar at  the  end  of  the
    Gregorian month of August.   The Ethiopian year number is 8 years  less
    than that for the Gregorian calendar, from January 1 to September 11 or
    12; thereafter, it is only 7 years less until the end of the  Gregorian
    year.

Evidence before the Upper Tribunal

Respondent's evidence

27. The respondent's first  age  assessment  on  7  March  2018  found  the
    applicant to be 'significantly older than 18 years  old'  both  at  the
    beginning and end of the assessment.  There had been 7 meetings, from 5
    December 2017 to 7 March 2018, all of which were shorter than the  full
    day for which they had been arranged.  The reasons were the applicant's
    late arrival or longer lunch breaks than planned.   The  lead  assessor
    changed in the fourth session as the previous lead assessor had to take
    extended leave of absence at short notice.

28. The assessment included  evidence  from  Mr  Bangura,  the  applicant's
    allocated social worker, that he 'could be older' than 17,  because  he
    had a protruding Adam's apple, 'what could  appear'  to  be  a  defined
    jawline, noticeably coarse facial hair and dark  stubble.   Mr  Bangura
    considered that 'these developmental factors are more likely to be post-
    pubertal than that of someone in late adolescence'.  He  concluded  his
    views thus:

         "As to what impact his journey and other environmental hazards  may
         have had on [the applicant's] physiological growth and development,
         one can only speculate."

29. There is extensive consideration  in  the  report  of  the  applicant's
    physical appearance, the length of time he has been  shaving,  and  his
    'permanent frown lines across his forehead', his pronounced larynx  and
    so on. The assessors noticed some grey hairs and a receding hair  line.
     When being interviewed, the applicant was composed,  and  not  visibly
    upset, throughout the  interview.  He  challenged  and  questioned  the
    number of questions he  was  asked.   The  applicant  said  he  had  no
    identity documents and could remember only his Gregorian calendar  date
    of birth, not the Ethiopian calendar version.  He could not write it in
    Amharic.

30. The applicant's account was that he was educated in Ethiopia up to  the
    age of 15, then was out of school for a year before leaving for good in
    2016, following the disappearance of his  father  that  year.  He  left
    school because he had been stealing books:  his parents  got  him  back
    into the school, but he did not attend because he was afraid  that  his
    classmates would call him a thief, or that he would steal again.   When
    his parents realised that he was skipping school and wasting time, they
    left him to it and said that they would try to get him into a different
    school for the next year.

31. The applicant helped his father with his job, selling  houses,  parcels
    of land and cars, without pay, and also helped to distribute  political
    leaflets in the churches and mosque.  His  father  was  arrested  three
    times in 2015 and 2016, and on one occasion imprisoned for 5-6  months,
    but the government kept bothering him, so he disappeared,  leaving  all
    his belongings behind and making no further contact  with  the  family.
    The applicant said he was arrested after  his  father's  disappearance,
    and interrogated for 2 weeks.  He was then either 15 or 16  years  old,
    on his account. He left Ethiopia in the eleventh  month  of  2016,  his
    birth month, which he was able to name as Tarshas,  but  he  could  not
    remember the precise date.

32. The applicant's mother and uncle handed him over to an agent  who  took
    him to Sudan, and he travelled from there to Libya.  He was  tired  and
    thirsty.  In Libya, the group was attacked, and the  lorry  driver  was
    killed.  The kidnappers took them into Libya where  he  was  sold  into
    slavery and spent 6 months in Libya. He was assisted to call his mother
    and ask for money for his release.   The applicant's account  of  which
    agents were paid was contradictory, but that may have been a  condition
    of his travel and I place no adverse weight on it.

33. The applicant was eventually allowed to travel on to Italy, having paid
    US $1000 for his release and a further US $2200 for his onward  travel.
    He had learned Arabic, and some Tigrinya, while in Libya. He arrived in
    Catania, Sicily, where the Red  Cross  met  the  migrants  and  he  was
    photographed  and  fingerprinted  by  the  Italian  authorities.    The
    interpreters were Eritrean, and he spoke to  them  in  Tigrinya.    The
    applicant spent 5 months in Italy before travelling on to France, where
    with the help of some Sudanese people, he found his way to  the  Jungle
    in Calais and began trying to  get  to  the  United  Kingdom;  he  made
    numerous attempts  before  finally  succeeding  in  boarding  a  lorry,
    arriving in November 2017.  He could not remember the exact  date.   He
    claimed asylum the next day.

34. The applicant said he had not smoked or drunk alcohol in Ethiopia,  but
    he did now.  He was not using drugs.  He had trouble sleeping  and  was
    experiencing pain in his side, but was otherwise well.  A referral  for
    counselling services was in hand.

35. The Home Office considered him to be 18 but the applicant said  he  was
    17. Towards the end of the first assessment,  when  the  applicant  was
    asked whether he wanted to add more information, he said  that  he  had
    seen his birth certificate before and 'I can only remember the year,  I
    think it was 1993 [in the  Ethiopian  calendar]'.   The  applicant  had
    previously denied knowing the Ethiopian calendar.

36. The assessors did not consider it necessary to give the  applicant  the
    benefit of the doubt: they were certain that he was significantly older
    than 18.

37. The  addendum  report  dated  2  August  2018  followed  three  further
    meetings, at all of which the applicant  used  an  Amharic  interpreter
    provided by the  respondent.   Additional  photographs  were  taken  to
    support his being older than 18, and in one there was  a  ring  on  the
    third finger of his left hand, which the assessors considered to be his
    wedding ring finger.  The applicant said it was a friend's ring,  which
    he had now given back, and he just wore it  wherever  it  fitted.   The
    applicant sat languidly  in  his  chair,  taking  telephone  calls  and
    appearing uninterested in the meeting.

38. The applicant could not remember his address in Addis Ababa,  nor  that
    of his school, but he did remember the name of the  school.   He  could
    recall the names of two of his teachers and three of his  class  mates,
    but had forgotten the names of his other teachers. He was studying  six
    or seven subjects, four of which had been taught  in  English  for  3-4
    years: his English was limited when he was assessed, but the  assessors
    noted that he often  anticipated  questions  which  had  not  yet  been
    interpreted, suggesting that he understood the language better than  he
    spoke it.

39. The applicant was able to say which church he attended in Addis  Ababa,
    but not the name of the pastor or priest, or its address,  except  that
    it was 20 minutes by car from his  home.    He  claimed  to  have  been
    unaware that Addis Ababa had street  names,  and  could  not  recognise
    places on a map when shown it.

40. The applicant's  social  worker  was  impressed  with  his  independent
    cooking skills, but the applicant said the cooker in his  accommodation
    was not working; he had only cooked once,  or  perhaps  three  or  four
    times, since moving in.  The assessors had  a  report  of  a  telephone
    conversation at the applicant's solicitors' offices with  his  aunt  in
    Ethiopia, who said he was 'around 17'.  They maintained their  decision
    that he was 'an adult older than 18' but did not say how old he was.

Mr Bangura's evidence

41. I next consider the oral evidence of Mr Bangura, the only  witness  for
    the respondent.  Mr Bangura told me that although he was  not  the  age
    assessor in this case, he had undertaken about 50 age  assessments  and
    received training in how to perform them.   Unfortunately,  Mr  Bangura
    was an unimpressive witness.  He is a qualified social worker  who  has
    worked for the respondent since 2010 and who was  responsible  for  the
    applicant from 30 November 2017 to March 2018.

42. Mr Bangura's interaction  with  the  applicant  was  relatively  brief,
    because it emerged at the hearing (not in his witness  statement)  that
    Mr Bangura had travelled abroad in early 2018 following a  bereavement,
    and was not at work from 5 February 2018 to the end of March 2018.   Mr
    Bangura's interaction with  the  applicant  was  therefore  limited  to
    December 2017, January 2018 and a few days in February 2018.

43. The first question Mr Bangura said he considered was how a young person
    knew their age or date of birth and in  which  calendar.   He  said  he
    would also have regard to communication skills, self-care, and the  way
    a young person interacted and took responsibility for their  own  care.
    He would be interested to find out the life experiences they had in the
    country of origin which might negate or  accelerate  a  young  person's
    educational development.

44. When Mr Bangura first saw the applicant on 30 November 2017, just a few
    days after he made his asylum claim on 27 November 2017, the  applicant
    was shabby and unshaven. Mr Bangura believed that  physical  appearance
    was very important, and placed  weight  on  a  young  person's  height,
    presentation and facial hair.  He said that the applicant had  a  well-
    defined, angular jaw line which had the look of someone who was shaving
    regularly, although the applicant said he had not begun  shaving  until
    he was in the Calais Jungle.  Once the  applicant  shaved,  Mr  Bangura
    said that he realised from the state of the applicant's facial skin and
    stubble that he had been shaving for some time.  Mr Bangura  considered
    this to be an important indicator.

45. Mr Bangura  considered  that  the  applicant's  ability  to  form  more
    sophisticated sentences, his calm and polite approach, his  ability  to
    focus in the meetings and to concentrate, all  indicated  that  he  was
    between 18 and 21 years old, rather than 17 as he  claimed.  A  17-year
    old would be more fidgety, playing with his telephone,  scratching  his
    nose, fidgeting in the chair or playing with  a  piece  of  paper.   Mr
    Bangura accepted that this did not stop at 18, and that maturation  was
    a process of evolution.  He accepted that a  17-year-old  might  behave
    maturely in some areas of their development.

46. Mr Bangura did not consider that the applicant had  been  deceitful  or
    obstructive in  his  dealings  with  him,  saying  that  generally  the
    applicant gave straight answers.  He considered the applicant was  able
    to cook, and that was why he was placed in supported housing in a semi-
    independent placement.

47. Mr Bangura had recorded two home visits, he  thought,  but  might  have
    seen the applicant at his accommodation up to 5 times, as he would  pop
    in on him when visiting other young people in the  same  accommodation:
    he would push the door on the applicant's room if  the  applicant  were
    not in the communal areas.  He had never seen it  particularly  untidy.
    For a home visit, Mr Bangura would telephone the key worker  and  check
    that she and the applicant were both available then book an interpreter
    for the agreed date.  If he was visiting someone  else,  he  would  not
    make contact with the key worker before popping in on the applicant.

48. Mr Bangura was satisfied that the applicant could cook, but  had  never
    seen him do so, nor had he eaten with him: he knew that  the  applicant
    and two other young people had  pooled  their  money  and  shopped  and
    cooked together.  Mr Bangura said that he had seen  the  remains  of  a
    lasagne in the fridge (Ethiopian cuisine is  Italian-influenced)  which
    he  was  told  the  applicant  had  cooked.   When  pressed  in  cross-
    examination, Mr Bangura said that how good the applicant's skills  were
    was not within his direct knowledge: that was why he had a keyworker.

49. Mr Bangura relied upon two Looked After Child assessments for which  he
    was responsible in the short period when he was the applicant's  social
    worker.  I have concerns about these documents: in  the  December  2017
    one, the applicant is described as  a  practising  Muslim,  whereas  in
    January 2018 he  is  described  as  a  Christian,  who  has  difficulty
    understanding  English.   There  are  other  errors,  but   those   are
    sufficient to suggest that these documents were not properly checked.

50. Overall, I consider that Mr  Bangura  made  his  decisions  as  to  the
    applicant's perceived age on his  physical  appearance,  and  that  his
    evidence as to whether the applicant could cook and whether he kept his
    room clean was not based on very much reliable information.

Dr Benson's medico-legal report

51. I have already recorded the opinion of Dr Benson about the  applicant's
    ability to testify.  Dr Benson said in her medico-legal report that the
    applicant lacked emotional reactivity and potentially underreported his
    emotional distress, both symptomatic of post-traumatic stress  disorder
    and depression, and that he met the ICD-10 criteria for both of  those.
    She said that the applicant was not presently suicidal.   She  recorded
    50 skin lesions, the list of which runs to four A4  pages,  which  were
    considered  under  the  Istanbul  Protocol  and  found  to  be   either
    consistent with, highly consistent with or typical of his account  with
    beatings, burns and other abuse, both  in  detention  in  Ethiopia  and
    while enslaved in Libya, as well as a skin  infection  caused  by  poor
    conditions in Libya.

52. Only three of the lesions were not regarded as relevant to his  account
    of abuse and being a victim of trafficking. One of those three  lesions
    related to a tuberculosis test.  The applicant had tested positive  for
    tuberculosis and was awaiting further investigation and treatment.   He
    was not receiving any medication for his post-traumatic stress disorder
    and depression, but was receiving  help  from  Freedom  from  Torture's
    counselling services.





The applicant's schooling

53. The evidence about  the  applicant's  schooling  consists  of  his  own
    written and oral evidence, the evidence of Dr Taye,  and  the  evidence
    obtained shortly before the hearing by the parties, directly  from  the
    school which it is agreed that he attended.

54. The evidence obtained by the respondent  is  set  out  in  the  witness
    statement of Ms Lorraine Gregory, a social worker for  the  respondent.
    Her statement records  that  with  the  help  of  an  interpreter,  she
    telephoned a Bank in Ethiopia and asked for the telephone number  of  a
    named school, which it is common ground is  the  school  the  applicant
    attended.   The questions were put through the interpreter, in Amharic,
    with the interpreter pretending that she was a parent seeking a  school
    place for her son.

55. The interpreter spoke to the school's  principal:  he  said  it  was  a
    government school, with no prospectus, and that information  about  the
    school would be on a Facebook  page.   The  applicant's  name  was  not
    mentioned. The information obtained was that  the  school  was  a  non-
    denominational government school, not a private  school,  which  taught
    from kindergarten at age 4, up to grade 8.  The school was unisex,  and
    lessons were taught in both Amharic and  English.  The  uniform  was  a
    brown sweater, with red skirt or trousers, and the subjects taught were
    English, Amharic, maths, science, statistics  and  sport.   The  school
    both used and taught the Ethiopian calendar.

56. On 27 February 2019, Ms  Verity  Altaras,  the  applicant's  solicitor,
    obtained the telephone number of the school in question  and  spoke  to
    the headmaster of  the  primary  school,  with  the  applicant  present
    throughout.  Ms Altaras explained that she was a solicitor  and  wanted
    to ask some questions in order to establish whether a young person  had
    attended the school.  The person confirmed he was  the  headmaster  and
    head of the primary school in question.

57. The school holds records of all students who have  attended  since  its
    foundation in 1934, including the child's name, the  family  name,  the
    age of the child when they registered at the school (but  not  date  of
    birth), the period of attendance,  and  school  results.   Until  about
    2017,  the  records  were  paper-based,  but  now  they   were   stored
    electronically.  Records would not  be  released  unless  a  parent  or
    relative  attended  in  person  with  the  former  student's  identity,
    alternatively if not related, a person would be required  to  obtain  a
    form of power of attorney and,  again,  attend  personally.   Power  of
    attorney would have to be obtained from the sub-city administration  or
    education bureau, with  an  explanation  as  to  what  information  was
    required, and why.

58. The headmaster confirmed that from year 7, certain subjects other  than
    English were taught in the English language. Amharic, civic studies and
    sports continued to be taught in Amharic, while  mathematics,  English,
    biology, chemistry and physics were taught in  English.   All  subjects
    were taught with reference to the  Ethiopian  calendar,  but  in  world
    history and English, the Gregorian calendar was  also  taught.   School
    holiday and other events were given in the local Ethiopian calendar.

59. The evidence  obtained  from  the  principal  and  the  primary  school
    headmaster was very similar and is treated as uncontroversial in  these
    proceedings.

60. The evidence of Dr Taye was prepared before  the  school  evidence  was
    available.  He was born in Gojam Province in north-western Ethiopia. He
    is a highly educated man, with a Master's degree in Physical  Geography
    from Addis Ababa University and a PhD in Environmental Management  from
    Wageningen University in the Netherlands.  He now  holds  the  rank  of
    Associate Professor at Addis Ababa University,  teaching  Environmental
    Management, Research Methodology and  Climate  Change  related  courses
    there.

61. Dr Taye is the father of two girls who have been privately educated  in
    Addis Ababa.  His experience is that private schools in Addis Ababa use
    the Gregorian calendar,  not  the  local  Ethiopian  calendar.   It  is
    therefore common for those who have been  privately  educated  to  know
    little about the dating system in the  local  Ethiopian  calendar.   Dr
    Taye's daughters have been taught their dates  of  birth  in  both  the
    Gregorian and the Ethiopian calendar.  Dr  Taye  said  in  his  witness
    statement that there were families  in  Ethiopia  that  used  only  the
    Gregorian calendar at home: its use was prevalent in private companies,
    international organisations, non-governmental organisations and private
    schools.  Conversion was always a challenge, so some parents  stuck  to
    one calendar.  It was not unusual therefore for a  child  to  know  his
    date of birth only in the Gregorian calendar.

62. We had the benefit of oral evidence by video link  from  Dr  Taye.   He
    said that while private schools tended to use the  Gregorian  calendar,
    government schools used the local Ethiopian  calendar.   That  did  not
    mean they never taught the Gregorian calendar: in most schools, English
    was also a medium of instruction, but you would expect the holidays and
    other school events to be in the  local  calendar.   However,  not  all
    government schools were the same.

63. Dr Taye expected that a 15-year old  would  be  able  to  sequence  the
    months of the year in one or both calendars; however, it was  extremely
    difficult to generalise about what was used at home.  The conversion of
    the  local  Ethiopian  calendar  into  the   Gregorian   calendar   was
    problematic, even for students at University level, because  the  local
    calendar had a fixed number of days in each month, which the  Gregorian
    did not.  It was confusing and transposed dates could be out by as much
    as 10 days in consequence.  The local calendar was well understood  but
    his university students often struggled with the Gregorian calendar.

64. Students at  school  had  identity  cards.   Dr  Taye  had  attended  a
    government school himself.  His daughters, who went to private schools,
    had identity cards in the Gregorian calendar format.   After  8  years'
    schooling in a government school, Dr  Taye  considered  that  a  person
    would be able to sequence the months of the  local  calendar  reliably,
    but not necessarily the Gregorian equivalent.

Applicant's evidence

65. The applicant adopted his witness statements of 16 April 2018,  19  May
    2018, 3 August 2018, 15 October 2018  (in  his  asylum  claim)  and  14
    December  2018.   In  answer  to  some  supplementary  questions,   the
    applicant said he had never discussed  either  at  school  or  at  home
    whether his school was a government or a private school.   His  parents
    only told him that they paid money for his education.  They did not say
    how much.  He was unaware when in Ethiopia that  there  were  different
    types of  school,  nor  that  fees  for  government  schools  had  been
    abolished in 1994.

66. The applicant has always said that he knew his date  of  birth  in  the
    Gregorian calendar only, because his mother had told him it when he was
    in Ethiopia, and his family celebrated their two sons'  birthdays  each
    year.  The applicant claims not  to  be  familiar  with  the  Ethiopian
    calendar and in evidence was unable to sequence the months  or  explain
    when the local Ethiopian calendar year began.

67. The applicant said that in his school, the Ethiopian calendar was used,
    but only in a limited way.  Ethiopian history was taught in  the  local
    calendar, and some teachers wrote on the blackboard  in  the  Ethiopian
    calendar.  From grade 5 (not 7) they were taught in  both  English  and
    Amharic.  He disagreed that the  uniform  was  brown  sweater  and  red
    trousers: it had changed since his day, when both were red.

68. In cross-examination, the applicant said that in  Ethiopia  before  his
    father was taken away, he had his  mother,  father,  brother,  maternal
    uncle and aunt, and all four grandparents.  The family  celebrated  the
    birthdays of both sons, which was why he knew his own date of birth and
    that of his brother.  The applicant had never had a  national  identity
    card in Ethiopia, because he left before he was 18 years old.  He had a
    birth certificate, on which  the  date  of  birth  was  given  in  both
    calendars.  He could not remember when he had first seen that.  It gave
    his name, his mother's name, and the time and  date  he  was  born,  in
    numbers not words.  He could not remember  whether  it  also  gave  the
    place of birth. It was a hospital birth certificate, so it did not  say
    when or where he was baptised.  He had only seen it once or twice, when
    looking for books in a particular cupboard at home.  He had never  seen
    his baptism certificate nor that of his brother.

69. The applicant was asked about evidence from his aunt, who said that the
    birth certificate in the house was a 'church birth  certificate':   the
    applicant said his aunt told him that she could get either  the  church
    or government birth certificate, either from the church or  the  house.
    He could not remember where he was baptised and had not asked his  aunt
    about it.  He had never had to give his date  of  birth  to  anyone  in
    Ethiopia because when he went to the doctor or dentist, his mother came
    too.  Officials asked your age, not your date of birth, and the  school
    probably the same. The school identity card had the date of  birth  and
    his age on it and he had to carry  it  all  the  time  in  his  pocket.
    Sometimes, a teacher might ask for date of birth: he did not know  why.
     Apart from that, everyone else just wanted to know your age.

70. The applicant said that when he  travelled  through  Sudan  and  Libya,
    nobody asked his date of birth.  When he was fingerprinted in Italy and
    in France, he might have given his date of birth, but he probably  just
    picked a date at random.

71. When cross-examined about the evidence of the school and Dr  Taye,  the
    applicant stuck to his assertion that the  school  used  the  Gregorian
    calendar when he was there.  The school identity card had name, date of
    birth and school grade on it, but no photograph.

72. There followed a prolonged attempt to get  the  applicant  to  sequence
    dates in the Ethiopian calendar.   He  seemed  unable  to  do  so.   He
    described the months by numbers and said that he had done the  same  to
    the interpreter at the interview, although they were  written  down  as
    English months.

73. The applicant said he  did  not  remember  any  of  the  names  of  his
    teachers, except for one  called  Almas:  they  just  called  them  all
    Teacher at school. He could remember the first names  of  some  of  the
    other pupils, and also some friends who did not go to the same  school.
    The school did have a computer and sometimes they  watched  YouTube  in
    the library.  He did not use Facebook and nor did his friends.  He  was
    learning computer use at school in the  United  Kingdom,  but  had  not
    searched Facebook to see whether he could  locate  any  of  his  former
    friends in Ethiopia.

74. His uncle had a business selling  car  tyres.   Until  the  applicant's
    father was arrested, he helped him by running errands and  distributing
    papers for his father's political activities, not  his  father's  work.
    The rest of the time he just played with friends, once he  had  stopped
    going to school. He was away from school for a year in 2015/2016.   His
    friends were still going to school, and the applicant would  have  gone
    back: his family had arranged a different school for him,  but  he  did
    not go as he was ashamed for having stolen a book from his old  school.
     His parents offered to take him to school to register, but he  refused
    to go: he would have had to restart year 8 from the  beginning  to  get
    his exams, and he was ashamed of what he had done.

75. He had remembered his mother's telephone number and telephoned her once
    from Italy, about 15 days after he arrived in Catania, using the mobile
    phones of other migrants.  He denied having his own  mobile  telephone,
    but admitted that a mobile he was looking after for another migrant got
    broken when he was chased by the police, who sprayed stuff in  his  eye
    and then beat him and went. The police did not ask the applicant's name
    that time. The reason he was looking after the telephone was  that  its
    owner had run to catch a lorry, leaving the  mobile  phone  on  charge:
    that happened often, you might be  looking  after  one,  two  or  three
    mobiles for others.

76. Over 20 times, he was stopped while trying to get on  a  lorry  to  the
    United Kingdom, by a group of police who asked him his  name,  date  of
    birth  and  so  forth.   Then  they  let  him  go.   If  there  was  an
    interpreter, he would speak to the  police  in  Amharic,  otherwise  he
    could try some sort of language through a passer-by.   He  would  write
    down his date of birth or tell them it in English, using the  Gregorian
    calendar.  The police in France tried to speak English.

77. The applicant could not remember his  father's  telephone  number,  nor
    those of his uncle or aunt.

78. The applicant said that he had been fingerprinted in  Italy.   He  gave
    his date of birth in the Ethiopian format, but  he  did  not  know  the
    Tigrinya numbers, so he just guessed.  He  was  not  sure  whether  the
    Italians, who were just normal Italian  civilians,  understood  him  or
    not.  It was crowded, and he did not have time to speak English.

79. The applicant said he is a smoker; he began in  Libya  and  now  smoked
    whenever he was stressed.  His father would have killed him if  he  had
    done it in Ethiopia.  The same applied to drinking: he did not drink in
    Ethiopia, but he did in Calais, because it was cold,  and  people  like
    him drank there.  The applicant said he was given toiletries in  Calais
    and began to shave: he needed to shave about every 15 days or so.

80. The applicant was then asked about his life skills and friendship group
    in the United Kingdom.  He named a group of five friends, who all lived
    in Croydon.  When the applicant was sent to live in  Mottingham,  about
    two hours from Croydon, he would go to visit them after school  and  on
    two occasions he had stayed out overnight  because  he  could  not  get
    back.  He would just go to one of their homes and chat.  On one of  the
    overnight occasions, he just stayed on the bus all night.

81. His social worker, Mr Williams, suggested that in future he should stay
    with one of his friends, one of whom was 16,  one  17  and  the  other,
    formerly age disputed, was now accepted to be 18. +

82. Asked why he thought the respondent considered him older, the applicant
    said maybe it was his nature; he could not comment on their estimate of
    his age, but it was their right to reach their own conclusions.

83. As regards his cleaning and cooking skills, the applicant said that his
    key worker, and other residents, had shown him how to clean.  If he was
    told, he did it.  Mostly, however, he ate  out  rather  than  cook,  or
    somebody would help with the cooking.

84. The applicant was asked about a ring that he wore on his left hand when
    interviewed, which might have been a wedding ring (it did not look like
    a wedding ring in the photograph  produced,  more  like  an  ornamental
    signed ring).  He said it was not his own ring, but belonged to someone
    else and he had given it back.

85. In re-examination, the applicant was asked whether  the  age  assessors
    checked with him their understanding of his account  of  what  happened
    with his father. He said they asked limited questions but  did  not  go
    through the full document with him.  He now said there  was  a  further
    reason why he did not want to  go  back  to  school,  as  'things  were
    getting complicated for my father'.

86. The applicant said he was not always very good  at  tidying  his  room,
    left his clothes on the floor, and so on.  The report by Mr Eric Mensah
    that said he was tidy was not correct.

87. He had been tired and confused and  very  hungry  when  interviewed  in
    Italy.  The food portions were tiny there.   It  was  all  very  quick:
    they took fingerprints, took a photograph, gave him a change of clothes
    and if there was a skin rash, they gave you cream for it.  There were a
    lot of people being processed, over eight hundred. He  had  learned  to
    speak Tigrinya in Libya, but not to write or count the numbers.

Ms Giulia Tranchina's evidence

88. Ms Tranchina is an assistant solicitor  with  Wilsons  Solicitors,  who
    represent  the  applicant  in  his  asylum  claim.    In  her   witness
    statement, she gives hearsay evidence of a conversation  the  applicant
    had in her presence, on 20 March  2018,  when  she  was  assisting  the
    applicant to try to contact his mother on the last telephone number, he
    had for her.

89. The applicant's account was that he had been forced to call his  mother
    on her  mobile  telephone  number  on  several  occasions  while  being
    tortured in Libya, to ask her to send money for his release.    He  had
    lost contact with her on that number when he was in Italy, and  thought
    her mobile telephone number was out of use.

90. The conversation which took place in Ms Tranchina's office was  in  two
    parts, both of which were said to be between the applicant and his aunt
    (by marriage) in Ethiopia, the  wife  of  his  maternal  uncle.    Both
    conversations took place in Amharic, which Ms Tranchina does not speak.
     They were translated to her by an interpreter.  The first conversation
    was heard only from the applicant's end of the  conversation,  but  the
    second was on speaker telephone so the interpreter took notes was  able
    to tell Ms Tranchina what had been said.  The interpreter's  notes  are
    not attached to Ms Tranchina's statement.

91. To Ms Tranchina's surprise, when the applicant gave  her  his  mother's
    mobile telephone number to try once more to reach his mother  from  her
    office, the telephone connected. She passed the  telephone  handset  to
    the applicant, but realised from his expression that  it  was  not  his
    mother to whom he was speaking.  The applicant  asked  whoever  he  was
    speaking with, if they would send his birth certificate as evidence  of
    his age.  He then said 'OK' and hung up.

92. When asked, the applicant told his solicitor that he had been  speaking
    to his aunt.  He told Ms Tranchina that his aunt said  his  mother  had
    left Addis Ababa some two months earlier, and gone  to  a  rural  area,
    leaving her mobile phone with her sister-in-law.  His  mother  did  not
    want to say where she had gone, and only  telephoned  her  brother  and
    sister-in-law occasionally.   The  applicant's  aunt  by  marriage  had
    recently reactivated the mobile phone line.

93. The aunt was in a  hurry  and  not  'in  her  mind'  according  to  the
    applicant: she asked him to ring again, now that  he  had  her  number.
    The applicant was emotional  and  confused  at  the  unexpected  family
    contact.  After the call, the applicant said that he had asked his aunt
    to get him his birth certificate.  He seemed worried about  his  mother
    and brother.  Ms Tranchina formed the view that the conversation  could
    not have been pre-planned.

94. After some discussion, Ms Tranchina arranged for the applicant to  call
    back straight away, with the solicitors' telephone on loudspeaker.   At
    Ms Tranchina's request, the interpreter took manuscript  notes  of  the
    whole 10-minute conversation which ensued and then translated  them  to
    Ms Tranchina. The aunt was reported to have said that  the  applicant's
    mother and brother had left the family  home  because  the  authorities
    came to the house many times, 'day and night'.  It was  too  much,  and
    his mother decided to leave, renting  out  the  property  and  all  the
    furniture.  The aunt  thought  they  were  in  Tigray.   The  aunt  was
    surprised to learn that the applicant was in the United Kingdom.

95. The applicant asked his aunt if she knew how old he was; his  aunt  did
    not know exactly the applicant's date of birth but  knew  that  he  was
    'around 17'.   She  said  she  would  try  to  get  the  'church  birth
    certificate' if the people who were renting his  mother's  house  would
    let her in.  There was no news of his father: no one knew where he was.
    At this point in the conversation,  the  aunt  said  she  had  to  stop
    talking as there were police around and it was dangerous.

96. Ms Tranchina discussed with the interpreter how the conversation  would
    be evidenced.   She  says  the  interpreter  was  prepared  to  make  a
    statement if asked: he was a freelance  interpreter  with  no  criminal
    convictions, and a British citizen, so he  had  nothing  to  fear.   Ms
    Tranchina decided that 'it  would  probably  be  better  for  [her]  to
    prepare [her] own statement, but I took his details should a  statement
    be required also from him'.  She sent him a copy of her draft statement
    to  check  and  'confirm  whether  this  is  a  faithful  and  accurate
    transcript of the account he gave me orally during our appointment with
    [the applicant]' and the interpreter approved her statement.

Ms Greta Nonni's evidence

97. Ms Nonni is a Youth Caseworker at the South London Refugee  Association
    (SLRA).  She was the applicant's youth caseworker.  Ms Nonni is a Level
    2-qualified OISC Asylum and Protection Advisor, and also has  a  BA  in
    Oriental Studies from  the  University  of  Bologna  in  Italy,  and  a
    Master's degree in Migration Studies from Sussex University.   She  has
    worked with migrant children and young people in Italy before coming to
    the United Kingdom, and since beginning to  work  here  has  worked  in
    various advocacy and support roles from 2014 to the  present  day,  for
    mainly male unaccompanied asylum-seeking children and young people from
    all over the world.

98. Ms Nonni is not  trained  to  conduct  age  assessments,  but  she  has
    attended various age assessment  trainings  and  acted  as  appropriate
    adult in about 5 young people's age assessments.  She has written about
    10 letters of support in the past 4 years, although she has worked with
    more than 50 age disputed young people.

99. Ms Nonni met the applicant at the SLRA youth club which  she  runs,  in
    February 2018, and has seen him once or twice a  week  since  then  and
    spoken to him every other day.  She has recorded a total of 83 contacts
    with the applicant over a 10-month period, but not all of the  contacts
    she made are written up, due to pressure of work.

100. Ms Nonni considers that child development is fluid  and  that  specific
    behaviour is not indicative of a specific age, in  isolation.   On  her
    observation, he still struggles with day-to-day  matters  and  that  is
    indicative of his not being over  18,  or  not  significantly  so.   He
    borrows money from friends, rather than asking for an advance, and  the
    same with his oyster card.  He often comes to  her  office  having  not
    eaten.  He has been unable to save, not even to buy  a  telephone.   He
    missed appointments at the Chest Clinic at Croydon University  Hospital
    for his tuberculosis treatment, and there was confusion about how  many
    days' medication he was given.   He  relies  on  her  to  memorise  his
    appointments  and  remind  him,  and  prefers  to  be  accompanied  and
    supported at first appointments.

101. Her experience was that the applicant did not keep  the  bathroom  very
    clean, did not know where to get  cutlery,  plates  and  glasses  (even
    though he actually had some in his room) and was  unfamiliar  with  the
    contents of the kitchen cupboards.  She thinks that he says he  can  do
    more than he actually can, which is not uncommon.   When  he  comes  to
    their office, he forgets to wash his mug after being given a  drink  of
    tea or coffee.  He has required support to cut his  fingernails  as  he
    did not understand where to get nail scissors. He  did  not  know  with
    which dentist he  was  registered  and  still  books  his  appointments
    through his keyworker or case worker.  He kept his hoodie on in  summer
    because he liked how it fitted, and did not like the t-shirt underneath
    it.

102. With his friends, the applicant jokes and pranks and plays around  like
    a younger person. Ms Nonni considered him older than the 14- or 15-year
    olds at the youth club but still youthful.  While with a  host  family,
    the applicant played PlayStation a lot,  late  into  the  night  if  he
    could.  He had difficulty reading maps  or  orientating  himself  using
    one.  Ms Nonni in her witness statement considered that  the  applicant
    was a young  person  of  around  his  claimed  age  and  not  an  adult
    significantly over 18.

103. Ms Nonni was cross-examined at length but without  altering  the  tenor
    of her evidence.  She said firmly  that  although  sympathetic  to  the
    young people she looked after, she was not unprofessional and  did  not
    always find them to be under 18.  Her evidence was that  the  applicant
    was about 17-18 now: "he is just on that bridge of being  adult  and  I
    would not be able to say exactly when".

104. In re-examination Ms Nonni said that she  had  been  impressed  by  the
    applicant's honesty on an occasion when  he  found  that  he  had  been
    overpaid  300  on  his  payment  card  while   in   the   respondent's
    accommodation.  He asked Ms Nonni what to do and she thought that  very
    honest of him.  Ms Nonni recommended that the applicant  speak  to  his
    social worker.

Ms Marian Spiers and the Young Leaders group

105. I consider next the evidence from Ms Spiers, Dr Eder,  Mr  Harshak  and
    Ms Kaymer, all of which  centred  on  residential  and  non-residential
    Young Leaders activities in which the  applicant  participated  in  the
    summer of 2018. Ms Spiers is the Youth Work Coordinator at South London
    Refugee Association  (SLRA).   She  has  no  age  assessment  training,
    although she has sat in as an appropriate adult on an  age  assessment,
    assisted by an explanation from her manager as to what was involved.

106. Ms Spiers has over 30 years'  experience  of  working  with  vulnerable
    young people in a variety of settings  and  roles.   She  has  attended
    numerous training courses, including on mental health, the  rights  and
    entitlements  of  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  children,  victims  of
    trafficking, exploitation and modern slavery.  She has spent  about  10
    years  working  abroad,  travelling  and  volunteering  in  orphanages,
    schools, refugee camps and with street children.  She has  worked  with
    many young people from Ethiopia, Eritrea and Sudan, and had spent  time
    in Ethiopia, travelling with an Ethiopian girl  and  staying  with  her
    family members, interacting with many boys under the age of 18, many of
    whom she said looked older than their age.

107. Ms Spiers said that she had worked  with  many  hundreds  of  separated
    young people over the last nine years, at the  Dost  Centre  for  Young
    Refugees  and  Migrants,  a  charity  in  East  London  which  provides
    psychosocial casework and a diverse youth and  education  programme  to
    enable children and young people to participate actively in their local
    and wider communities, to value their  resilience  and  increase  their
    wellbeing, to access their rights and entitlements and to support  them
    through the asylum process.

108. Ms Spiers met the applicant in February  2018.   He  had  attended  the
    SLRA Youth Club, participating in group sessions  and  taking  part  in
    three 5-day residential trips.  She has taken him to placements, helped
    him move in, and worked with him one-to-one as well as in groups.   The
    applicant presented always as friendly and  smiling,  even  before  his
    English  improved  enough  for  them  to  converse.   His  first  5-day
    residential in July 2018 involved living on a barge with Ms Spiers  and
    nine other boys aged between 16 and 17 years old.  He was calm, patient
    and gentle, trying really hard to practise what little English he  had,
    but did not  find  it  easy  to  cook  for  himself  or  others,  often
    volunteering to do the dishes instead.  Nor was he confident in dealing
    with  his  medical  issues:  Ms  Spiers  had  to  help  him   rearrange
    appointments and sort out his medication.

109. The applicant enjoyed learning to swim, playing  sport,  playing  group
    games, and mixing with the other boys and staff.  Sometimes  he  seemed
    preoccupied and worried; he spoke often about how much  he  missed  his
    mother and seemed to view her as a surrogate mother, along  with  other
    female figures in his life.

110. In August 2018, the applicant went on another  5-day  residential  trip
    with a group called Our Second Home, along with 25 boys who were mainly
    16 or 17, with just two who were already 18.    Ms Spiers had  referred
    21 of the 25 boys.  There were various wide games and silly games:  the
    applicant was not embarrassed at being silly.  He fitted in  well  with
    the other young people; the majority were not age disputed and accepted
    him as a 17-year-old.  He spent most of his time with a small group  of
    boys aged between 14 and 17, with just one 18-year-old.  Ms Spiers gave
    examples of two other interactions, noting always  that  the  applicant
    could be silly, splashing his friends and racing them,  but  that  when
    faced with adults he was shy and often seemed younger than his asserted
    age.

111. Ms Spiers went to eat with the applicant  at  his  Lewisham  placement.
    He had never used the kitchen there, even though he  had  already  been
    living in that accommodation for  some  weeks.   The  applicant  bought
    pizzas and snacks for his guests but did not know how to  turn  on  the
    oven, or for how long to cook pizza.  In the absence of the friends  he
    used to shop and cook with, the  applicant  was  buying  takeaways  and
    struggling to manage his money.

112.  The  applicant  struck  Ms  Spiers  as  consistently  open,  truthful,
    sometimes nave, but thoughtful of others.  He was self-conscious about
    his  hair  and  appearance,  enjoyed  listening  to  music,   chatting,
    laughing, visiting and eating with his friends,  playing  games,  being
    silly sometimes, and joking.  He worried about  the  situation  in  the
    world, and homeless people one the street.  He  would  offer  his  last
    pound to someone who needed it more.  He constantly  sought  validation
    from the adults in his life, checking  that  he  was  doing  the  right
    thing, where he needed to be, or what something meant.

113. In cross-examination, Ms Spiers said that the applicant dressed like  a
    teenager, wearing ripped jeans and certain kinds of trainers.   He  was
    pliable, willing to follow instructions, but never took the lead.   She
    described him as 'biddable'.

114. Ms Kaymer's evidence was that she was a leader at the August  2018  Our
    Second Home camp referred to in Ms Spiers' evidence.  The applicant was
    at ease in the social company of the  other  boys,  particularly  those
    from Ethiopia and Eritrea; he was polite and friendly, but  wary  of  a
    person in responsibility.  He would  laugh  and  joke  with  the  other
    participants, enjoying singing and dancing with them, staying  up  till
    the early hours of the morning, chatting and playing games.

115. In cross-examination, Ms Kaymer said  that  she  had  never  previously
    given witness evidence.  She was just 21 years  old  and  had  been  20
    years old when she was a leader at the camp.  The camp leaders  had  to
    be a certain number of years older than the participants; they were not
    told whether any were age disputed, nor were they permitted to ask,  in
    case it was a sensitive area for the young people.  Ms Kaymer said that
    the applicant did not look older than 18 to her: given  the  difference
    in his age and hers, I consider that to be a useful indicator.

116. Dr Eder was a Foundation  Year  2  medical  doctor  when  he  gave  his
    witness  statement  in  December  2018,  working  in  an  accident  and
    emergency department.  He had been a  leader,  and  helped  coordinate,
    residential summer camps, worked in a  nursery,  coached  football  and
    spent a month in a hospital in Bahir Dar, Ethiopia, working with junior
    doctors and medical students there.  He had also spent time  supporting
    vulnerable children in a project in Kisumu,  Kenya.   He  had  spent  4
    months in his first year as  a  doctor,  in  general  paediatrics  with
    children up to the age of 18.

117. Dr Eder was also involved with the August  2018  Our  New  Home  summer
    camp.  Dr Eder was 26 at the time. He explained that for the  25  young
    people involved, there were 12 leaders and 6 staff at  the  camp.   The
    leaders  were  given  some  details  of  people's  ages,  but   nothing
    confidential.  He did not know the applicant was age disputed until  Ms
    Spiers contacted him in about October 2018 to provide his views of  the
    applicant's age.

118. The camp was focused on identity, leadership and community.  The  young
    people who came were potential future  camp  leaders  themselves.   The
    applicant would make a good leader in due course but was not as loud or
    vocal as some of the others.  The applicant still needed to develop: he
    was quieter and more subtle, shyer and found it hard to  come  forward.
    The boys could just play football if they wanted,  but  those  who  did
    tended to be younger.  Dr Eder did not think the applicant was  one  of
    the 14-year olds: he thought he was nearer the older age group, but not
    the oldest.  He considered the applicant to be younger than the medical
    students he had met in Ethiopia, the youngest of whom had been 18 years
    old.

119. The applicant was in one of the small groups  which  Dr  Eder  ran;  he
    described him as getting on  well  with  other  participants,  enjoying
    drama games and football, drawing a picture of a  football  player  and
    his mother when asked to illustrate what was  important  to  him.   The
    applicant would become distracted, then come back to the group.

120. Dr Eder found the applicant to be sincere, kind, loyal to  friends  and
    colleagues, with a lovely  genuine  aura,  and  said  he  left  a  good
    impression on all the leaders.   Dr Eder said that he  thought  of  the
    applicant as someone he  could  trust  and  who  was  trustworthy.   He
    emphasised  that  physical  appearance  was  a  very   unreliable   and
    unscientific way to assess age.

121. Mr Harshak was on the same camp:  he was then 25  years  old.   He  did
    not know then whether any of the boys  were  age-disputed;  of  the  25
    participants, there were a handful, no more than 5 or 6, who  were  18.
    The rest were younger.  Mr Harshak had since discovered  that  some  of
    the participants were age-disputed.

122. Mr Harshak had worked with two international  projects,  the  main  one
    being Crisis Classroom, which began in  October  2016  and  ended  with
    field visits to France, Italy, and Greece between March and June  2016.
    He had also spent a week in the Calais Jungle in 2016 with a  different
    non-governmental organisation. He explained  that  the  leaders  had  a
    WhatsApp group and that Ms Spiers had posted a  request  on  there  for
    witnesses to the applicant's age.  Some of the participants replied  by
    direct message and some within the group.  He had  only  spoken  to  Ms
    Spiers about it.

123. Mr Harshak said that some of the leaders were  20  or  21:  he  noticed
    quite a big difference between them and the attendees.  Mr Harshak  had
    worked with people of that age, but this applicant was quiet  and  shy,
    not always massively self-confident.  He stood by his view that in  the
    summer of 2018, the applicant was still under 18.

Legislative framework

124. The legislative framework within which I  reach  my  decision  is  well
    established and there is no disagreement between the parties  on  this.
    The disagreement between the parties arises on the credibility  of  and
    the weight to be given to various elements of the evidence  before  me.
    There is no burden  of  proof  and  no  formal  benefit  of  the  doubt
    principle.

125.  The  starting  point  for  assessing  the  applicant's  age   is   the
    credibility of  the  applicant's  own  evidence  (see  AE,  R  (on  the
    application of) v London Borough of Croydon [2012] EWCA Civ 547 at [44]
    in the judgment of Lord Justice Aikens, with whom  Lord  Justice  Lloyd
    agreed).   My primary focus must be on the applicant's account  of  how
    he knows his age and date of birth,  but  it  is  permissible  to  have
    regard to credibility more generally, as long as the primary  focus  is
    not forgotten and care is taken to ensure that particular importance is
    afforded to the credibility of evidence in relation to his age (see MVN
    v London Borough of Greenwich [2015] EWHC 1942 (Admin) at [27]  in  the
    judgment of Mr Justice Picken.

126. In R (on  the  application  of  AM)  v  Solihull  Metropolitan  Borough
    Council (AAJR) , [2012] UKUT 00118 (IAC), the  Upper  Tribunal  (Vice-
    President Ockelton and Upper Tribunal Judge  Lane  (as  he  then  was))
    considered that almost all evidence  of  physical  characteristics  was
    likely to be of very limited value as there was no  clear  relationship
    between chronological age and physical  maturity  in  respect  of  most
    measurable aspects of such maturity.  The Tribunal in AM's  case  found
    that it was difficult to see that any useful observations of  demeanour
    or social interaction or maturity could be made  in  the  course  of  a
    short interview between an individual and a  strange  adult,  including
    the asserted expertise of a social worker, but that a person such as  a
    teacher or family member, who can point to consistent attitudes  and  a
    number of instances over a period of  time,  or  the  reactions  of  an
    individual's peers or those who work with groups of young people should
    carry more weight, particularly if any necessary allowance for cultural
    differences is made.

127. That is the basis on which I proceed to consider this application.

Analysis

128. I consider first whether the applicant's direct evidence about his  age
    is credible.  There are numerous discrepancies and  inconsistencies  in
    the applicant's evidence which  impact  upon  the  credibility  of  his
    claim.  I have  had  regard  to  the  applicant's  vulnerability,  when
    reaching conclusions as to whether he was a witness of truth  regarding
    his age and his history.

129. The applicant's evidence about his date of birth  is  that  his  mother
    told it to him, and his family celebrated his birthday, by reference to
    the Gregorian calendar only, and that he was  schooled  principally  in
    the Gregorian calendar, except that the Ethiopian calendar was used  in
    studies such as Ethiopian history.

130. That is in direct contradiction of the  evidence  from  the  school  in
    Addis Ababa where, it is accepted, the  applicant  studied,  which  was
    that the local Ethiopian calendar was used except  for  subjects  where
    there was a reason to use the  Gregorian  calendar,  like  English  and
    European history, and then only in the later  school  years.   I  place
    weight on the evidence of Dr Taye that a child educated at an Ethiopian
    school up to the age of 15 would be able to sequence the months in  one
    or other of the calendars.

131. The applicant's response to being  asked  about  that  discrepancy  was
    that when he was at the school, up to 2015, only the Gregorian calendar
    was used, but on the evidence  before  me,  such  a  change  is  highly
    unlikely and I do not find it credible.

132. There was  also  the  issue  whether  the  school  he  attended  was  a
    government or a private school:  I accept that the applicant  may  have
    been confused when he was asked about whether his  parents  paid  money
    for his school and not understood  the  difference,  so  I  place  less
    weight on those contradictions.  The school's evidence,  from  both  of
    the leadership teachers approached by the parties, is that schooling at
    that school is free.  That is supported  by  country  evidence  in  the
    bundle: since 1994, government schools in  Ethiopia  no  longer  charge
    fees.

133. The applicant's evidence before me of his knowledge  of  the  Ethiopian
    calendar was very confused, much more so than  in  the  age  assessment
    interviews.  He insisted that he knew only the  month  numbers  in  the
    Ethiopian calendar and could not say now with certainty in which  month
    of the Ethiopian calendar the school year began  or  ended.   The  only
    months he was able to identify were Pagumen, a 5  or  6  day  balancing
    month in early September in the Gregorian calendar, and Meskara,  which
    begins in September. The applicant said  that  he  knew  Timkat  was  a
    public holiday in Ethiopia: Timkat occurs in January, but he could  not
    remember when it came, nor whether it came near Pagumen,  which  is  in
    September. He could not say where in the Ethiopian year  the  Gregorian
    January fell.

134. The applicant could not remember in which month  the  important  annual
    religious holiday of  Meskel  was  held.   Meskel  (the  Feast  of  the
    Exaltation of the Holy Cross) happens every  year  in  late  September,
    involving a procession, a bonfire, and national  celebrations.   It  is
    not credible that a child who lived in Ethiopia until he was  at  least
    15 would not remember that Meskel was a festival falling at the end  of
    the rainy season and the beginning of the school year.

135. I also have regard to the cautious position the  applicant  took  about
    what he  had  said  to  the  Italian  authorities  when  fingerprinted,
    essentially that he attempted to give a date in Tigrinya and did so  at
    random, and that he could not now say what date he chose  to  give  the
    Italian authorities.  I consider that the reason he says that  is  that
    he knows that he said something different to  the  Italian  authorities
    from what he is saying now.

136. I do not find the applicant's own account of his age  to  be  credible.
    I consider that he has tried to conceal and  obfuscate,  much  more  so
    than in his interviews with the age assessors,  and  there  can  be  no
    reason for him to do that if he is telling the truth.

137. The applicant claimed to have no mobile phone of his own, but I  remind
    myself that in Dr Benson's report, he told her it was his own telephone
    which broke: now, he says it was one he was looking after for a friend.
     The account of his running around with  several  phones  belonging  to
    other people who had left them on charge while they ran for  the  lorry
    is difficult to credit. I consider that the applicant has  been  trying
    to conceal at least some ongoing contact with his family  in  Ethiopia.
    These inconsistencies do not impact on the applicant's age in the sense
    that they are indicators of his age, but they impact on the credibility
    of his account overall.

138. I recall, also, the  evidence  of  the  applicant  about  his  family's
    mobile phones.  He says that he used to know his father's  number,  and
    those of his aunt and uncle, but he cannot remember them now.  He  said
    that his mother's number was inactive (which seems to  have  been  true
    for a time) but when he tried it, his aunt answered.  I  note  that  he
    said that his aunt was going to obtain the hospital  birth  certificate
    from his mother's former  home,  but  the  evidence  of  the  solicitor
    (double hearsay though it  is)  was  that  it  was  the  'church  birth
    certificate' she thought she could find.

139. I am satisfied that the applicant knows his age.  I am  therefore  left
    in the position of having to assess his age and reach a decision on his
    date of birth on the basis of his evidence and that  of  the  witnesses
    called by both him and the local authority.

140. None of the applicant's witnesses is an expert on age  assessment,  but
    it seems it is not actually possible to be  an  expert  in  determining
    age.  Their evidence is opinion evidence and when I consider the weight
    to be placed upon that evidence proffered by those individuals, I taken
    into account the context of the witnesses' contact with  the  applicant
    and the experience and the contact that each individual has with  young
    people both as asylum seekers, refugees  and  non-asylum  seekers.   My
    conclusions are not predicated upon  the  respondent's  view  or  which
    witness evidence is to be preferred.  I have reached  my  view  on  the
    evidence before me, the oral evidence  and  the  documentary  evidence,
    even if I have not specifically referred to it earlier.

141. The respondent's position that the applicant was significantly over  18
    years old cannot be sustained on  the  evidence  before  me.   I  place
    little  weight  on  the  evidence  of  Mr  Bangura  who,  despite   his
    protestations, made his assessment of the applicant's age on unreliable
    physical  characteristics,  and  who  was  prepared  to  say  that  the
    applicant could cook, never having seen him do so, and  to  put  before
    the Tribunal  two  badly  checked  reports  in  which  the  applicant's
    religion was different from December  2017  (Muslim)  to  January  2018
    (Christian).  I note,  however,  that  he  thought  the  applicant  was
    between 18 and 21 years old.

142. For the applicant, I have the evidence of Ms Nonni, who thought he  was
    between 16 and 17 years old, based on the applicant's social competence
    and self-care skills.    She accepted that she 'could not always get it
    right'.  I remind myself that the reactions of an individual's peers or
    those who work with groups of young people should  carry  more  weight,
    particularly if any necessary allowance  for  cultural  differences  is
    made.  Unfortunately,  there  was  no  evidence  from  the  applicant's
    friends in his various accommodations, or at school.  There is also the
    evidence of his aunt (although it is at least double hearsay,  and  not
    properly evidenced by the interpreter's notes), that he is 'about  17',
    but she does not know his date of birth.

143. I have evidence from three 'Young Leaders' who, although they knew  the
    applicant for a very short period, just 5 days last  summer,  had  also
    spent time with young people in Ethiopia.   They  all  responded  to  a
    request on Ms Spiers'  WhatsApp  group  for  people  prepared  to  give
    evidence of the applicant's age.  There were 12 young leaders  on  that
    course, so they represent  of the leadership  group  from  the  August
    2018 5-day residential camp. I have not seen the WhatsApp post,  but  I
    approach this judgment on the basis that it was neutrally  phrased:  Ms
    Spiers is very experienced and would not have sought to  influence  the
    evidence given by the Young Leaders.

144. All three of the Young Leaders worked with the applicant at the same 5-
    day camp in August 2018, although Ms Spiers had  a  longer  involvement
    with him through a regular youth club.   Five  days  is  a  very  short
    period in AM terms.  I recall that Ms Kaymer, who  was  20  years  old,
    thought the applicant was several years younger than she was,  and  not
    older than 18.  Dr Eder, who was 26, thought that the applicant was  at
    the older age of the group he was mentoring, nearer to 17 than 14,  and
    younger than the 18-plus doctors he had met in Ethiopia, where he spent
    a month Mr Harshak said he would have been surprised if  the  applicant
    was 18 years old.  Ms Spiers, who arranged for these three witnesses to
    attend, and who is herself  very  experienced,  thought  the  applicant
    looked and acted like a person of 17 or 18 years old and dressed like a
    teenager.

145. The respondent's age assessments were undertaken on the basis that  the
    applicant was Eritrean,  not  Ethiopian,  a  position  from  which  the
    respondent  has  now  resiled,  in  the  light  of  the  report  of  Dr
    Woldegabriel.   The applicant challenged the primary age assessment  on
    the basis that it had taken no account of the  applicant's  history  of
    torture and being a victim of trafficking, nor had he been referred for
    a mental health assessment to  determine  how  that  might  affect  his
    behaviour in the age assessment meetings.

146. The respondent eventually agreed to reconsider its  age  assessment  in
    the  light  of  new  evidence,  while  maintaining  that  the  original
    assessment was lawful.  Neither age assessment assigned a date of birth
    to the applicant.  In the light of  the  failure  to  assess  and  have
    regard to the  applicant's  mental  state,  and  the  over-emphasis  on
    physical markers such as shaving, having an Adam's apple, and so on,  I
    consider that there is no alternative but to quash the  age  assessment
    and the supplementary decision.

147. Taking all the rather limited  evidence  before  me  into  account  and
    doing the best I can with that evidence, I am not  satisfied  that  the
    applicant was a minor on arrival. I do not, however, think that he  was
    significantly older than 18.   I consider that he was an adult when  he
    came to the United Kingdom and  that  he  was  born  in  the  Gregorian
    calendar year of 1999.







Order

148. IT IS ORDERED that:

    1) The respondent's age assessment  and  supplementary  assessment  are
       hereby quashed;

    2) I assess the applicant's age as 19, with  a  date  of  birth  of  21
       November 1999; and

    3) The respondent shall continue to provide services to  the  applicant
       as if under the  Children  Act  1989,  including  accommodation  and
       financial support, until 26 April 2019.

Costs

149. The  applicant  will  pay  50%  of  the  respondent's  costs  of  these
    proceedings, to be subject to a detailed assessment if not agreed.

150. The amount (if any) which  the  applicant  is  required  to  pay  under
    section 26 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act
    2012 shall be determined by a costs judge if not agreed.

151. There shall be detailed assessment of the applicant's costs payable  by
    the Lord Chancellor pursuant to Part 1 of the Legal Aid, Sentencing and
    Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

152. There was no application for  permission  to  appeal  at  the  hearing.
    Pursuant to rule 44(4B) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (as amended), I refuse permission to appeal to the Court  of
    Appeal because I am not satisfied that there is any arguable  error  of
    law in my judgment.




