
IAC-FH-LW-V1

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                                                JR/8109/2018

                                                                 Field House
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                              13 August 2019

                                    Judgment handed down on 6 September 2019


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                            mohammad kamrul islam
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE kopieczek
                        Upper Tribunal Judge sheridan


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr M Biggs, Counsel, instructed by Universal Solicitors appeared  on  behalf
of the Applicant.

Mr B  Seifert,  Counsel,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


JUDGE KOPIECZEK: This application for judicial review  concerns  a  decision
    of the respondent dated 12 September 2018.  According to the  applicant
    it is a decision to refuse a human rights claim  (based  on  10  years'
    continuous lawful residence).  On behalf of the respondent it is argued
    that it is a fresh claim decision pursuant  to  paragraph  353  of  the
    Immigration Rules.


    However, the claim involves  more  than  an  argument  as  to  how  the
    respondent's decision should be characterised.  Amongst  other  things,
    it is argued that if it is a fresh  claim  decision,  it  is  unlawful.
    Central to that argument is a dispute about the service of  a  decision
    dated 23 November 2017, being a decision to refuse a human rights claim
    and certifying the claim as clearly unfounded, within the context of an
    application for indefinite leave  to  remain  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The applicant contends that he never  received  that  decision.
    If the decision was validly served, it would mean that the  applicant's
    leave expired in November 2017.  If that is right, he had not  acquired
    10 years' lawful residence as  at  the  date  of  the  respondent's  12
    September 2018 decision and thus could not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276B of the Rules (the long residence Rule).

    Immigration history

 1. It is not necessary for us to refer to anything  other  than  the  main
    features of the applicant's immigration history.  He arrived in the  UK
    on 27 May 2008 with leave as  a  student.   Various  applications  were
    thereafter made for further leave to  remain;  some  granted  and  some
    refused.

 2. On 8 May 2014 he was granted leave to remain  as  a  Tier  2  (General)
    Migrant until 14 April 2017. On 28 October 2016 he  was  informed  that
    his leave to remain was curtailed to expire on 1 January 2017.   On  31
    December 2016 he made an application for leave to remain on  Article  8
    grounds, that application subsequently being varied on 15 May  2017  to
    an application for indefinite leave to remain outside the Rules.

 3.  On  23  November  2017  the  respondent  purported  to   refuse   that
    application, certifying it as clearly unfounded pursuant to s. 94(1) of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  ("the  2002  Act").
    This afforded the applicant an out of country appeal only.  It is  this
    decision which the applicant contends he never received.

 4. On 15 December 2017 he made an application for leave to remain  on  the
    grounds of long residence.  That application was varied on 1  May  2018
    to an application for indefinite leave to  remain.   That  led  to  the
    challenged decision dated 12 September 2018.

    Submissions

 5. At the outset of the hearing, having identified with  the  parties  the
    areas of challenge advanced on behalf of the applicant, we invited  the
    parties to address us firstly on what we shall call  the  Sheidu  point
    (Sheidu (Further submissions; appealable decision) [2016]  UKUT  000412
    (IAC)).  That involves the contention that the respondent's decision of
    12 September 2018, rather  than  being  a  refusal  to  accept  further
    submissions as amounting to a fresh claim pursuant to paragraph 353  of
    the Immigration Rules, is in fact a refusal of a  human  rights  claim.
    The parties agreed that if we found in favour of the applicant on  that
    point it would not be necessary to go on to consider the other  aspects
    of the claim.

 6. A central feature of the claim otherwise, involves the contention  that
    the applicant did not receive the decision of 23 November 2017 and  did
    not sign for it. To that end the applicant seeks to  rely  on  evidence
    from himself, and from his landlady at the premises at which he resided
    at the relevant time. The respondent asserts that the  decision  having
    been sent to the applicant's address, and having been  signed  for,  it
    was properly 'given'.

 7. Although Mr Biggs indicated that oral  evidence  may  not  in  fact  be
    needed, that post-decision  evidence  would  involve  consideration  of
    whether the issue of service of the 23 November decision was a question
    of precedent fact.  That in turn relates to the presumption  of  notice
    having been given pursuant to article 8ZB(1) of the Immigration  (Leave
    to Enter and Remain) Order 2000. The applicant's grounds raise an issue
    in terms of the Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003,  in  particular
    regulation 7(4), but the grounds rely on an outdated version  of  those
    regulations which are inaccurately quoted in the grounds of claim.

 8. The parties agreed that so far  as  they  were  aware,  the  Tribunal's
    decision in Sheidu has not been considered in any reported decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal or, more importantly, any higher authority.

 9. In his submissions on the Sheidu point, Mr Biggs referred to the detail
    of the decision dated 12 September 2018 in support  of  the  contention
    that the respondent had in fact made  a  decision  to  refuse  a  human
    rights claim.  Amongst other  things,  it  was  pointed  out  that  the
    respondent had made express reference to the long  residence  Rule  and
    considered it in detail before refusing  the  application  pursuant  to
    paragraph 276D of the Rules.

10. We were referred also to paragraphs 34-34G of the Immigration Rules  in
    terms of the validity of applications for leave to remain,  in  support
    of the contention that in this case the respondent had considered  that
    the application made was a human rights application.

11. With reference to Baihinga (r. 22; human rights  appeal:  requirements)
    [2018] UKUT 00090 (IAC), and the respondent's  Guidance  on  Rights  of
    Appeal Version 6.0 published on 9 October 2017 appended to the decision
    in Baihinga, it was submitted that  regardless  of  paragraph  353,  an
    application for leave to  remain  on  the  grounds  of  long  residence
    pursuant to paragraph 276B is a human rights claim.  As  we  understood
    the  argument,  it  was  submitted  that  paragraph  276B  applications
    (amongst others) are not subject  to  the  paragraph  353  fresh  claim
    regime because they are human rights claims in any event which  require
    a decision from the respondent pursuant to paragraph 276D.

12. In response to our enquiry as to whether that meant that  an  applicant
    could make endless repeat applications  of  the  same  type,  Mr  Biggs
    submitted that the respondent has tools at his disposal in the form  of
    ss. 94 and 96 of the 2002 Act. (certification provisions)  which  would
    mitigate the abuse of such repeat applications.

13. Returning to the Sheidu point, it was submitted that  albeit  that  the
    respondent referred to paragraph 353 and fresh claim considerations  at
    the end of the decision, by that point it  was  too  late  because  the
    decision to refuse the human rights claim had already been made.

14. In his submissions Mr Seifert argued that there was a distinction  made
    in the  challenged  decision  between  a  human  rights  claim  and  an
    "application".  Thus, there was repeated reference in the  decision  to
    the "application" for leave to remain, meaning that the respondent  did
    not consider the application as a "claim".

15. We were also referred to that part  of  the  decision  under  the  sub-
    heading "Repeat claim" where paragraph 353 is considered.   Relying  on
    Robinson v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019]  UKSC  11,
    in particular at [62-64], it was submitted that the  decision  in  this
    case is clearly a paragraph 353 decision.

16. It was further submitted that the facts in Sheidu were  very  different
    from those in this case, for example in that in Sheidu there  had  been
    several appeals to the First-tier Tribunal.  Furthermore, the  decision
    in this case is phrased differently from that in Sheidu.

17. In summary, it was submitted that not only were  the  facts  in  Sheidu
    different, but Robinson was now the authority on the point.

18. In his reply, Mr Biggs took issue with the contention  that  there  was
    any  distinction  made  in  the  respondent's   decision   between   an
    application  and  a  claim.   Furthermore,  any  such  distinction  was
    inconsistent with the Home Office policy  appended  to  Baihinga  which
    itself says that a 276B application is a human rights claim.

19. It  was  further  submitted  that  Sheidu  was  not  inconsistent  with
    Robinson.  The latter required the respondent to  apply  paragraph  353
    and that was not done in this case.

    Assessment and Conclusions

20. After submissions we announced to the parties that we would  grant  the
    application for judicial review on the basis that we were persuaded  as
    to the merit of the applicant's argument that the decision is in fact a
    refusal of a human rights claim rather than a fresh claim decision.  We
    also indicated however, that we were not satisfied that there  was  any
    merit in Mr Biggs' submissions to the  effect  that  a  paragraph  276B
    refusal was, in effect, automatically to be characterised as a  refusal
    of a human rights claim regardless of paragraph 353.  All we  need  say
    about that argument is that we  consider  that  similar  arguments,  or
    arguments with the same underlying thesis, were  rejected  in  Robinson
    and other cases.

21. In Sheidu the guidance offered is encapsulated  within  the  italicised
    words, namely that "If the SSHD makes a decision that is one  of  those
    specified in s 82(1),  it  carries  a  right  of  appeal  even  if  the
    intention was not to treat the submissions as a fresh claim."

22. In Sheidu the appellant made an asylum application  which  was  refused
    and his appeal dismissed.  He made a number of subsequent  applications
    all of which were rejected or refused.  He was subject to a deportation
    decision and his appeal against that decision was dismissed.   He  made
    further submissions to the effect that he feared persecution  in  Sudan
    which he claimed was his country of nationality.  There were Article  8
    submissions in terms of family and private life.

23. The Tribunal summarised the challenged decision between  [9]  and  [14]
    including, significantly, quoting at [9] the heading  of  the  decision
    letter as follows:
                            "UK BORDERS ACT 2007
                    CONSIDERATION OF FURTHER SUBMISSIONS
        DECISION TO REFUSE A PROTECTION CLAIM AND HUMAN RIGHTS CLAIM"

24. At [16] the Tribunal said as follows:


         "The terms of the decision letter in the  present  case  show,  we
            think, why we expressed the sentiments we did  in  paragraph  7
            above.  It is true that the part of the decision  beginning  at
            paragraph 66 purports to deal with the submissions made on  the
            basis that they are not a "fresh claim".  But it appears to  us
            that the previous 65 paragraphs do something rather  different.
            The heading of the letter, which we  have  set  out,  indicates
            that it contains a decision to refuse a protection claim and  a
            human  rights  claim;  so  far  as  the  latter  is  concerned,
            paragraph 58 appears to be, in terms, the refusal  of  a  human
            rights claim.  As it seems to us, this is ZT  (Kosovo)  and  ZA
            (Nigeria) territory: there has been an appealable decision, and
            once there has been an appealable decision, paragraph  353  has
            no part to play."




25. Further, at [17] there is the following:

           "...Mr Deller's second submission is that, because  of  the  way
           paragraph  353  is  considered  in  the  decision  letter,   and
           following Waqar, the decision was that the submissions  did  not
           amount to a "fresh claim", and so  their  rejection  carried  no
           right of appeal.  If those terms were applicable to the decision
           letter, that  submission  would  certainly  be  consistent  with
           Waqar; but it does not appear to us that those  submissions  are
           open to the Secretary of State in  view  of  the  terms  of  the
           decision letter.  Whatever  may  have  been  the  terms  of  the
           decision letters in the other cases, it appears to us that  this
           decision letter starts with a human rights claim,  substantively
           refuses it, and does so using wording in the heading and in  the
           refusal itself which is so clearly that envisaged by s. 82  that
           the subsequent consideration under paragraph 353 cannot have the
           effect of  removing  the  right  of  appeal  engendered  by  the
           decision."

26. It is apparent that the Tribunal in that case considered not  only  the
    structure and form of the challenged decision but  its  substance.   It
    was not simply a question of the structure  or  form  of  the  decision
    which was objectionable in terms of the respondent's contention that it
    was a fresh claim decision.  It was that in  substance  the  respondent
    had refused a human rights claim.

27. We have considered whether the decision in Sheidu survives that of  the
    Supreme Court in Robinson.  Mr Seifert relied in particular on [64]  of
    Robinson where it states as follows:

         "For these reasons I consider that the Court of Appeal was  correct
         to conclude that 'a human rights claim' in section 82(1)(b) of  the
         2002 Act as amended means an original human rights claim or a fresh
         human rights claim within rule 353. More generally, where a  person
         has already had a protection claim or a human rights claim  refused
         and there is no pending appeal, further submissions which  rely  on
         protection or human rights grounds must first be  accepted  by  the
         Secretary of State as a fresh claim in accordance with rule 353  of
         the  Immigration  Rules  if  a  decision  in  response   to   those
         representations is to attract a right of appeal under section 82 of
         the 2002 Act."

28. We do not see that passage, or indeed any other aspect of Robinson,  as
    casting doubt on the correctness of the decision in Sheidu. It is  true
    that Sheidu is  a  decision  which  was  made  with  reference  to  the
    particular facts of that case. It is nevertheless a decision  which  is
    not that far removed from the facts of the case before us. Furthermore,
    the Tribunal obviously considered  that  the  point  in  issue  was  of
    sufficient importance to offer guidance. We agree with the reasoning in
    Sheidu and apply it to the facts of the case before us.

29. Turning to the challenged decision in this case, it is  instructive  to
    summarise it and quote aspects of it verbatim.  It is to be noted  that
    unlike in Sheidu there is no heading stating that the decision  is  one
    to refuse a human rights claim.  There is no heading at  all.   Page  1
    states that "Your application has been unsuccessful.   You  should  now
    leave the United Kingdom."  The substantive part of the decision starts
    on page 2.  There it states as follows:

         "On 01/05/18 you made a human rights claim in  an  application  for
         Indefinite Leave to Remain in the UK  on  the  basis  of  10  years
         continuous and lawful residence and on the basis of your family and
         private life.

         Your application has been considered under those  Rules,  and  with
         reference to Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights
         (ECHR).  The relevant Immigration Rules can be viewed  on  [website
         given]".

30. Next, under a sub-heading "Consideration" it states that:

         "Your human rights application for Indefinite Leave to  Remain  has
         been considered under the Immigration Rules, including  the  family
         and private life Rules, and outside the Immigration Rules."

31. There then follows a description of the applicant's immigration history
    and on the following page the requirements of paragraph  276B  are  set
    out.  The decision notes that the applicant entered the UK  on  27  May
    2008 as a student and that he made a number of in-time applications and
    resided lawfully until the 'outside the  Rules'  application  dated  31
    December 2016 was refused on 23 November 2017, with an out  of  country
    appeal.  It refers to the applicant's leave having been extended  under
    s.3C (of the Immigration Act 1971) but stating that that 3C leave ended
    on 23 November  2017  when  the  (31  December  2016)  application  was
    decided.  That 23 November 2017 decision is the one which the applicant
    contends he never received.

32. There follows within the 12 September 2018 decision a consideration  of
    the extent to which the applicant met the 10 year rule.  We  then  find
    this:

         "Your application for Indefinite Leave  to  Remain  in  the  UK  is
         hereby refused under paragraph 276D with  reference  to  276B(i)(a)
         and (v) of the Immigration Rules" (our emphasis).

33. Consideration is then given to the extent to which  the  applicant  was
    able to meet the family and private life  requirements  of  the  Rules,
    including in terms of suitability and eligibility.  On page 5 there  is
    detailed consideration of the issue of "Exceptional Circumstances".  On
    page 6 there is the following:

         "Refusal Paragraph under the 10-year Private Life Route

         In light of the above, your application is refused under  paragraph
         276ADE(1), (iii), (iv), (v), and (vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
         Accordingly, you do not qualify for leave to remain under  the  10-
         year private life route of Part 7 of the Immigration Rules, or  for
         leave to remain outside the Rules  on  exceptional  circumstances."
         (our emphasis).

34. After a paragraph referring to "Compassionate Factors" there is the sub-
    heading "Repeat claim".

35. Under this sub-heading it states as follows:

         "You have previously had an asylum or human  rights  claim  refused
         with a right of appeal.  On 31/12/16  you  applied  for  Indefinite
         Leave to Remain outside the immigration rules.  This was refused on
         23/11/17 with an out of country right of appeal,  which  you  chose
         not to take.  Therefore your current claim has been  considered  to
         determine whether it is either a repeat claim or a fresh claim.  We
         have done this consideration under paragraph 353 of the Immigration
         Rules (HC 395 as amended).

         Paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules states:

         'When a human rights  or  protection  claim  has  been  refused  or
         withdrawn or treated as withdrawn under  paragraph  333C  of  these
         Rules and any appeal relating to that claim is no  longer  pending,
         the decision maker will consider any further  submissions  and,  if
         rejected, will then determine whether they amount to a fresh claim.
          The  submissions  will  amount  to  a  fresh  claim  if  they  are
         significantly different from the material that has previously  been
         considered.  The submissions will only be  significantly  different
         if the content:

             (i)  had not already been considered; and

             (ii) taken together with the previously  considered  material,
                  created a realistic prospect of  success,  notwithstanding
                  its rejection.

         This paragraph does not apply to claims made overseas.'

         Your application has been considered on all the evidence available,
         including evidence previously considered.  You  have  provided  new
         information in the form of stating you have a partner  in  the  UK,
         and providing further reasons which prevent you from  returning  to
         Bangladesh.

         Having looked through your previous application dated  15/12/17,  I
         can see no mention of a partner.  Therefore, your partner does  not
         meet the definition of 'partner' for the purpose of the immigration
         rules, as you have not been in a relationship for 2 years  akin  to
         marriage.  You have also provided no evidence  to  demonstrate  you
         are in a relationship.  Furthermore, being in a relationship in the
         UK does not warrant a grant of leave outside the immigration rules.

         I have considered the new information relating to your private life
         in the  UK,  and  the  reasons  you  state  you  cannot  return  to
         Bangladesh.  I have not found you have demonstrated any exceptional
         circumstances, which would prevent you from being able to return to
         your home country.

         Therefore, I have considered that your current application does not
         amount to a fresh claim, as there would be no realistic prospect of
         success at an appeal hearing as a Judge of the first tier could not
         reasonably take an alternative view.

         Therefore it is considered that paragraph 353 should apply in  your
         case, and my decision does not provide a right of appeal."

36. We accept that the foregoing passage of the decision letter involves  a
    consideration of paragraph 353.  However, the  earlier  four-and-a-half
    pages involve an assessment of the extent to  which  the  applicant  is
    able to meet the requirements of the  long  residence  rule,  paragraph
    276B, or otherwise meets the  requirements  of  the  Article  8  Rules.
    Within that consideration at the very outset there is the statement  in
    the first sentence that on 1 May  2018  the  applicant  "made  a  human
    rights claim" in the application for indefinite leave  to  remain.   It
    refers to his application having been considered under the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Immigration Rules applicable are set out.  On page 4, after
    the assessment of paragraph 276B there is an express statement that the
    application for indefinite leave to remain is  "hereby  refused"  under
    paragraph 276D with reference to 276B.  Then, on page 6 it repeats that
    the application is "refused" with reference to the private life  rules,
    paragraph 276ADE.

37. We consider it to be incontrovertible that the decision considered  the
    extent to which the applicant was able to meet the requirements of  the
    long residence and  Article  8  Rules  and  unequivocally  refused  the
    application.  We do not need to refer in  any  detail  to  the  appeals
    regime.  It is not in dispute but that  if  a  human  rights  claim  is
    refused, such a refusal (usually) generates a right of appeal under  s.
    82 of the 2002 Act.

38. We accept that it is appropriate within a  paragraph  353  decision  to
    consider the extent to  which  the  application  meets  any  applicable
    Immigration Rules. However, we do not consider that the  paragraph  353
    consideration that is to be found at the end of this decision  has  the
    effect of converting what is a refusal of a human  rights  claim  to  a
    refusal to accept further submissions as amounting to  a  fresh  claim.
    The decision by that time had already been made.

39. Likewise, we do not consider that there is any merit  in  the  argument
    that the decision distinguishes between an 'application' and a 'claim'.
    A plain reading of the decision does not support that view even if such
    a distinction could properly be made in any given case.

40. In these circumstances, we declare that the decision dated 12 September
    2018 is a refusal of the human rights claim which generates a right  of
    appeal.  The effect of that is that the applicant ought  to  have  been
    served with the relevant notification of rights  of  appeal  under  the
    Immigration (Notices) Regulations 2003.

41. In the light of those conclusions, it is not necessary for us to decide
    whether, as a fresh claim decision, the decision is an unlawful one for
    the other reasons advanced on behalf of the applicant in the grounds.

42. Similarly, it is not necessary, and indeed would be inappropriate,  for
    us to make findings on the question of whether the  decision  dated  23
    November 2017 was lawfully "given" pursuant to the  Immigration  (Leave
    to Enter and Remain)  Order  2000.  That  is  a  matter  that  is  more
    appropriately resolved within the context of any appeal under the  2002
    Act.

43. Accordingly this application for judicial review is granted.

44. At the handing down of this  judgment  neither  party  attended,  their
    attendance having been excused.

Costs

45. In the embargoed judgment we indicated that  our  provisional  view  in
    relation to costs, subject to submissions, was that the respondent  pay
    the applicant's reasonable costs, to be assessed if not agreed. Neither
    party has dissented from that view and on behalf of the applicant  that
    view is endorsed. We make an order for costs in those terms therefore.

46. The respondent has made an application for permission to appeal to  the
    Court of Appeal which, for  the  reasons  explained  in  the  embargoed
    judgment, we consider to have been made at the  handing  down  hearing.
    Having considered  the  grounds  dated  5  September  2019,  we  refuse
    permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal, there  being  no  arguable
    error of law in our decision. ~~~~0~~~~


                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/8109/2018


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                       The Queen on the application of
                            MOHAMMAD KAMRUL ISLAM
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                   Before Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek &
                        Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan




                  Application for judicial review: decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr M. Biggs on behalf of the  Applicant  and  Mr
B. Seifert on behalf of the Respondent, at a hearing at Field House,  London
on 13 August 2019 (judgment handed down on 6 September 2019)

     Decision: the application for judicial review is granted

For the reasons  given  in  the  judgment  attached,  this  application  for
judicial review is granted (the judgment also dealing  with  the  issues  of
costs and permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal).

Order


We order therefore, that the judicial review application be granted.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

We refuse permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal,  there  being  no
arguable error of law in the decision.


Costs

The respondent is to pay the applicant's (reasonable) costs, to  be  subject
to detailed assessment on the standard basis if not agreed.

Signed:
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek

On:  6 September 2019








Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).





