
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: JR/8946/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Judgment handed down         |
|On 8 August 2017                              |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                    R (on the application of Talha Rahim)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Z. Malik of Counsel, instructed by SZ Solicitors

For the respondent:    Mr J. Anderson of Counsel, instructed by the
Government Legal  Department


                                  JUDGMENT

Introduction and immigration history

    1. The applicant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 7 June  1972.
       He entered the United Kingdom on 8 September 2004  when  he  was  32
       years old with entry clearance as a student. His leave to remain  as
       a student and  as  a  Post-Study  Work  (Migrant)  was  successively
       extended  until  23  November  2013.  He  then  made  and  in   time
       application for further leave to remain either as a Tier 4 (General)
       Migrant on 21 November 2013 (according to the applicant) , or  as  a
       student (according to the respondent's refusal letter). This further
       application was refused on 2 June 2014.  On the  following  day  the
       applicant was served with papers informing him  of  his  immigration
       status and asserting that he had earlier obtained leave to remain by
       deception having, it is claimed, submitted a TOEIC certificate which
       the Educational Testing Service had cancelled as a result  of  their
       checks which had led them to believe that it had  been  obtained  by
       use of a proxy test- taker.


    2. The applicant challenged this contention by way of  judicial  review
       proceedings on 8 July 2014. Those proceedings were unsuccessful. The
       refusal of 18 January 2016 was either the refusal of  permission  or
       the refusal of the substantive application. The application to  seek
       permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal  was  refused  on  8
       February 2016.


    3. Accordingly, the applicant's challenge  to  the  lawfulness  of  the
       respondent's decision to refuse further leave  to  remain  has  been
       tested  already,  albeit  in  the   context   of   judicial   review
       proceedings, and the applicant's challenge as to its lawfulness  has
       been rejected, even as far as the Court of Appeal.

    4. For these reasons, although the applicant had leave to remain  until
       22 November 2013, he fell short of  a  period  of  10  years  lawful
       leave. Although his in-time application for further leave to  remain
       operated to provide  the  applicant  with  s.3C  continuation  leave
       whilst  it  remained  under  consideration,  the   application   was
       ultimately unsuccessful in  June  2014  and  the  challenge  to  the
       refusal was rejected. The effect of this is that the  applicant  has
       never acquired 10 years  lawful  residence  which  required  him  to
       establish a lawful presence until 8 September 2014.

The application for further leave and the decision to refuse it

    5. In due course the applicant applied for further leave to  remain  on
       the basis of a protected family and private  life.  The  application
       was refused by decision made on 1 August 2016. A number  of  reasons
       were  relied  upon  by  the  respondent.  The  decision-maker  first
       approached the application by reference to Appendix FM and paragraph
       276ADE(1).


    6. As the applicant did not  assert  that  he  had  a  partner  or  any
       children in the United Kingdom, the decision-maker properly confined
       his consideration to a protected private life.


    7. The respondent recited in summary form the immigration history  that
       I have set out above, relying  upon  information  from  ETS  to  the
       effect that the TOIEC certificate that he had earlier used to obtain
       leave had been cancelled as a result of the deception.  As a  result
       of the deception that the decision-maker claimed  had  taken  place,
       the application was refused on suitability grounds.


    8. Consideration was then  given  to  whether  the  applicant  met  the
       requirements of paragraphs 276ADE (1) and concluded that he did not.
       No challenge is made to that finding.

    9. The decision-maker then went  on  to  consider  whether  there  were
       exceptional  circumstances  outside  the  application  of  paragraph
       276ADE(1). He noted the immigration history to which I have  already
       referred and recited that the applicant (who had by then been in the
       United Kingdom for 11 years) would have established a  private  life
       but had provided no significant evidence that the nature, scope  and
       content  of  his  private  life   rendered   removal   unlawful   or
       disproportionate. The decision noted  that  the  applicant  had  his
       parents and siblings in Pakistan. Given  that  he  had  entered  the
       United Kingdom at the age of 32, the decision-maker  concluded  that
       there were no exceptional circumstances preventing  the  applicant's
       return.

The nature of the present proceedings

   10. It was for these reasons that the decision-maker certified the claim
       as  'clearly  unfounded'  under  s.  94  (1)  of  the   Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The applicant,  of  course,  has  a
       right of appeal against that decision but the right  of  appeal  can
       only be exercised out-of-country.

   11. These proceedings for judicial review are, therefore, restricted  to
       a challenge to the certification the effect of which is  to  confine
       the applicant's right of appeal to an application to be made out-of-
       country. The issue before  me  is  whether  the  decision-maker  was
       lawfully entitled to determine that the Article 8 claim was  clearly
       unfounded, namely, that it was bound to fail.

   12. The challenge made to the respondent's decision  making  process  in
       the grounds seeking judicial review relied upon the decision  in  SM
       and Qadir (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229  (IAC).
       In essence, the grounds sought to establish the respondent  was  not
       lawfully entitled to rely  upon  the  allegation  of  deception.  Mr
       Malik, on behalf of the applicant accepted  that  these  grounds  no
       longer amounted to an arguable contention and abandoned them.

   13. Instead, he sought to develop a different challenge  which  he  made
       orally.

The, as yet unmade, application to amend the grounds

   14. There is, of course, no criticism to be made against Mr Malik in his
       approaching the matter in this way. He had been instructed  the  day
       before. He submitted, however, that his Instructing  Solicitors  had
       only been approached by the applicant in the course of the  previous
       Wednesday. Consequently, there  was  no  application  to  amend  the
       grounds. Whilst the grounds formulated by Mr Malik  were  clear  and
       intelligible, they had not been reduced to writing. Mr Anderson,  on
       behalf of the Secretary of State, did not assert that he  could  not
       answer the points made by Mr Malik in his remodelled case.

   15. Mr Anderson  submitted,  however,  that  it  was  necessary  for  an
       application to amend to be made and that an applicant should not  be
       in a better position by appearing  at  the  hearing  represented  by
       counsel than he would be if an application had been made in due form
       and on payment of the appropriate fee and  an  explanation  provided
       for the late application to amend the grounds.

   16. Further, since the granting of permission by Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Storey on 23 November 2016, a series of  directions  had  been
       made both by him and in a further communication  from  the  Tribunal
       dated 12 May 2017 which set out a series  of  requirements  for  the
       proper conduct of the substantive hearing. The applicant, of course,
       has not complied with them.


   17. It goes without saying that if no written application had been  made
       prior to the  hearing  to  amend  the  grounds  supported  by  draft
       grounds, the application would not have been permitted. There is  no
       evidence of a suitable reason for the delay in applying to amend. Mr
       Malik spoke of the applicant being short of funds but this  did  not
       prevent him instructing solicitors and counsel late in the  day.  If
       he was able  to  instruct  solicitors  on  Wednesday,  there  is  no
       evidence to suggest that he could not have done so  earlier.   These
       are compelling,  not  to  say  overwhelming,  reasons  for  refusing
       permission to pursue the applicant's radically amended case.

   18. Nevertheless, out of deference  to  the  arguments  advanced  by  Mr
       Malik, in considering the (unmade) application to amend the grounds,
       I shall give consideration to  the  merits  of  the  case  that  the
       applicant would now wish to advance.


The proper legal approach


   19. In doing so, I shall be guided  by  the  approach  set  out  in  the
       opinions of the House of Lords in ZT (Kosovo)  v  the  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 6. Relying on the Court of
       Appeal's decision in R (on the application  of  L)  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2003] EWCA Civ 25 at paragraphs 56 to
       58 which were duly endorsed by Lord  Phillips  the  approach  to  be
       adopted is to apply an objective test. It does  not  depend  on  the
       Home Secretary's view; rather, up on a criterion which a  court  can
       readily reapply once it has the materials which the  Home  Secretary
       had. The claim is either clearly unfounded or it is not.  The  Court
       of Appeal stated,


         If on at least one legitimate view of the facts  or  the  law  the
         claim may succeed, the claim will not be clearly unfounded. If that
         point is reached, the decision-maker cannot conclude otherwise.


   20. Lord Phillips continued in paragraph 23:


         If any reasonable doubt exists as to whether the claim may succeed
         then it is not clearly unfounded... If the court concludes that the
         claim has a realistic prospect of success  when  the  Secretary  of
         State has reached a  contrary  view,  the  court  will  necessarily
         conclude that the Secretary of State's view was irrational.


   21. Whilst there is plainly an argument  as  to  whether  the  reviewing
       Tribunal can look at material that post-dates the decision in  order
       to reach its own view  on  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  might
       properly conclude the claim is clearly unfounded, that issue is  not
       material in the context of this appeal.   All  the  material  relied
       upon by the applicant in  his  submissions  to  me  was  before  the
       Secretary of State. (The  applicant's  posts-decision  statement  is
       directed towards his taking the TOIEC test which, for our  purposes,
       is not material.)


   22. Mr Malik sought to enlarge the test by submitting that, since it  is
       legitimate for different judicial decision-makers to reach different
       conclusions on the same material, the issue was not simply whether I
       considered the application to be clearly unfounded but whether there
       might be another judicial decision-maker who would reach a different
       but legitimate view.  I consider that there  is  no  need  for  this
       enlarged test as it was in contemplation both by the Court of Appeal
       and the House of Lords in the passages which I have set out.   Those
       passages identify the principle that if, on at least one  legitimate
       view of the facts or the law, the claim may succeed the  claim  will
       not be clearly unfounded. If  any  reasonable  doubt  exists  as  to
       whether the claim may succeed, then it is not clearly unfounded.

   23. Mr Malik drew to my attention  another  significant  element  in  an
       Article 8 claim in which an applicant seeks to assert that there are
       exceptional circumstances outside a strict application  of  Appendix
       FM and paragraph 276ADE(1). In doing so, he relied upon the judgment
       in the Supreme Court in R (on the application of Agyarko v Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 in which  Lord  Reed
       said in paragraph 60 that the Immigration  Rules  and  any  relevant
       Instructions cannot alter the requirement in Article  8  cases  that
       the ultimate responsibility lies in striking a fair balance  between
       the competing public and individual interests involved by  a  proper
       application of a proportionality test. The  test  of  exceptionality
       does not import the requirement for some highly unusual feature over
       and above the test of proportionality. Instead, it simply means that
       there should be circumstances  in  which  refusal  would  result  in
       unjustifiably harsh consequences to the  individual  such  that  the
       refusal  of  the  application  would  not   be   proportionate.   So
       understood, the exceptional circumstances test is  not  incompatible
       with Article 8.


A consideration of the merits of the remodelled claim

   24. Having set out what I consider to be the relevant case law,  I  turn
       to whether the applicant's claim based upon circumstances which fall
       outside the confines of Appendix FM and paragraph  276ADE(1)  might,
       on any legitimate view of them, result in the  applicant  succeeding
       before a First-tier Tribunal Judge such that the claim will  not  be
       clearly unfounded. If I have my doubts, the claim cannot be  clearly
       unfounded.  If  there  is  a  realistic  prospect  of  success,  the
       Secretary of State's certification must be a unlawful.


   25. Mr Malik's  submission  centres  upon  the  applicant's  immigration
       history. He submits that it was open to the applicant  to  establish
       by evidence, having entered the United Kingdom on 8  September  2004
       and having been refused further to leave to remain as a student on 2
       June 2014 on the basis of deception, that no proxy  test  taker  was
       used. He submitted that the applicant was entitled  on  conventional
       judicial review lines to have his  case  assessed  at  its  highest.
       Accordingly, he submitted that it  was  impossible  to  exclude  the
       possibility that, if no proxy test taker had  been  used,  he  would
       have qualified under the 10 years lawful  leave  rule.  Accordingly,
       his removal was disproportionate under Article 8.

   26. I do not accept the proposition  that  it  is  possible  to  rewrite
       history as he has invited me to do. First, whilst  the  respondent's
       decision letter refers to  the  application  for  further  leave  to
       remain as a student, we are not able to say whether that application
       would have succeeded. (Similarly, as the applicant  claims,  if  his
       application had been made as a Post-Study  (General)  Migrant.)   We
       know that it was refused by reason of the applicant's deception.  We
       do not, however, know whether the other requirements  of  the  Rules
       were met. For the purpose of the decision made on 1 August 2016,  it
       was only the allegation of deception that could be  relied  upon  to
       refuse to the claim on suitability grounds.  It  was  irrelevant  to
       mention other grounds for refusal.

   27.  Secondly, whether the decision was factually right or wrong, it was
       a lawful decision made on 2 June 2014 at which point  the  applicant
       had less than 10 years lawful residence. We know that it was  lawful
       because it was tested by way of judicial review which was refused in
       January 2016. We know the Upper  Tribunal's  refusal  was  justified
       because the applicant's attempt to appeal to the Court of Appeal was
       refused in February 2016.

   28. There is no 'near-miss' principle whereby the benefits  accruing  to
       those who have 10 years lawful residence  may  also  be  enjoyed  by
       somebody who  has  enjoyed  something  less  than  10  years  lawful
       residence on the basis that this  is  an  exceptional  circumstance.
       Furthermore, Mr Malik's attempts to re-write history do  not  amount
       to an exceptional circumstance. The history is as it is. It  is  not
       possible to treat the applicant's case on the basis that, if  events
       had  been  different,  the  applicant  would  have  succeeded.   The
       applicant's immigration history is certain. What might have been is,
       inevitably, speculative. For these reasons, I am satisfied that  the
       contention advanced by Mr Malik is bound to fail. Furthermore, in my
       duty to avoid confining the consideration to  my  own  view  of  the
       facts, I am  satisfied  that  no  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  would
       conclude, even if the applicant makes out his case that no deception
       had been used, that the appellant would have established exceptional
       circumstances of the type applicable is such cases that would  merit
       the grant of leave to remain under Article  8,  notwithstanding  his
       failure to meet  the  requirements  of  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph
       276ADE(1).

Conclusion

   29. For these reasons, I refuse to grant permission to the applicant  to
       amend his grounds of challenge.

   30. I refuse the application for judicial review on  the  basis  of  the
       grounds originally advanced.

DECISION

 1. Permission to amend the grounds is refused.
 2. Judicial review is refused.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                               8 August 2017





