

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Case Number: JR/8596/2016



|Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On Tuesday 7 November 2017                    |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH



                                   Between

                       The Queen on the application of
                               MD JAYANAL [A]
                               MRS MAHDIA [B]
                                   [M Z A]

                                                                  Applicants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Applicant:     Mr P Saini and Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by M Q
                    Hassan solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Thomann, Counsel instructed by Government Legal
Dept


                                  JUDGMENT
                  [Handed down on Tuesday 12 December 2017]

      INTRODUCTION

      1. This is  an  application  for  judicial  review  challenging  three
         decisions made by the Respondent dated  31  May  2016  ("the  First
         Decision"), 21 June 2016 ("the Second Decision") and 5 October 2017
         ("the Third Decision").  By  the  First  Decision,  the  Respondent
         curtailed the  First  Applicant's  leave  to  remain  and,  by  two
         separate decisions of the same date, curtailed the Second and Third
         Applicants'  leave  in  consequence.   The  Second  Decision  is  a
         response to the pre-action protocol letter in relation to all three
         Applicants.   The  Third  Decision  accompanied  the   Respondent's
         detailed grounds.  I will come on to deal with the effect  of  that
         decision when looking at the detail of it.


      2. Permission to challenge the First and Second Decisions was  granted
         by Upper Tribunal Judge Frances following an  oral  hearing  on  17
         July 2017 for the following reasons (so far as relevant):-
           "(2)  The [First] Applicant's leave was curtailed on grounds  of
           deception in relation to his previous grant of leave  to  remain
           as a Tier 4 Student, under paragraph 323(ia) of the  Immigration
           Rules.  Leave to remain for his wife  and  child  was  curtailed
           under 323(ii); ceasing to meet the  requirements  of  the  Rules
           under which leave to enter or remain was granted.
           (3)   It is arguable that  the  Applicant's  deception  was  not
           relevant to the curtailment of his wife's Tier 2 leave  or  that
           of her dependent child.
           (4)   The arguments made in respect to the Applicant  have  less
           force, but in the interests  of  the  overriding  objective  and
           considering  the  family  unit  as  a  whole,  all  grounds  are
           arguable."


      3. By an Order  dated  30  October  2017,  I  granted  the  Applicants
         permission to amend their  grounds  to  challenge  also  the  Third
         Decision.


      4.  The  underlying  legal  issues  stem  from  an  assertion  by  the
         Respondent that the  First  Applicant  obtained  a  TOEIC  (English
         language) certificate by  use  of  a  proxy  test-taker  ("the  ETS
         allegation").


    BACKGROUND


      5. The Applicants' immigration history and background facts are as
         follows.  The Applicants are all nationals of Bangladesh.  The
         Third applicant is a child born here on 9 October 2011 but remains
         a Bangladeshi national as neither of his parents was settled in the
         UK at the relevant time.


      6. The First Applicant entered the UK on 27 September 2009 with leave
         as a Tier 4 student valid to 31 October 2012.  The Second Applicant
         entered the UK on 20 January 2011 as his dependent. The ETS
         allegation relates to a test which is said to have been taken on 15
         November 2011 at Portsmouth International College.  Using that
         certificate, the First Applicant applied for and obtained a
         Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies ("CAS") from Blake Hall
         College and then applied on 6 October 2012 for further leave to
         remain as a student which was granted on 22 January 2013 to 28
         February 2015.  The Second and Third Applicants were dependent on
         that application.


      7. On 9 January 2015, the Second Applicant sought leave to remain as a
         Tier 2 migrant and she was granted leave on 26 January 2015 to 28
         January 2019.  The First and Third Applicants were her dependents
         on that application.  The leave of all three Applicants was
         curtailed on 23 July 2015 on the basis that their leave granted on
         22 January 2013 had been obtained by deception.


      8. The Applicants made representations via their solicitors by letter
         dated 30 July 2015 ("the 30 July letter") which led to a
         reconsideration of the decision (following judicial review
         proceedings challenging the July 2015 decisions and an agreement to
         reconsider reached by way of a consent order).  Leave was curtailed
         again on 31 May 2016 by way of the First Decision.  A pre-action
         protocol letter was sent to which the Second Decision is a
         response.   The Third Decision described in the detailed grounds as
         a "fresh decision" was then taken on 5 October 2017 and served with
         the detailed grounds.


      9. Turning then to the Third Decision, that was not written in
         response to any representations from or on behalf of the
         Applicants.  It appears to result from a view taken by the
         Respondent that it was necessary to supplement or further explain
         her reasons for the First and Second Decisions and to take one or
         two additional points.  The letter begins:-
           "This letter is supplemental, and should be read in conjunction
           with the original decision of 3 [sic] May 2016."


     10. The Court of Appeal deprecated precisely that form of words in
         Caroopen and Myrie v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2016] EWCA Civ 1307.  In the detailed grounds, the Third Decision
         is described as a review of the Respondent's position ([6]).
         There is no express acceptance that the First and Second Decisions
         are unlawful although it might be thought to be implicit in the
         submission at [12] of the detailed grounds that it would be
         "futile" to quash "the index decision" to permit a further review.
         Mr Thomann submitted that the Third Decision is something of a
         hybrid, on the one hand simply supplementing reasons to be read
         with the earlier decisions and on the other taking additional
         points which were always open to the Respondent but were not raised
         earlier.


     11. As a matter of housekeeping, I also raise at this stage the witness
         statements of the First and Second Applicants dated 19 October 2017
         which were filed at the back of the bundle for the hearing but  not
         formally lodged or served separately.  Mr Saini  accepted  that  my
         consideration of the Respondent's decisions is a review on standard
         public law principles rather than determination of the existence of
         any precedent fact. Since the witness statements  were  not  before
         the Respondent at the time of any of her decisions under challenge,
         Mr Saini accepted that I should not take  them  into  account  when
         considering the substance of  the  decisions.   He  said  that  the
         relevance is as to what the Applicants would have said if given the
         opportunity to make representations (and therefore relevant to  the
         procedural fairness  ground).   Mr  Thomann  accepts  that  if  the
         Respondent is asked to reconsider her decisions in  light  of  this
         more recent evidence she will be obliged to do so and to take  into
         account what is said in the statements.


    GROUNDS/ ISSUES


     12. The Applicants originally raised three grounds.  I gave the
         Applicants permission to amend their grounds to introduce four
         further grounds challenging the Third Decision.  I did not by my
         decision give permission to argue those further grounds.  However,
         two of those grounds overlap with the original grounds albeit
         challenging the Third Decision and the hearing therefore proceeded
         on those grounds taken together.  For that reason, it is
         appropriate to grant permission to the Applicants to argue grounds
         five and six of the amended grounds.


     13. Ground four deals with the legal consequences of the Third Decision
         and since I give permission to the Applicants to challenge the
         Third Decision, it is appropriate also to grant permission on that
         ground.  Ground seven is a distinct ground which I will deal with
         following consideration of the first six grounds so far as it
         remains necessary to do so.


     14. Grounds one and five are a challenge to procedural fairness.  There
         is one distinct issue raised in ground five concerning a new reason
         for curtailing the Second Applicant's leave but otherwise there is
         considerable overlap between the challenge to all three decisions
         on this ground.  These grounds assert in short summary that the
         First and Second Applicants should have been interviewed about the
         ETS allegation and other matters prior to curtailment or at the
         very least given the opportunity to make representations prior to
         the decisions being taken.


     15. Grounds two and six are a challenge to the lawfulness of the
         curtailment and whether the Respondent acted irrationally in
         curtailing the Applicants' leave and maintaining the decision to
         curtail.  Ground three challenges the lawfulness of the exercise of
         the Respondent's discretion.  This ground imports also
         consideration of the Respondent's treatment of the Third
         Applicant's best interests.


     16. Mr Thomann reformulated the grounds as amended into five issues as
         follows:-
          a. Was the Respondent entitled to curtail the First Applicant's
             leave by reason of his deception?
          b. If so, did the Respondent have power to curtail also the Second
             and Third Applicants' leave and on what basis?
          c. Did the Respondent lawfully exercise her discretion when
             curtailing leave?
          d. Has there been any procedural unfairness arising from the way
             in which the decisions were made?
          e. Is there any error of law in the Respondent's consideration of
             Article 8 ECHR and did that consideration (in the Third
             Decision) give rise to a right of appeal?


    DISCUSSION


    Procedural Unfairness


     17. It is convenient to address the case by reference to the issues as
         formulated by Mr Thomann. However, the procedural unfairness issue
         has the potential of impacting on the lawfulness of the decisions
         which were made even if the decisions themselves are lawful on
         their face and reasonable based on the evidence.  For that reason,
         I begin my consideration with that issue.

     18. It is accepted on behalf of the Applicants that there is no policy
         or guidance which applies in cases such as these and which requires
         the Respondent to interview the Applicants.  Their case is that it
         is only by the medium of an interview or appeal that the Applicants
         (in particular the First Applicant) can fairly and properly answer
         the ETS allegation.


     19. Mr Saini drew my attention to what is said by the Supreme Court in
         Bank Mellat v HM Treasury (No 2) [2013] UKSC 39 at [178] itself
         citing the case of R v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         ex parte Doody [1994] 1 AC 531.  Mr Thomann also relied on what is
         said in Doody itself as follows ([560D-G]:-
           "1. Where an Act of Parliament confers an administrative power
           there is a presumption that it will be exercised in a manner
           which is fair in all the circumstances. 2. The standards of
           fairness are not immutable. They may change with the passage of
           time, both in the general and in the application to decisions of
           a particular type.  3. The principles of fairness are not to be
           applied by rote identically in every situation. What fairness
           demands is dependent on the context of the decision, and this is
           to be taken into account in all its aspects.  4. An essential
           feature of the context is the statute which creates the
           discretion, as regards both its language and the shape of the
           legal and administrative system within which the decision is
           taken.  5. Fairness will very often require that a person who
           may be adversely affected by the decision will have an
           opportunity to make representations on his own behalf either
           before the decision is taken with a view to producing a
           favourable result; or after it is taken, with a view to
           procuring its modification; or both. 6. Since the person
           affected usually cannot make worthwhile representations without
           knowing what factors may weigh against his interests fairness
           will very often require that he is informed of the gist of the
           case which he has to answer."
           [my emphasis]


     20. As that extract makes clear, what fairness demands depends on the
         factual circumstances of the case.


     21. In this case, it is not suggested by the Applicants that they did
         not know the substance of the ETS allegation.   Slightly unusually
         in this case, the First Decision was preceded by earlier decisions
         dated 23 July 2015.  That is the first occasion when the ETS
         allegation was raised against the Applicants.


     22. As Mr Saini pointed out, those decisions were withdrawn following a
         judicial review challenge because the Respondent had misunderstood
         the status of the Applicants. The Respondent curtailed the First
         Applicant's leave in July 2015 based on paragraph 323(i) with
         reference to 322(2A) as she mistakenly assumed that the status
         position remained that the First Applicant had leave as a Tier 4
         student with the Second and Third Applicants as his dependents.


     23. However, the July 2015 decision contains the same gist in relation
         to the ETS allegation.  The fact that the ETS allegation was raised
         nearly one year prior to the First Decision is relevant to the
         fairness of the decision making in this case.


     24. That the Applicants recognised that they could make representations
         in response to the ETS allegation is equally clear by the fact that
         they did in fact make such representations (via the 30 July letter
         - see [8] above).  Those representations come after the 23 July
         decisions and before the First Decision under challenge in this
         application.  I will deal with what is said in substance about the
         First Applicant's case when I come to consider the detail of that
         case.  However, for current purposes it suffices to note that the
         representations were not limited to pointing out the error in
         relation to immigration status but also provided, in very short
         summary, the Applicants' case in response to the ETS allegation and
         the consequences of curtailment.


     25. It is clear from the 30 July letter that the First Applicant
         understood to what English language certificate and test the
         allegation related.  He does not deny that he took that test.  It
         is not said that he could not at that time provide the sort of
         information which he has now provided in his witness statement.
         True it is that the litigation surrounding ETS has moved on
         somewhat since July 2015 and there is now a greater understanding
         of both the evidential tests which apply and the substance of the
         generic evidence relied upon by the Respondent. However, the
         Applicants do not say that prior to those developments, they did
         not understand the gist of the allegation.  The letter of 30 July
         2015 then was their first opportunity to make representations.  The
         second was after that letter and in the course of compromising the
         earlier application for judicial review.


     26. Mr Saini said that it was not clear to the Applicants that they
         could make representations before the First Decision because they
         had no control over the withdrawal of the earlier decisions and the
         making of the First Decision.  That submission does not withstand
         scrutiny since the earlier application for judicial review was
         compromised by a consent order in April 2016.  The Applicants'
         solicitor (the same firm as previously and presently), negotiated
         that consent order and could easily have sought an agreement to
         make representations in relation to the ETS allegation and
         curtailment more generally had the Applicants wished to take that
         course.


     27. Even after the First Decision, the Applicants could and did
         challenge that decision by a pre-action protocol letter.  That led
         to the Second Decision.  Again, there is no explanation from the
         Applicants why they could not, at that stage, provide the sort of
         explanation now contained in their witness statements. Similarly,
         following the Second Decision and when lodging the application for
         judicial review, the Applicants could have lodged witness
         statements.  In fairness to them, had they done so, it would
         probably be said that those could not be taken into account.  The
         Applicants could not know that the Respondent intended thereafter
         to make a further decision.  However, the Applicants did then
         provide witness statements shortly prior to this hearing.  There is
         no explanation why they did not do that sooner.


     28. Other than the witness statements lodged immediately before the
         hearing before me, therefore, the 30 July letter is the only
         attempt made by the Applicants to respond to the ETS allegation in
         the period of over two years that they have had to deal with it.
         The Applicants have had a number of opportunities to answer the ETS
         allegation but have failed to take advantage of those
         opportunities.


     29. Overall, for the foregoing reasons, I am satisfied that the
         Respondent has not acted in a manner which is procedurally unfair.
         There is though one discrete assertion of unfairness which I will
         need to deal with in relation to the Second Applicant when I come
         to look at the exercise of discretion in her case.


    Lawfulness of curtailment of the First Applicant's leave


     30. The basis of curtailment in relation to the First Applicant on the
         one hand and the Second and Third Applicants on the other is
         different (save for a point which I will come to when dealing with
         the curtailment of the Second Applicant's leave).  As such and as
         identified by Mr Thomann's list of issues, it is appropriate to
         consider first the basis of curtailment of the First Applicant's
         leave.  It is convenient when doing so also to consider the
         Respondent's exercise of discretion in that regard.


     31. It will be recalled that the First Applicant's leave at the date of
         the First Decision was as a dependent of the Second Applicant who
         by that stage had leave as a Tier 2 migrant.  The leave to which
         the ETS allegation relates was an earlier period of leave which had
         by then come to an end.  The First Decision was not in response to
         any application by the First Applicant for further leave in
         reliance on the English language certificate said to have been
         obtained by deception.  That is all relevant because it explains
         why the Respondent could not apply the mandatory provision in
         paragraph 322(1A) (because the deception did not relate directly to
         an application under consideration) or paragraph 322(2) which
         provides that leave "should normally be refused" where a person has
         previously exercised deception and when the Respondent is
         considering a current application for variation of leave by that
         person.


     32. Accordingly, the First Applicant's leave was curtailed applying
         paragraph 323(ia) which provides that leave may be curtailed if a
         person uses deception in seeking leave to remain or a variation of
         leave to remain.


     33. There was a suggestion made by Mr Saini in his oral submissions
         that this paragraph could not be employed because the deception
         must relate to the most recent period of leave.  Whilst the use of
         the present tense might be suggestive of such an interpretation, I
         am unpersuaded by that submission.  This rule relates to
         curtailment of leave.  If the intention was to permit only
         curtailment of the leave obtained by the deception, the rule could
         have been drafted in that way by use of the definite article (as is
         the case in relation to, for example, paragraph 322(1A) where an
         application is to be refused where false representations etc are
         made in relation to the application).  As it is, the provision is
         silent as to when the deception is used; the requirement is only
         that a period of leave to remain is sought using deception.


     34. The First Decision in relation to the First Applicant reads as
         follows (so far as relevant):-
           "For the purposes of your application dated 06 October 2012 you
           submitted a TOEIC certificate from Educational Testing Service
           ("ETS") to your sponsor Blake Hall College in order for them to
           provide you with a Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies.
           According to information provided to the Home Office by ETS, you
           obtained TOEIC certificate 1000000232644449 as a result of a
           test that you took at Portsmouth International College on 15
           November 2011.
           ETS has a record of your speaking test.  Using voice
           verification software, ETS is able to detect when a single
           person is undertaking multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check of
           your test and confirmed to the SSHD that there was significant
           evidence to conclude that your certificate was fraudulently
           obtained by the use of a proxy test taker.  ETS have declared
           your test to be "Invalid" due to the aforementioned presence of
           a proxy tester who sat the test in your place, and the scores
           have therefore been cancelled by ETS.
           On the basis of the information provided to her by ETS, the SSHD
           is satisfied that your certificate was fraudulently obtained.
           It is not considered that there are any exceptionally compelling
           or compassionate circumstances in your case that mean discretion
           should be exercised in your favour.  The Secretary of State
           therefore curtails your Tier 2 Dependent Partner leave to remain
           in the United Kingdom under paragraph 323(ia) of the Immigration
           Rules with immediate effect."


     35. The Second Decision was written in response to a pre-action
         protocol letter.  That decision dealt in more depth with the
         quality of the so-called "generic evidence" in ETS cases following
         criticism of that evidence in the pre-action protocol.  More detail
         was also given for example concerning the test results of
         Portsmouth International College more generally.


     36. In light of the previous litigation relating to ETS allegations, I
         do not need to recite the background.  It is sufficiently set out
         in, for example, in Abbas v Secretary of State for the Home
         Department [2017] EWHC 78 (Admin) ("Abbas") which itself makes
         reference to the previous cases in this area.


     37. The burdens and standards of proof relating to deception are also
         now clear from previous cases involving ETS allegations.  Those are
         referred to in MA (ETS - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 00450 (IAC) as
         a "burden of proof boomerang". That operates as follows. First, the
         Respondent must adduce sufficient evidence to raise the issue of
         deception.  The Applicant then has the burden of providing an
         "innocent explanation" in order to satisfy the evidential burden
         which has shifted to him.  If the Applicant satisfies that
         evidential burden, the legal burden is then on the Respondent to
         show on the balance of probabilities that the Applicant has
         exercised deception.


     38. It is agreed between the parties in this case, that, as a judicial
         review challenge, the issue for me is whether the Respondent's
         conclusion that the Applicant has exercised deception by use of a
         proxy test-taker is unreasonable to the "Wednesbury" standard (see
         R (oao Mohibullah) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         (TOEIC - ETS - judicial review principles) [2016] UKUT 00561
         ("Mohibullah")  (IAC) at (iv) of the headnote).


     39. In order to satisfy her evidential burden, the Respondent in this
         case relies on the statements of Mr Peter Millington and Ms Rebecca
         Collings.  Their evidence was accepted by the Upper Tribunal in SM
         and Qadir v Secretary of State for the Home Department (ETS -
         Evidence - Burden of Proof) [2016] UKUT 00229 (IAC) as satisfying
         the evidential burden when coupled with evidence relating to the
         individual applicant ([i] of the headnote).


     40. The understanding of the methodology of the voice recognition
         analysis conducted by ETS has since moved on and later cases have
         accepted that the expert evidence relied upon in cases since SM and
         Qadir "allows real weight to be given to the result of the ETS
         review" (per Davis J in Abbas).


     41. In this case, the Respondent also relies on the expert report of
         Richard Heighway which it appears (from its heading) was before the
         Tribunal in Mohibullah.  I was not taken to the content of this
         report.  The report of Professor French is also relied upon.
         Again, I was not taken to that report by either representative.
         However, that report was previously considered in Abbas.  In that
         case, Davis J accepted that this report could be relied upon by the
         Respondent in the following way:-
           "[12]...Professor French does not suggest that the conclusion of
           the ETS review in any particular case is correct nor does he
           suggest that a specified degree of certainty can be attached to
           any individual finding of test invalidity.  Mr Colin Thomann
           appearing for the Secretary of State conceded that in the
           context of my fact finding exercise the expert evidence could
           not be determinative any more than could be the notification of
           invalidity in respect of the Claimant's test by ETS.  Rather, he
           argued that the evidence of Dr Harrison supplemented by that of
           Professor French is the backdrop against which the significance
           and weight of the notification relating to the Claimant should
           be judged.  I am satisfied that this is a proper approach.
           Moreover, the evidence of Professor French in particular allows
           real weight to be given to the result of the ETS review in the
           Claimant's case."


     42. The First Applicant's leave was curtailed because of the ETS
         allegation which related to a test taken at Portsmouth
         International College on 15 November 2011 in speaking and writing
         English.  The First Applicant obtained scores of 170 for speaking
         and 160 for writing.  As Mr Saini pointed out, those are not
         particularly high scores and do not of themselves point to the
         First Applicant having used a proxy test taker.


     43. The Respondent has produced the "look up tool" evidence relating to
         the First Applicant which confirms his scores as stated and
         confirms that the ETS review has concluded that his test results
         are "invalid".


     44. The Respondent also relies on evidence from the "look up tool"
         relating to all the tests taken at Portsmouth International College
         on 15 November 2011.  Those show that of the 119 tests taken, 43
         (36%) were found to be "questionable" and 76 (64%) were found to be
         "invalid".  The average scores for speaking are 173.0 and for
         writing 167.4.  The First Applicant's scores are within a
         reasonable margin of that average although I accept, as Mr Saini
         submitted and Mr Thomann fairly accepted, this evidence does not
         take the matter much further as the averages could very easily
         arise from some very high scores and other much lower scores.


     45. Reference is made by the Respondent in this regard to the evidence
         of Mr Adam Sewell which was before the Tribunal in R (Saha) v SSHD
         (Secretary of State's duty of candour) [2017] UKUT 17 (IAC).  As Mr
         Saini pointed out, the evidence of Mr Sewell relating to
         statistical analysis of a college's results in that case related to
         an entirely different college (Elizabeth College).  My
         understanding of the Respondent's case on this point, though, is
         that statistical analysis of this nature is capable of underpinning
         the evidence of the Respondent in relation to the generic evidence.
          That, though, can only take matters so far given that I did not
         have a statement or report from Mr Sewell as to the statistical
         analysis in relation to Portsmouth College and nor did I hear
         evidence from him.  For the same reason, I do not attach weight to
         the submission made at [37] of the Respondent's skeleton argument
         by reference to that evidence in R (Habib) v SSHD (JR/1260/2016).


     46. In light of the analysis of the "generic evidence" in previous test
         cases as referred to above, I need say no more about it.  I am
         satisfied that the Respondent was entitled to rely on that evidence
         to discharge the evidential burden on her when coupled with the
         evidence relating to the First Applicant that ETS has cancelled his
         scores as "invalid".  That evidence is not determinative of the
         validity of the ETS allegation but it does have the effect of
         shifting the evidential burden to the First Applicant.  It is then
         for him to discharge that burden in order to shift that burden back
         on to the Respondent to prove deception to the standard of a
         balance of probabilities.


     47. The representations made in the 30 July letter in this regard
         criticise the generic evidence in relation to ETS and the legal
         basis for curtailment.  The letter goes on to make the following
         points:-
           "Our client completed Bachelor of Arts from the University of
           Greenwich.  Completion of a Bachelor's degree from one of the
           top 100 universities in the UK requires a considerable amount of
           proficiency in English.  The entry requirement for a Bachelor's
           degree in the University of Greenwich is a minimum score 6.0
           while for any lower score, one must demonstrate improvement at
           the desired level.  Therefore, when someone completes a
           Bachelor's degree from such a reputed university, it becomes
           obviously demonstrated that one does not require to engage into
           deception to obtain a TOEIC certificate.  Our client confirms
           that his TOEIC certificate was not fraudulently obtained by the
           use of a proxy test taker.  It is our client's argument that the
           lack of motive to engage into deception supports the proposition
           that he did not commit the deception."


     48. The first point to note about these representations is that they
         are contained only in a letter from the Applicants' solicitor.
         There is no statement underpinning the representations. The second,
         though, is that, as Mr Saini submits, and I accept, there is no
         direct reference to these representations made by the Respondent in
         either the First or Second Decisions.  Mr Thomann fairly accepted
         this to be the case.  As such, Mr Saini submits that the Respondent
         has failed in her Tameside duty to have regard to relevant
         information (taken from Secretary of State for Education and
         Science v MBC Tameside [1977] QC 1014).  Mr Thomann did appear to
         suggest at one point that this was overcome by the Third Decision
         where the Respondent did have regard to those representations but I
         can see no reference or response to those representations in that
         letter.


     49. Having considered the substance of the representations and heard
         oral submissions from Mr Saini and Mr Thomann, though, I am
         satisfied that the First Decision (and subsequent decisions) are
         not unlawful on this account for the following reasons.


     50. First, it is perhaps understandable that the Respondent would not
         consider it necessary or appropriate when making a later decision
         to take into account representations made in relation to an earlier
         decision which was withdrawn following challenge. Those
         representations were not repeated by the Applicants' solicitors at
         the time when the Respondent was reconsidering the First Decision
         nor was the consent order concluding the previous application for
         judicial review compromised with any direction that the Respondent
         should consider the earlier representations.  Most of those had in
         any event been overtaken by the withdrawal of the decisions which
         they challenged.


     51. Second, the question for the Respondent was whether she was
         satisfied that the First Applicant had exercised deception.  The
         representations made could be given only very limited if any weight
         in that consideration for the following reasons.  First, as I have
         already noted, the representations were unsupported by a witness
         statement. Second, all the representations have to say is that the
         First Applicant "confirms" that his TOEIC certificate was not
         fraudulently obtained.  At best, that is a bare denial of the
         deception which is unsupported by any statement of truth.


     52. In the course of submissions, I also clarified a factual issue
         which arises from these representations and the academic documents
         in the bundle and that is this.  The academic transcript in
         relation to the First Applicant's degree refers to the University
         of Greenwich as the "Awarding Institution" and the "Programme
         Studied" is said to be by way of distance learning.  The degree was
         awarded in June 2015.  Mr Saini confirmed my understanding of the
         situation that this degree was in fact undertaken via Blake Hall
         College.  It is that college which provided the First Applicant
         with a CAS.  That CAS in turn supported the First Applicant's
         application for Tier 4 leave made on 6 October 2012. It was in
         support of that application, that the First Applicant produced the
         TOEIC certificate which is said to have been obtained by deception.




     53. The link between the First Applicant and the University of
         Greenwich therefore is only that the latter was the awarding body
         for his degree.  He studied at Blake Hall College and it is to that
         college that he had to demonstrate his English language ability.
         When applying to study with that college, he relied upon the very
         certificate which is said to have been obtained by deception.  As
         such, that point could have no evidential force in the First
         Applicant's favour.  I appreciate that this point does not feature
         in the Respondent's reasoning and only arose in the course of the
         hearing before me.   It nonetheless demonstrates why, even if the
         Respondent should have and did not consider those representations,
         they could not satisfy the burden on the First Applicant.  Other
         than raising this point, the representations are no more than a
         bare denial that deception was exercised.


     54. The First and Second Applicants have produced witness statements
         late in the day.  It was accepted that I could only take those into
         account when considering the procedural unfairness arguments as an
         indication of what they might have said if asked and whether a
         failure to interview or invite this evidence is therefore
         procedurally unfair.  I was though taken to three paragraphs of the
         First Applicant's statement as disclosing his evidence about the
         ETS allegation (paragraphs [12] to [14]) which I therefore mention
         for completeness.


     55. Although Mr Thomann made a number of submissions about that
         evidence I do not need to deal with those in any detail as, as Mr
         Thomann accepted, it will be for the Respondent to review her
         decisions in light of that evidence if requested to do so.  I
         record though the gist of Mr Thomann' submissions.  Paragraph [12]
         of that statement is simply a repetition of what is said in the 30
         July 2015 letter.


     56. Further detail as to the test is provided at [13] where the First
         Applicant says this:-
           "[13] When I decided to enrol in the College for my English
           Language test I found the college name from a website search and
           got their details form [sic] their website online.  I then
           phoned them and they informed me of the necessary details and
           the nearest date for exam.  I was told to bring the fees on the
           exam day which was �200 including �20 admin fee.  I paid the
           amount in cash.  On the exam day I went to the exam centre
           8.30AM and provided my ID (Passport) to the reception desk.  My
           ID was checked and I paid the fees to them.  I was then given a
           unique ID Number and I was shown to the exam hall where I would
           take my exam.  I entered the exam hall and sat in front of an
           allocated computer and was given earphones.  I put these on and
           then I entered my unique number on ETS portal and found the
           question paper.  The first part of the test was speaking
           assessment which nearly lasted between 20 mins.  Following this
           was the writing section which was nearly 1 hour.  Once the
           assessment was over I left the building."


     57. As Mr Thomann points out, the details about the test remain patchy.
           The First Applicant does not explain why he chose to take a test
         at a college in Portsmouth when he was apparently living in London.
          He has not taken the opportunity (now widely publicised) to obtain
         his voice recording.  He has produced no documentary evidence of
         having attended the college, paid the fee or sat the test.


     58. Paragraph [14] of the witness statement repeats the point that the
         First Applicant says that he did not need to "cheat" because he is
         proficient in English.   However, as Mr Thomann pointed out, the
         First Applicant's assertion that he does not need to cheat as he
         has undertaken a degree in English and therefore speaks it well is
         unlikely to be determinative particularly in light of judicial
         comments in other ETS cases that there may be many explanations why
         applicants may resort to cheating.  In any event, the test was
         taken some four years before the degree qualification.  No
         application was made for the First Applicant to give evidence or
         for cross-examination.


     59. As I have already noted, the issue for me is whether the Respondent
         was entitled to curtail the First Applicant's leave based on the
         material before her at the time of the First Decision.  I decide
         that issue in the Respondent's favour.  The Applicant has not
         discharged his evidential burden based on what was before the
         Respondent at the date of her various decisions.  It was open to
         the Respondent to declare herself satisfied that the TOEIC
         certificate was fraudulently obtained.


     60. I turn then to the exercise of the Respondent's discretion to
         curtail the First Applicant's leave for that reason.  In the First
         Decision, the Respondent says merely that she does not consider
         that there are any exceptional or compelling circumstances meaning
         that discretion should be exercised in his case.


     61. The Respondent expands on the exercise of her discretion in the
         Third Decision as follows:-
           "In fraudulently obtaining a TOEIC certificate in the manner
           outlined above, Mr [A] willingly participated in what was
           clearly an organized and serious attempt, given the complicity
           of the test centre itself, to defraud the Secretary of State and
           others.  In doing so, Mr [A] displayed a flagrant disregard for
           the public interest, according to which migrants are required to
           have a certain level of English language ability in order to
           facilitate social integration and cohesion, as well as to reduce
           the likelihood of them being a burden on the taxpayer.
           Accordingly, the Secretary of State is satisfied that Mr [A]'s
           presence in the UK is not conducive to the public good because
           his conduct makes it undesirable to allow him to remain in the
           UK.
           Whilst curtailment of leave under paragraph 323(ia) is a
           discretionary power, the Secretary of State does not consider
           that any discretion in Mr [A]'s favour should be permitted given
           his party to the ETS deception.  To exercise his discretion in
           his favour would be contrary to the Secretary of State's
           approach to other migrants who we consider have been a party to
           ETS deception, and would send out a contradictory message as to
           how serious such abuse is deemed to be."


     62. The starting point for the exercise of that discretion is of course
         that the Respondent has concluded that the First Applicant has
         exercised deception.  That is a conclusion which I have upheld as
         lawful.  There are three reasons given in the Third Decision for
         the exercise of discretion against the First Applicant.  First, she
         says that the First Applicant's deception was part of an organised
         deception with complicity of the test centre.  That is the point
         concerning the overall test centre results for that day.  As such,
         she says that the First Applicant's presence in the UK is
         undesirable.  That point speaks for itself. Second, the Respondent
         points to the general public interest in those living in the UK
         being able to speak English.  This is consistent with section 117B
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").
         Third, the Respondent refers to treatment of others found to have
         been involved in deception in ETS cases.  That point therefore
         relies on consistency with others in the same position.


     63. Mr Saini argued that the general grounds apply in this case only
         because there has been deception.  As such, he says, the fact of
         deception cannot be the beginning and end of the exercise of
         discretion.  However, as I note above, that is not the approach
         which the Respondent adopted.  The Respondent has recognised that
         the ground on which she relies is a discretionary one.  She is not
         required by any policy or guidance to exercise her discretion in
         any particular way.  Whilst the fact of deception cannot be
         determinative of the exercise of that discretion, it is clearly a
         highly relevant factor.  The Respondent has though, provided three
         reasons why she has exercised her discretion in favour of
         curtailment.  Those are reasons to which the Respondent was
         entitled to give weight.  Her decision to curtail the First
         Applicant's leave is not unlawful for that reason.


     64. In addition to the general discretion point, the Applicants also
         rely on Article 8 ECHR and the best interests of the Third
         Applicant as reasons why discretion has been unlawfully exercised
         in this case.   However, the question of what discretion requires
         in that context depends on the consequences of curtailment for the
         rest of the First Applicant's family and, in particular, the Third
         Applicant.  It is therefore appropriate to consider that issue
         after I consider the lawfulness of the curtailment of the Second
         and Third Applicants' leave.  I note also that the First Decision
         includes a one-stop notice requiring the First Applicant to give
         other reasons why he should be entitled to remain.  It is therefore
         open to the Applicants to make submissions or an appropriate
         application if they rely on other grounds to remain.  I will
         consider that in the context of the final ground/issue.


    Lawfulness of curtailment of the Second and Third Applicants' leave


     65. Having satisfied myself as to the lawfulness and rationality of the
         Respondent's decision to curtail the First Applicant's leave, I
         turn now to consider the curtailment of the Second and Third
         Applicant's leave.  It will be recalled that the Second Applicant
         now holds the main immigration status as a Tier 2 migrant with her
         husband and child as dependents.  As such, she has leave
         independently of the First Applicant and in her own right.
         However, at the time of the First Applicant's deception, her leave
         (and that of the Third Applicant) was dependent on the First
         Applicant.


     66. Mr Saini accepted that, if the deception had come to light at the
         time of the First Applicant's application for Tier 4 leave or at
         any point thereafter when the Second and Third Applicants were
         dependent on the First Applicant for their status then the effect
         of curtailment of the First Applicant's leave would be to permit
         the Respondent to curtail the Second and Third Applicants' leave
         (subject to the exercise of discretion and the best interests of
         the Third Applicant).  He submitted however that the position is
         different where, as here, there is an intervening change in the
         basis of the leave granted so that the Second and Third Applicants
         are no longer dependent on the First Applicant for their status.


     67. The basis of curtailment of the leave of the Second and Third
         Applicants in the First and Second Decisions is paragraph 323(ii)
         which provides that the Respondent may curtail leave if a person
         ceases to meet the requirements of the Rules under which his leave
         to remain or a variation of leave to enter or remain was granted.


     68. By the First Decision in the Second Applicant's case, her leave was
         curtailed in the following terms:-
           "You were granted leave to remain as the Dependant Partner of a
           Tier 4 General Student migrant (person "P") on 22 January 2013
           until expiry of 28 February 2015.
           P's current extant leave as your Tier 2 Dependent Partner has
           been curtailed so that it expires with immediate effect.
           Therefore the Secretary of State has decided that your leave
           should be curtailed in line with the curtailment of P's leave to
           remain.
           It is not considered that the circumstances in your case are
           such that discretion should be exercised in your favour.  As the
           Secretary of State is satisfied that you were granted your
           current Tier 2 leave on the basis of your previous leave as the
           dependant of a person ("P") and P's leave to remain is being, or
           has been, curtailed, she has decided to curtail your Tier 2
           leave to remain under Paragraph 323(ii) of the Immigration Rules
           with immediate effect.
           Consideration has also been given to section 55 of the Borders,
           Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 (Duty regarding the welfare
           of children).  The duty to have regard to the need to safeguard
           and promote the welfare of children requires the Home Office to
           consider the effect on any children of a decision to refuse
           leave, or remove, against the need to maintain the integrity of
           the immigration control.
           Our aim is always to carry out enforcement of the Immigration
           Rules with the minimum possible interference with a family's
           private life, and in particular to enable a family to maintain
           continuity of care and development of the children in ways that
           are compatible with the immigration laws.
           In the particular circumstances of your case, it has been
           concluded that the need to maintain integrity of the immigration
           laws outweighs the possible effect on you and your child that
           might result from you and your child having to re-establish
           family life outside the UK."


     69. The leave of the Third Applicant was curtailed for like reasons
         noting that his father's leave had been curtailed as a Tier 2
         dependent partner and that, since the Third Applicant's leave was
         dependent on his father's when his father had status as a Tier 4
         student, it was appropriate to curtail his leave also.  The section
         55 and family/private life consideration paragraphs were very
         similar if not identical to those in the decision relating to his
         mother (the Second Applicant).


     70. The Respondent's argument in relation to the power to curtail the
         leave of the Second and Third Applicants was developed in the
         Second Decision as follows:-
           "[xiii)]    In your pre-action protocol letter of 7 June 2016,
           you assert that Mahidia [B] and [MA] were previously the
           dependants of Md Jayanal [A] and that on 23 January 2015 Mahidia
           [B] was granted leave to remain as a Tier 2 Migrant with [MA]
           and Md Jayanal [A] as her dependants.  As set out in the
           immigration history above, Md Jayanal used deception.  As a
           result the SSHD is properly entitled to curtail his leave using
           paragraph 323(ia).  The SSHD also takes the position that Mahida
           [B]'s leave has also been properly curtailed using paragraph
           323(ii) as a result of the ETS deception by her husband, on
           which her leave had previously been based."


     71. The Respondent also developed her section 55 consideration as
         follows:-
           "[xv)]      The SSHD maintains that consideration has been given
           to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act
           2009 (Duty regarding the welfare of children).  The duty to have
           regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of
           children requires the SSHD to consider the effect on any
           children of a decision to refuse leave, or remove, against the
           need to maintain the integrity of the immigration control.  Our
           aim is always to carry out enforcement of the Immigration Rules
           with the minimum possible interference with a family's private
           life, and in particular to enable a family to maintain
           continuity of care and development of the children in ways that
           are compatible with the immigration laws.  In the particular
           circumstances of your case, it has been concluded that the need
           to maintain the integrity of the immigration laws outweighs the
           possible effect on you and your child that might result from you
           and your child having to re-establish family life outside the
           UK."


     72. As I understand the Respondent's case, the Second Applicant's
         entitlement to Tier 2 leave depended on, amongst other criteria,
         her application not falling for refusal under general grounds.  As
         such, it is said, since her earlier leave and that of the Third
         Applicant were obtained by the First Applicant's deception, the
         application for Tier 2 leave would have fallen for refusal for that
         reason if the deception had at that stage been discovered.


     73. The Respondent relies in this regard on the judgment in Abbas.
         That was a case involving refusal of naturalisation and revocation
         of indefinite leave of the claimant who had obtained a grant of
         previous leave (as the spouse of a British citizen) using a TOEIC
         certificate obtained by deception.  As such, the Court was obliged
         to consider whether the Claimant had exercised deception as a
         matter of precedent fact because the power to revoke arose directly
         from the statute.  The Respondent relies on this case for the
         proposition that she was entitled to revoke indefinite leave even
         though it was an earlier grant of leave which involved the
         deception (as Davis J held in that case).


     74. I did not find that case of assistance here for two reasons.
         First, the power relied upon is different.  Indeed, the claimant's
         Counsel in that case pointed to the difference between section 76
         of the 2002 Act and paragraph 322(2) of the Rules.  The latter
         expressly permits curtailment where deception is used in a previous
         variation of leave application and the point would not therefore
         have arisen if the Respondent had been considering an application
         for further leave (or by extension whether to curtail leave) rather
         than seeking to revoke indefinite leave.


     75. Second, the Judge dealt with two alternative submissions which the
         Respondent relied upon as entitling her to revoke indefinite leave
         in that case.  He rejected one and accepted the second.  The
         submission which was rejected was that the earlier grant of leave
         was a "building block" to the subsequent grant. It was argued that
         it must be implicit therefore in the later application that the
         earlier leave was lawful.   The rejection of that submission does
         though depend at least in part on the wording of section 76 which
         requires that the indefinite leave be obtained by deception.


     76. The second submission which was accepted is that the ordinary
         meaning of the word "deception" does not require a direct
         fraudulent act at the point at which it has its effect.  However,
         the acceptance of that submission in Abbas depended on the claimant
         himself having exercised the deception and having, based on the
         leave obtained by the deception, sought further (indefinite) leave,
         impliedly asserting that the leave required to obtain indefinite
         leave was validly obtained. That is not this case.  Save in
         relation to a supplementary point made in the Third Decision, to
         which I will come, the Respondent does not rely on the Second
         Applicant herself having any involvement in the First Applicant's
         deception.


     77. Nor was I assisted by the case of A v Secretary of State for the
         Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 773 ("A").  That case also was
         concerned with different provisions of the Rules namely those
         concerned with false documents and false representations (paragraph
         322(1A) and paragraph 320(7A)).  Both of the provisions with which
         A was concerned expressly permitted refusal whether or not the
         false representations were made with the applicant's knowledge.
         The Court drew a distinction at [67] and [68] between reliance on a
         false document which "tells a lie about itself" and a false
         representation which does not necessarily do so.  As the Court
         accepted at [68], if a person is innocent of the false
         representation that may not be reason for mandatory refusal
         although it may give rise to a power or presumption of
         discretionary refusal.  Mr Thomann of course relies on the sentence
         in the judgment that "false" in this context requires dishonesty
         "although not necessarily that of the applicant himself".


     78. I cannot see how that assists the Respondent in this case.  The
         leave sought by the Second Applicant was entirely different to her
         leave previously.  Previously she was here as the dependent of a
         Tier 4 student.  In her application, she sought to remain in her
         own right as a Tier 2 applicant.  I can well see that if she had
         continued to seek leave as the First Applicant's dependent then,
         subject to the exercise of discretion, the Respondent would have
         been entitled to curtail her leave.  Indeed, the Applicants accept
         as much.


     79. That does not assist though in the circumstances which now prevail.
          The question here is a different one.  The highest the Respondent
         can put her case, based on Abbas, is that when making her Tier 2
         application, the Second Applicant was impliedly asserting that her
         previous leave was valid and that her application did not therefore
         fall to be refused on general grounds.  However, that argument
         appears to depend still on some knowledge on the part of the Second
         Applicant.


     80. There are two further difficulties with the Respondent's argument.
         First, paragraph 323(ii) of the Rules applies where a person
         "ceases to meet" the requirements of the Rule under which they were
         granted leave.  It is implicit in that wording that the applicant
         is able to satisfy the requirement at the time of the grant but
         ceases to meet it at a later stage.  An obvious example may be
         where a person is granted leave to remain as a spouse but the
         relationship breaks down.  The Respondent's case here though is
         that the Second Applicant has never met the relevant rule because
         her application would have failed prior to grant if the deception
         had been discovered earlier as it would have been refused on
         general grounds.


     81. That brings me on to the second and perhaps more cogent reason why
         the analysis fails and that is the circularity of it.  The
         Respondent cannot rely on paragraph 323(ii) itself as the general
         ground on which the application fails. It must be some other
         provision in the general grounds which applies and which means that
         her application would have failed for that reason. Insofar as the
         Respondent relies on paragraph 322(2) via the medium of paragraph
         323(i) (based on Mr Thomann's submission in relation to the case of
         A), that is not relied upon in the First Decision and this cannot
         be implied from what is said.  Some reasoning would be required.
         The fact that the Second Applicant is not the person responsible
         for the "false representation" would also need to be factored into
         the exercise of discretion.


     82. Although Mr Thomann expressly refers to this at [61] of his
         skeleton argument as being the general ground relied upon by
         reference to what is said in the Third Decision, that is not what
         the Respondent says in that decision.  What she says in fact is
         that the applications would have fallen within paragraph 322(2)
         "had Mr [A]'s deception come to light prior to the applications of
         09 January 2015" (my emphasis).  If she intended to curtail the
         leave of the Second Applicant (and therefore by extension that of
         the Third Applicant) under these provisions she needed to make that
         expressly clear and provide reasons.  As paragraph 323(i) is a
         discretionary ground, she would also have needed to consider the
         exercise of her discretion based either on the deception having
         been exercised by the First Applicant without the Second and Third
         Applicants' knowledge or their complicity in that deception.


     83. That brings me on to the supplementary reason for curtailment of
         the Second Applicant's leave in the Third Decision. For the first
         time, the Respondent raises the issue whether the Second Applicant
         knew of and/or was complicit in the First Applicant's deception.
         What is said is as follows:-
           "It is considered that had Mr [A]'s deception come to light at
           an earlier date, whilst he still had leave to remain as a Tier 4
           (General) Student, then in all likelihood his leave would have
           been curtailed whilst it was still extant, and the leave of his
           spouse and child and his dependants would have been curtailed in
           line.  Mr [A]'s spouse and child would not have then been in a
           position to benefit from his deception by Mrs [B] becoming the
           primary applicant on her Tier 2 application, and Mr [A] becoming
           her dependant.
           By switching between who is the primary applicant and who is the
           dependant, there is an inference that both Mr [A] and Mrs [B]
           have conspired to distance themselves from Mr [A]'s deception,
           particularly given that the BBC's Panorama programme into the
           ETS fraud was aired in February 2014 - migrants who had obtained
           a TOEIC certificate by fraud must by then have realised that the
           matter was likely to surface in their future immigration
           matters.
           Even if Mrs [B] has been completely unaware of her husband's
           deception, the Secretary of State's view is that she and their
           child have benefitted from his deception; and Mr [A] has then
           sought to benefit further by becoming a dependant of his wife.
           Had Mr [A]'s deception come to light prior to the applications
           of 09 January 2015, the applications made by your clients would
           have fallen within the ambit of paragraph 322(2) of the
           Immigration Rules, namely the making of false representations or
           the failure to disclose any material fact for the purpose of
           obtaining a previous variation of leave.
           As a Tier 2 Dependant Partner is not required to provide
           evidence of meeting an acceptable level of English language, by
           Mr [A] switching to be a dependant of his spouse then his
           previous use of what is considered to be a fraudulently obtained
           TOEIC certificate would not ordinarily have come to light.
           It is therefore considered that Mrs [B] has also been a party to
           deception by switching to be the primary applicant on her Tier 2
           application, and which would then camouflage Mr [A]'s previous
           use of the TOEIC certificate.  A curtailment of her leave would
           therefore be justified under paragraph 323(ia)."


     84. The Respondent relies upon an inference that the switching of main
         status holder was in order to avoid the discovery of the deception,
         thereby implicating the Second Applicant in that deception.  As Mr
         Saini submitted, an inference is not evidence.  Further, in this
         case, the conclusion drawn from that inference is, at least without
         any supporting evidence or reasons, irrational.  There could be
         very good reasons for the First and Second Applicants to switch
         roles, particularly when the First Applicant's status was as a
         student and the Second Applicant's role is as an economically
         active worker.  Given the birth of the couple's child, an agreement
         might well have been reached between the parents that it would make
         sense for maintenance reasons for the First Applicant to remain at
         home caring for the child thereby enabling the Second Applicant to
         work to support the family.  That is of course speculation but no
         more speculative than the Respondent's reasoning.


     85. In terms of the Applicants' reasons for switching status, much
         depends on evidence, for example, as to why it is the Second
         Applicant who decided to take on a role as worker rather than the
         First Applicant.  That brings me on to the second reason why I
         accept that this basis of curtailment is unlawful and that relates
         back to the procedural unfairness issue.  If the Respondent
         intended to accuse the Second Applicant of knowledge of or
         complicity in the First Applicant's deception, she ought to have
         put the allegation to the Applicants in  interview or at the very
         least invited representations on this point.


     86. The Second Applicant was given absolutely no warning that this
         point was to be taken against her nor given any opportunity to deal
         with it.  Unlike the First Applicant, therefore, she was not given
         the gist of the case against her and had no opportunity to make
         representations.  This issue was also raised very late in the day
         in the Third Decision.  She has not therefore had the opportunity
         to deal with it after that decision was taken.  I draw no adverse
         inferences from the fact that her subsequent witness statement does
         not deal with this allegation. The detailed grounds were served
         only on 5 October and the witness statements were filed some
         fourteen days later. She does in any event say at [8] of that
         statement that she would not condone cheating or participate in
         such activities herself.


     87. I conclude that the Second Applicant's leave has been unlawfully
         curtailed.  The basis of curtailment under paragraph 323(ii) and/or
         323(ia) does not provide the Respondent with the power to curtail
         her leave in the circumstances of this case.  The reliance on
         paragraph 323(ia) in relation to the Second Applicant is also
         procedurally unfair.


     88. The Third Applicant's leave is as dependent of the Second
         Applicant.  In light of my conclusions in relation to the Second
         Applicant's leave, it follows that the Third Applicant's leave was
         also unlawfully curtailed.


     89. For the foregoing reasons, the best interests of the Third
         Applicant are unaffected.  At the present time, there are no
         removal directions in place against the First Applicant.  It is
         open to him to make representations as to why he should not be
         removed in spite of the curtailment based on my conclusions as to
         the continuation of the Second and Third Applicants' leave.  For
         those reasons, I do not deal either with the consideration of the
         Third Applicant's best interests in the Third Decision save to note
         that since his leave should not have been curtailed, different
         considerations arise in any event.


    Article 8 ECHR and Right of Appeal against the Third Decision


     90. The final issue concerns the Third Decision insofar as it purports
         to deal with Article 8 ECHR.  It is contended by the Applicants,
         based on Sheidu (Further submissions; appealable decision; Sudan)
         [2016] UKUT 412 (IAC) that, notwithstanding what is said in the
         Third Decision about the right of appeal, there is in law a right
         of appeal. This is the Applicants' seventh ground.


     91. As with the Third Applicant's best interests, I do not need to deal
         with this ground so far as the Second and Third Applicants are
         concerned.   The basis of the interference with the First
         Applicant's human rights is altered by my decision in relation to
         the Second and Third Applicants and that issue too will therefore
         need to be revisited.


     92. It is though appropriate to make a few observations about this
         ground, not least because, as I indicated at [13] above, it is a
         discrete ground and one which I have not granted permission to
         argue as yet.


     93. I accept that the analysis in the Third Decision as to appeal
         rights could be clearer.  Whether there is an appealable decision
         under section 82 of the 2002 Act depends on the Respondent refusing
         (in this case) a human rights claim.  The Applicants rely as that
         refusal on what is said in the Third Decision as follows:-
           "It has also been considered whether your clients' particular
           circumstances constitute exceptional circumstances which,
           consistent with the right to respect for private and family life
           contained in Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
           Rights, might warrant consideration by the Secretary of State of
           a grant of leave to remain in the United Kingdome outside the
           requirements of the Immigration Rules....
           There is nothing to prevent Mr [A]'s wife and child returning to
           Bangladesh with him, either now or in the future, so that their
           family life together can continue.  This is something we would
           expect them to do as a family unit.  It is the choice of Mr
           [A]'s wife and child whether to do so or not.  Having been a
           party to ETS fraud, Mr [A] should have been conscious that when
           that matter came to light there would be repercussions not only
           for himself but also for his family.
           Having obtained academic qualifications, it is noted that Mr [A]
           has shown that he has the skills and aptitude to seek and secure
           employment in his home country or elsewhere with which to
           support himself, his wife and his child.  Likewise, through her
           employment, Mrs [B] has shown that she has the experience to
           seek and obtain employment in Bangladesh or elsewhere to
           contribute to the family's maintenance and accommodation.
           Master [A] was born in the UK, and he is currently aged 5 years
           (and will be aged 6 years on 09 October 2017).  It is considered
           that your client's child is still of a young enough age to be
           able to adapt to the life, language and culture in Bangladesh,
           particularly where he has the emotional and physical support of
           a parent or parents.
           It is noted that you have claimed that Mr [A] is required to
           care for his mother, Mrs Mahmuda [K].  No information or
           evidence has been provided to substantiate this claim.  It is
           noted that Mrs [K] obtained settlement in the UK and was being
           sponsored by either another son or her son-in-law.  We therefore
           consider that Mrs [K] has other relations in the UK on whom she
           can rely upon for any care needs that she may have.  As a
           British citizen, Mrs [K] can also seek the assistance of Social
           Services or the NHS for any care she may require.  It is not
           therefore accepted that Mrs [A] is the only person who can care
           for Mrs [K] and that his presence in the UK is essential to her
           needs.
           In summary, the Secretary of State has reviewed the decision to
           curtail your clients' leave to remain and is satisfied that it
           is correct and maintains those decisions.  The Secretary of
           State has carefully considered your clients' Article 8 rights
           and is satisfied that their removal from the UK would not be in
           breach of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.
           The Secretary of State does not consider your clients' return to
           Bangladesh to be disproportionate to the permissible aim of
           maintaining an effective immigration control."


     94. However, there is also a prior requirement for a claim to have been
         made. A human rights claim is defined by section 113 of the 2002
         Act as follows:-
           "'human rights claim' means a claim made  by  a  person  to  the
           Secretary of State at a place designated  by  the  Secretary  of
           State that to remove the person from or require him to leave the
           United Kingdom [or to refuse him entry into the United  Kingdom]
           would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act  1998
           (public authority not to act contrary to Convention)."


  95. Mr Saini relies in this regard on what is said in the 30  July  letter
      from the Applicants' solicitors as follows:-
           "[The First Applicant] also believes that his current
           immigration status was also not considered while taking the
           decision.  Our client made an application for further leave to
           remain as the dependant of a Tier 2 migrant which was approved
           on 26 January 2015.  He made the application before the expiry
           of his previous leave to remain and met all requirements
           therefore his current leave to remain is valid in accordance
           with the Immigration Rules.  As he is currently the dependant of
           a Tier 2 Migrant, even if his leave were curtailed, the leave of
           the Tier 2 Migrant would not be affected due to his alleged
           deception.  In that case, the child would be left alone with a
           mother working full time without the support of our client.
           Besides, our client's elderly mother, who is a British citizen,
           also requires him to provide care to her."


     96. On the face of it, I simply cannot read that as a claim that
         removal will breach the Applicants' human rights.  I do have to
         accept though that when it is considered in the context of the
         passage in the Third Decision cited at [93] above, it does appear
         to have been read as such by the Respondent.


     97. However, I am not persuaded that I need to resolve this issue. If
         the Applicants contend that the Third Decision is an appealable
         decision, they have an alternative remedy namely to lodge an appeal
         with the First-tier Tribunal.  As judicial review is a remedy of
         last resort, that alternative would be reason to refuse the
         judicial review on this ground and indeed refuse permission on it.


     98. The Applicants drew my attention, however, to the case of Khan v
         Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 424
         ("Khan").  In that case, the Court of Appeal upheld the principle
         that judicial review is a remedy of last resort and that, where an
         applicant has the right to appeal a decision, judicial review would
         not normally be the appropriate remedy. In that particular case,
         though, the Court of Appeal concluded that the Upper Tribunal Judge
         considering whether he should exercise his discretion in favour of
         allowing a judicial review to proceed notwithstanding the
         availability of a right of appeal, had wrongly exercised that
         discretion.


     99. Mr Saini drew some parallels with the instant case.  However, there
         are more distinctions than similarities.  Here, unlike that case,
         the decision which is said to give rise to the right of appeal is
         not the initial decision under challenge.  It is the Third
         Decision.  There is no suggestion (nor could there be) that the
         First and Second Decisions gave any right of appeal.  Accordingly,
         the decision which is said to confer the right of appeal was taken
         only about one month prior to the hearing before me.


    100. This is not a case, therefore, where proceedings have developed in
         the understanding that there might be a right of appeal but that
         both parties had accepted that judicial review remained an
         appropriate remedy.  It is not a case where permission was granted
         at a point when there is said to have been an appealable decision.
         The parties have not incurred legal expenses in the expectation
         that the substantive hearing would proceed notwithstanding the
         possibility of a right of appeal.  The reasons why the Court of
         Appeal concluded that the Upper Tribunal Judge had wrongfully
         exercised his discretion are set out at [28] of the judgment in
         Khan.  Those simply do not apply here.


    101. For those reasons, insofar as the Applicants contend that the Third
         Decision is a refusal of a human rights claim which gives rise to a
         right of appeal, their remedy is to appeal that decision.  It would
         then be for the First-tier Tribunal to decide whether they have
         jurisdiction.  I therefore refuse permission to apply for judicial
         review on this ground.


    102. This ground may in any event have fallen away given my conclusions
         concerning the Third Decision insofar as it concerns the Second and
         Third Applicants.   At the very least, the Respondent will need to
         reconsider the position of the First Applicant alongside her
         reconsideration of the cases of the Second and Third Applicants.
         As I have already noted, the First Applicant has been served with a
         one-stop notice which provides him the opportunity to make
         representations about his entitlement to remain following
         consideration of this judgment.


    CONCLUSIONS


    103. The Respondent's decision curtailing the leave of the First
         Applicant is lawful.  There is no procedural unfairness in relation
         to the way in which the ETS allegation was raised or dealt with.
         The Respondent was entitled to be satisfied on the evidence before
         her that the First Applicant had exercised deception and to curtail
         his leave on that basis. She lawfully exercised her discretion when
         curtailing his leave.


    104. The Respondent's decision curtailing the leave of the Second
         Applicant is unlawful.  First, the power under paragraph 323(ii)
         relied upon does not give rise to a right to curtail in the
         circumstances of this case.  Second, there was insufficient
         evidence before the Respondent to conclude that the Second
         Applicant was involved in the deception in order to rely on
         paragraph 323(ia).   In any event, the way in which that allegation
         was raised with no prior notice, no gist of the case to be answered
         and no opportunity to make representations was procedurally unfair.


    105. It follows that the Respondent's decision curtailing the leave of
         the Third Applicant is also unlawful.


    106. In light of my conclusions concerning the leave of the Second and
         Third Applicants, the issue regarding the best interests of the
         Third Applicant does not fall to be considered.   It is open to the
         Applicants to make further representations about those interests
         and Article 8 ECHR more generally based on the consequences of my
         judgment. It is likely that the Respondent will have to revisit her
         conclusions on these aspects so far as they concern the First
         Applicant in light of my conclusions about the leave of the Second
         and Third Applicants.


    107. Insofar as the Third Decision stands following my judgment, if the
         Applicants contend that it gives rise to a right of appeal, they
         have the option of lodging an appeal with the First-tier Tribunal
         with whom responsibility then lies to determine its own
         jurisdiction.  The Applicants therefore have an alternative remedy
         in relation to consideration of Article 8 ECHR. I refuse permission
         to apply for judicial review on this ground (ground seven).


    108. I will hear from the parties by way of written or oral submissions
         as to the appropriate terms for relief and costs.



Signed      [pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/8596/2016


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                       Judicial Review Decision Notice


                       The Queen on the application of
                               Md Jayanal [A]
                               Mrs Mahdia [B]
                                   [M Z A]
                                                                  Applicants
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Smith




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective  representatives,  Mr  P  Saini  and  Mr  S  Karim  of   Counsel,
instructed by M Q Hassan Solicitors on behalf of the  Applicants  and  Mr  C
Thomann of Counsel,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department,  on
behalf of the Respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on  Tuesday  7
November 2017

Decision
   1. The First Applicant's application for judicial review is refused
   2. The judicial review applications of the Second  and  Third  Applicants
      are granted
   3. The Respondent's decisions so far as they relate  to  the  Second  and
      Third Applicants are quashed
For the reasons contained in my written judgment handed down  today  a  copy
of which is attached

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal
Neither party has made any application  for  permission  to  appeal.   I  am
required to consider that in any event.   I  refuse  permission  to  appeal.
There is no arguable error of law in my decision.


Costs
The Respondent shall pay 50% of the Applicants' costs  of  this  application
to be assessed by a Costs Judge if not agreed
The Applicants shall pay 50% of the Respondent's costs of  this  application
to be assessed by a Costs Judge if not agreed
I have had regard to the costs submissions made by the parties.
By reference to the issues as  formulated  within  my  judgment,  the  First
Applicant lost on three of the issues (procedural  irregularity,  lawfulness
of  curtailment  and  exercise  of  discretion).   The  Second   and   Third
Applicants succeeded in their challenge to the lawfulness of curtailment  of
their leave both as to the power to curtail and (in relation to  one  narrow
point) procedural irregularity.  For  that  reason,  the  issue  as  to  the
exercise of discretion fell away in their cases. So far as  the  first  four
issues are concerned, therefore, the  question  of  who  succeeded  is  very
finely balanced.  Each of the First  Applicant  on  the  one  hand  and  the
Second and Third Applicants on the other lost or succeeded  (in  effect)  on
the same three issues.  Put another way, the Respondent won on three  issues
and lost on three issues.  In relation to the fifth issue  (the  Applicants'
ground seven), I refused permission to proceed on  this  point  but  on  the
basis that the Applicants had an alternative  remedy.  I  do  not  therefore
take that issue into account when assessing the question of which party  can
be said to have succeeded.
It is  not  possible  to  categorise  success  in  terms  of  the  numerical
proportion of Applicants who succeeded.  The Third Applicant,  as  a  child,
was dependent on the Second Applicant's position and his case only  fell  to
be considered individually in terms of best interests  (an  issue  which  in
the event I did not need to resolve in light of  my  conclusions  about  the
lack of power to curtail the Second Applicant's leave).
In those circumstances, I accept the Respondent's submissions  that  she  is
entitled to recover 50% of her costs reflecting her  success  in  the  First
Applicant's case and for the  Applicants  to  recover  50%  of  their  costs
reflecting the success of the Second and Third Applicants.
I have given consideration to making no order as to  costs  as  the  parties
will obviously have the right to set off costs as  between  them.   However,
although I have no schedule of costs from  the  Applicants,  the  amount  of
their costs as stated in the costs submissions is about 50% higher than  the
Respondent's costs as claimed in her schedule.  It may  be  that,  following
negotiations or assessment as to reasonableness of costs  and  set-off,  the
net result will be no order as to costs.  However, it  is  appropriate  that
the  parties  have  the  opportunity  to  agree   or   have   assessed   the
reasonableness of the costs as claimed.  If the parties are unable to  reach
an agreement on quantum of costs, they  can  apply  to  a  Costs  Judge  for
detailed assessment.
            Signed:    [pic]


                       Upper Tribunal Judge Smith




        Dated:         12 December 2017









Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).


