

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                  RESERVED JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/9000/2017

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR

                                    Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre

                                                             24 January 2019


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                               vernon malcolm
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE perkins


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr A Mackenzie, Counsel, instructed by T R P Solicitors appeared on behalf
of the Applicant.

Mr R Dunlop, Counsel, instructed by Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    JUDGE perkins:


 1. I am grateful to both counsel for their assistance at the  hearing  and
    in response to a draft of my decision.

 2. The applicant has asked for  an  order  declaring  that  he  cannot  be
    removed from the  United  Kingdom  until  either  any  application  for
    permission to appeal has been determined by the Supreme  Court  or  any
    application for public funding for the purpose of such application  has
    been finally refused and, in the  interim,  an  order  prohibiting  his
    removal pending the determination of this application.   The  challenge
    is framed as a challenge to the respondent deciding on 24 October  2017
    to remove the applicant.  The  claim  was  issued  for  service  on  27
    October 2017.  On that day HHJ McCahill QC stayed the  removal  of  the
    applicant pending the outcome of the application for  judicial  review.
    On 4 May 2018 HHJ Carmel Wall granted permission on the papers.  On  19
    November 2018 the respondent applied for permission to rely on  amended
    grounds of challenge which application was granted by HHJ McKenna on  7
    January 2019.  There was also an application  to  rely  on  an  amended
    defence.  That came before HHJ David  Cooke  with  an  application  for
    adjournment which was refused.  The application to  amend  the  grounds
    was not considered and was left over for the hearing.

 3. The history of this case is  relevant  only  to  set  in  context.   In
    outline, the appellant is subject to  deportation  proceedings.   In  a
    decision dated 13 April 2015 the respondent decided it was conducive to
    the public good  to  deport  the  applicant  because  of  his  criminal
    activity although his criminal career seems to have peaked in 2005 when
    he was sent to prison for  a  total  of  eighteen  months  for  diverse
    criminal acts.  An appeal against  deportation  was  dismissed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal but that decision was set aside by  a  decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal's decision  came  before  the
    Court of Appeal.  In a judgment dated 11 April 2017 the Court of Appeal
    allowed the Secretary of  State's  appeal  with  the  result  that  the
    applicant was  liable  to  be  deported.   I  appreciate  that  I  have
    simplified this analysis.  There is enough potential error here without
    introducing elements that do not need  to  be  resolved  or  explained.
    There is evidence to suggest that there is a possibility of harm coming
    to the British citizen children  of  the  applicant  in  the  event  of
    separation from their father and it was argued that  it  was  wrong  to
    require them to leave the United Kingdom.  The Court of Appeal  refused
    permission to appeal its decision and the applicant took  advice  about
    appealing to the Supreme Court.  It is not suggested by anyone that the
    applicant's representatives had been other than  expeditious  but  they
    could not immediately apply to the Supreme Court because they  did  not
    have the necessary funding.  This is a well-recognised problem and,  in
    broad terms and certainly here, the Supreme Court permits  the  28  day
    time limit in which to make an application for permission to appeal  to
    start to run only when the outcome of a public funding application  has
    been received.

 4. It is common ground that by operation of statute a person  who  appeals
    from the Upper Tribunal to the Court of Appeal cannot be removed  until
    the outcome of permission to appeal to the Court of  Appeal  is  known.
    It  is  also  common  ground  that  there  are  no  comparable  express
    provisions governing the status of a person  who  wishes  to  appeal  a
    decision from the Court of Appeal to the Supreme Court.

 5. The procedural history is somewhat confusing.   The  original  detailed
    grounds of defence were based on a misconception and  amended  detailed
    grounds of defence were  served  with  permission  as  explained.   The
    applicant had to reconsider his position and accepted that some of  the
    points on which he intended to rely were no longer  appropriate.   This
    led to the amended grounds.  The nature of the  proposed  amendment  of
    the applicant's case is quite far reaching.  It puts the whole case  on
    a rather different basis from the one originally indicated.  Mr  Dunlop
    resisted the application to  amend.   However,  I  do  not  accept  his
    description that this is  a  further  and  unattractive  example  of  a
    "rolling review".  The essential remedy has not changed.  The  decision
    complained of has  not  changed.  The  amended  grounds  are  a  better
    formulated attack on the decision that has been in dispute  all  along.
    Mr Dunlop was  able  to  point  to  the  short  timescale  causing  the
    respondent to  have  some  difficulty  in  considering  what,  if  any,
    evidence would be necessary to deal with the case and that is something
    I would need to bear in mind when deciding the application for judicial
    review but there was nothing in the legal points in the amended grounds
    that could  not  have  been  anticipated  and  addressed  in  the  time
    available and, with respect to Mr  Dunlop,  plainly  were.   I  do  not
    accept there has  been  any  significant  unfair  disadvantage  to  the
    respondent in the late application to amend and it  is  an  application
    that I permit.

 6. Mr Mackenzie's grounds are  detailed  and  full  and  helpful  but  the
    essential point is that it is his case that the applicant is left in  a
    difficult position.  Unlike a person who seeks to appeal a decision  of
    the Upper Tribunal the applicant is vulnerable to removal  even  though
    he might be seriously contemplating an application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Supreme Court and even though that application  might  be
    encouraged by the advice of experienced practitioners.   Where,  as  is
    the case here, the respondent has shown a positive interest in removing
    someone then there  must  be  a  mechanism  to  prevent  that  person's
    removal.  The applicant argued that the mechanism is an order from  the
    Upper Tribunal.  He argued that the Upper Tribunal  has  all  necessary
    powers to give effect to the judicial review of  immigration  decisions
    and that it was clearly right that an order was  made.   He  emphasised
    that he was not so crass as to suggest that the Upper  Tribunal  should
    be looking at the merits of an appeal from the Court of Appeal  to  the
    Supreme Court but that the Upper Tribunal  should  use  its  powers  to
    ensure that the status quo is preserved while steps were taken to  make
    an application to the Supreme Court.  The application was made to sound
    exceedingly sensible.  It required only a continuation  of  the  status
    quo that has been established without complaint for some time following
    an interim order of the Upper Tribunal, that there  was  no  reason  to
    think that extending the applicant's stay just until an application  to
    the Supreme Court could be properly funded and presented and  organised
    was in any way contrary to the public interest,  especially  given  the
    time that had already elapsed, and that when all was said and done  the
    application was about the best interests of three British children.

 7. This argument is flawed.  I do not accept that there is no other route.
     There was an obvious route.  The applicant could have asked for a stay
    when he knew the decision of the Court of Appeal.  He did not do  that.
    However, that was not the end of the matter.  He could have  asked  and
    can still ask the Supreme Court for an order.  Neither of these  things
    are denied. The applicant has asked the Court of Appeal for a stay  but
    it was refused.  It was heard by Hickinbottom LJ on  18  January  2019.
    He refused the application and refused it for two reasons although,  if
    I may say so respectfully, he indicated that he was not impressed  with
    the apparent underlying merits of the  application.   The  two  reasons
    identified were that the application was going to be heard by the Upper
    Tribunal (a reference to the hearing before me) and that  bringing  the
    application before the Court of Appeal at this late stage,  nearly  two
    years after the judgment and fifteen months after  commencing  discrete
    proceedings to test the point duplicated  in  the  application  to  the
    Court of Appeal for a  stay,  appears  to  be  close  to  abusive.   He
    refused.  I note that Hickinbottom LJ did not suggest  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal did not have power to make an order but  rather  implied  that
    the Upper Tribunal at this stage at least was the best  place  to  deal
    with the application that had been made but by then the application  to
    the Upper Tribunal was at an advanced stage.

 8. There is no evidence before me about exactly why the application for  a
    stay could not be made to the Supreme Court.  I fully accept  that  the
    application for permission to  appeal  would  be  done  better  by  the
    applicant's representatives being properly funded  and  understand  why
    they would want to  wait  until  they  were  funded  even  though  that
    necessarily involves delay. I accept too (there is direct  evidence  on
    this) that the  Supreme  Court  will  not  entertain  a  free  standing
    application for a stay pending service of an application for permission
    to appeal.  This does not alter the fact that  an  application  can  be
    made, perhaps with "holding grounds".  It is not the case that there is
    no remedy.  It is a remedy that is hard to achieve but it is  a  remedy
    that only becomes necessary after the Court of Appeal  has  refused  to
    grant a stay.

 9. Mr Dunlop argued that this was not a deficiency but the clear result of
    considered  policy.   He  drew  my  attention  to  the  relevant  Civil
    Procedure Rules, particularly paragraph 52.16. "Stay".  This states:

         "Unless

         -    (a) the appeal court or the lower court orders otherwise; or

         -    (b) the appeal is from the Immigration and Asylum  Chamber  of
         the Upper Tribunal, an appeal shall not operate as a  stay  of  any
         order or decision of the lower court."

10. The Rules of the Supreme Court 2009 support Mr Dunlop's argument.  Rule
    37 provides under the title "Stay of Execution":

    "Any appellant who wishes to obtain a stay of execution  of  the  order
    appealed from must seek it from the court  below  and  only  in  wholly
    exceptional circumstances will the Court grant a stay."

11. As Mr Dunlop pointed out the relevant lower court here is the Court  of
    Appeal and so an appeal shall not operate as a stay unless  the  appeal
    court (Supreme Court) or the lower court (Court  of  Appeal)  otherwise
    orders.  This does not completely answer the  point.   It  is  not  the
    applicant's case that the existence of an appeal operates as a stay but
    that  there  should  be  a  stay  while  appeal  is  being  considered.
    Nevertheless the terms of the Rule do suggest to me strongly  that  the
    proper avenue for seeking a stay  is  from  the  court  that  is  being
    appealed or the court that is going to receive the appeal  and  nowhere
    else.

12. I have reminded myself of Mr Mackenzie's submissions and  his  skeleton
    argument and grounds and  I  appreciate  that  the  applicant  is  only
    seeking a stay until such time as his  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Supreme Court has decided an application  for  permission
    that the applicant wishes to present in a seemly and professional  way.
    For all of that I  refuse  the  application.   The  applicant  has  two
    remedies.  The first is to seek permission from the Court of Appeal for
    a stay.  He has done that and been unsuccessful.  That almost makes the
    point that it should be wrong to come to the Upper Tribunal.  The  next
    port of call is the Supreme Court.  That may be difficult  to  organise
    before a properly considered application for permission can be prepared
    but that does not mean that  the  Upper  Tribunal  should  provide  the
    relief that is the proper concern of the Court of Appeal or the Supreme
    Court.

13. Further, although I am not asked to order a stay beyond the  time  when
    the Supreme Court has determined  the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, it is impossible to carry out  a  proper  consideration  of  an
    application for a stay without paying some  regard  to  the  underlying
    merits of the case and it is plainly not my role to consider the merits
    of an appeal from the Court of Appeal to the Supreme Court.

14. In all the circumstances I doubt this Tribunal has jurisdiction to make
    the order but if it does then this is clearly not a case  in  which  to
    exercise it.

15. The short point is that  the  application  is  not  suitable  for  this
    Tribunal.  There is a remedy to be used  elsewhere  and  it  should  be
    used.  I dismiss the application and therefore the application for  all
    associated remedies and interim relief comes to an end.

                                  ~~~~0~~~~
