
IAC-FH-LW-V1

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/9850/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                                22 June 2017


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                             femintola bamidele
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE COLLINS


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr J Walsh, Counsel, instructed by Universe Solicitors  appeared  on  behalf
of the Applicant.

Ms E Dring, Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department  appeared
on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    MR JUSTICE COLLINS:


1.   This is a claim seeking judicial review of a decision of the  Secretary
    of State given on various dates, but the one that matters is one  which
    was dated 1 September so far as the covering letter was concerned,  but
    the decision appears to have been made on 10 August.  There was another
    decision in almost exactly the same terms made on 11  August  of  2016.
    Since then there have been two further decisions, one in  January  2017
    and one in March, each in virtually identical terms which are  attempts
    to fill gaps, or  rather  gaps  which  are  thought  to  exist  by  the
    respondent in the previous refusal decisions.  However, it is  accepted
    they do not assist because the issue is whether  the  applicant  should
    have been given a right of appeal against the relevant decision.  If he
    should have been given such a right on the basis of the  decision  then
    made, any subsequent decision which is a possible attempt to  cure  any
    defect cannot avail the Secretary of State, for obvious reasons.


2.   The applicant himself is a citizen  of  Nigeria.   He  claims  to  have
    entered the United Kingdom in December 1989 but he  has  in  fact  been
    here unlawfully ever since and there is no record of his entry.  He has
    produced material which includes payslips dating  back  to  1993.   The
    relevance of those early dates of course is that in accordance with the
    Rules as they now are, continuous residence in this country for  twenty
    years or more does bring the individual within the scope  of  what  has
    been regarded as an appropriate length of stay  to  engage  Article  8.
    The Rule itself does not refer  specifically  to  Article  8,  but  the
    amendments made in July 2012 were designed to show what the  Government
    thought was the appropriate approach to Article 8 claims.  As has  been
    made clear and as had to be, of course, accepted, that is not the  full
    picture because it is not for the Government  but  for  the  courts  to
    decide whether an Article 8 claim is or is not valid,  and  accordingly
    the Secretary of State has to consider any claim if it fails under  the
    Rules exceptionally outside the Rules, and that is  done  routinely  in
    such cases.

3.   Prior to the 2014 Act the rights  of  appeal  were  not  engaged  by  a
    decision which was based on a refusal of a human  rights  claim  unless
    the decision in question was one which meant that there  had  to  be  a
    removal from this  country.   It  was  the  prospect  of  removal  that
    triggered the right of appeal.  That was changed by the  amendments  to
    Section 82 when the rights of appeal were abolished in  relation  to  a
    very large number of applications, but  were  granted  in  relation  to
    asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights  claims,  and  Section
    82(1)(b) provides a  person  may  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  where  the
    Secretary of State has decided to refuse a human rights claim  made  by
    him, and a human rights claim is, as  is  perhaps  obvious,  one  which
    engages the Human Rights Convention.

4.   This applicant has a long history of making applications  to  endeavour
    to achieve his right to stay in this country.  In  August  of  2006  he
    applied for leave to remain under  the  long  residency  fourteen  year
    Rule. That was rejected and he tried again, without success.   In  2009
    he was served with a IS151A.  He lodged an appeal against  the  refusal
    back in 2006, but that was dismissed.  He did not leave the country and
    in March 2012 he applied for leave to remain under Article 8.  This was
    refused with no right of appeal, and of course at that time  there  was
    no right of appeal because the refusal of leave to remain did not carry
    with it a specific direction that he be removed.   He  then,  in  2013,
    applied for leave to remain outside the Rules and that was refused, was
    reconsidered in early 2014 and by then, of course, or by later 2014,  a
    right of appeal was provided, as I have  indicated,  and  he  exercised
    that appeal.  The appeal was dismissed and his attempt  to  go  to  the
    Court of Appeal was refused so that in March of 2016 his appeal  rights
    were exhausted.  He tried again by lodging an application for leave  to
    remain, this time under the family private life ten year Rule.  He  did
    not pay the fees and that was rejected, and further  applications  were
    made in June and July.  They led to the refusal letters.  I say letters
    because, as I have indicated, there were two, both reflecting decisions
    on 10 and 11 August.  Quite why  the  Secretary  of  State  thought  it
    necessary to produce two decision letters is far  from  clear  and  was
    totally  unnecessary.   However,  since  they  are  both  in  virtually
    identical terms it has been convenient simply to refer to the one  that
    came with the covering letter of 1 September.

5.   As is perhaps obvious, the applicant having made  a  number  of  claims
    and attempts to remain here under  the  Human  Rights  Convention,  the
    question of fresh claim was material.  That stems from paragraph 353 of
    the Immigration Rules which provides, so far as material, and I quote:-

         "When a human rights  or  protection  claim  has  been  refused  or
         withdrawn or treated as withdrawn under  paragraph  333C  of  these
         Rules and any appeal relating to that claim is no  longer  pending,
         the decision maker will consider any further  submissions  and,  if
         rejected, will then determine whether they amount to a fresh claim.
         The  submissions  will  amount  to  a  fresh  claim  if  they   are
         significantly different from the material that has previously  been
         considered. The submissions will only be significantly different if
         the content:

         (i)  had not already been considered; and

         (ii)  taken  together  with  the  previously  considered  material,
                created a realistic prospect of success, notwithstanding its
                rejection."

6.   It was accepted, as indeed was the case,  that  the  fresh  application
    made in March  and  in  the  summer  of  2016  did  contain  additional
    material, in particular there was  further  evidence  relating  to  the
    length of time that the applicant had been in this country.  His  claim
    to that effect that his stay here had been continuous was supported, it
    was said, by a  number  of  items  including  witness  statements  from
    individuals who knew him, been friendly with him and  who  stated  that
    effectively they regularly were in contact  with  him  during  relevant
    years when otherwise there has been no documentary  indication  of  his
    presence here.  There  was  also  additional  material  produced  which
    related to his partner and children of whom he was the father.  It  had
    not been accepted in the previous applications that he  was  exercising
    any relevant rights under the Parent Rules and that there was no family
    life that he was exercising here.

7.   There has been  a  certain  amount  of  learning  in  relation  to  the
    approach which should be adopted  insofar  as  the  new  situation  was
    concerned (by "new situation" I mean that resulting from the amendments
    to Section 82 of the 2002  Act).   The  matter  was  considered  by  Mr
    Ockleton, Deputy President, sitting with Judge Dawson in  the  case  of
    Secretary of State v Amuda Sheidu [2016] UKUT  000412  (IAC),  and  the
    issue there was set out in the first sentence:-

         "When is a decision not to treat submissions as a fresh  claim  not
         (or not merely) a decision not to  treat  submissions  as  a  fresh
         claim?"

    Somewhat obscure, but the point that has come out of the  case  and  is
    obvious, perhaps, is that if the Secretary of  State  does  not  accept
    that there is a valid fresh claim, then the  decision  that  should  be
    reached and should be reflected in any decision letter  is  just  that,
    namely that the fresh claim has been rejected and therefore there is no
    human rights claim which exists, and that is the approach  that  should
    be made.

8.   In the case of Sheidu, albeit there was a reference to 353 in the  body
    of the decision letter, the letter was headed:-

                            "UK BORDERS ACT 2007

                    CONSIDERATION OF FURTHER SUBMISSIONS

        DECISION TO REFUSE A PROTECTION CLAIM AND HUMAN RIGHTS CLAIM"

     and as the Tribunal decided that spoke for itself and it was  not  open
    to the Secretary of State to deny that what  she  was  considering  was
    indeed a claim under human rights protection.

9.   The similar point was decided by the Tribunal consisting of Mr  Justice
    Dove and Upper Tribunal Judge Lane in a decision of The Queen  (on  the
    application of Amin Hussein), in fact it was a claim against the First-
    tier Tribunal, so presumably was a case which had  been  remitted  from
    the High Court on the basis of a Cart claim, and  essentially  in  that
    case the court decided that on the facts and on the basis of the letter
    it had not been accepted that there was a fresh claim and it  had  been
    made clear that there was no such claim.  What perhaps is the substance
    of the decision is contained in paragraph 58 and this is  said,  and  I
    quote:-

     "The Secretary of State's letter of 26 June 2015 ... refers in  various
         places to the applicant's 'claim', where it would plainly have been
         preferable to refer to his 'submissions'.  Nevertheless, the  first
         substantive paragraph of the letter refers to 'your  letter  of  24
         June 2015 in which you made further submissions about your client's
         deportation from the UK'.  In the circumstances, we  consider  that
         the subsequent references to a claim in the letter need to be  read
         as referring to those submissions.  Overall, we consider  that  the
         letter of 26 June, properly construed, amounts  to  a  decision  to
         refuse to treat the  applicant's  submissions  as  a  fresh  claim.
         Paragraph 353 is mentioned in  terms  in  several  places  and  the
         letter makes it evident that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  asked
         herself the correct questions in terms of WM (DRC) [2006] EWCA  Civ
         1495, applying the requisite anxious scrutiny."

10.  So much depends obviously upon the proper construction of  the  refusal
    letter in a given case, and it is not difficult for  the  Secretary  of
    State to get it right because all that has to be  done  if  it  is  not
    accepted that there was in reality a fresh claim, and  that  aspect  is
    indeed rejected, is to state that and then go on to  consider,  because
    reasons clearly have to  be  given  to  deal  with  this,  whether  the
    submissions that are made were first  of  all  significantly  different
    from previous material, and secondly whether they created  a  realistic
    prospect of success, because those are  the  two  issues  which  become
    material if a 353 application is made.

11.  It is therefore necessary to look to  see  what  is  the  form  of  the
    decision letter in question.  It starts in  paragraph  3  by  referring
    specifically to paragraph 353 and then in 4 this is said, and I quote:-

     "Some points raised  in  your  submissions  dated  21  July  2016  were
         considered when the earlier claim was determined.  They were  dealt
         within the refusal decision letter dated 10 August 2016 and  within
         your appeal which was dismissed  28  October  2014  (Appeal  rights
         exhausted 07 March 2016)."

    As is perhaps rather apparent the reason for the  extension  of  appeal
    rights was because of an attempt to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal,
    which was turned down.  Going back to paragraph 4 this is then said and
    this is the key sentence from the point of view  of  Ms  Dring,  and  I
    quote:-

         "The remaining points raised in your  submissions,  taken  together
         with the material previously considered  in  the  refusal  decision
         letter and appeal determination would not have created a  realistic
         prospect of success."

12.  So far so good in that it  does  appear  that  the  letter  writer  was
    engaging with the issue of fresh claim,  however,  paragraph  5  begins
    thus, and I quote:-

     "You claim that your removal would be a breach  of  your  human  rights
         because you have established a family/private life  in  the  United
         Kingdom."

    It then goes on to set out the basis of the claim and to deal in detail
    with the matters which were material and raised in the claim.  It deals
    with and rejects the application of the Rules.   It  then  goes  on  to
    consider private  life  and  whether  there  had  been  a  twenty  year
    continuance residence.  It then goes on to consider under  the  heading
    "Exceptional Circumstances" whether Article 8 rights should provide for
    a grant of leave  and  that  issue  is  considered  in  detail  between
    paragraphs 27 and 39.  The decision then goes on  to  consider  whether
    there are  other  compassionate  factors  and  states  at  the  end  at
    paragraphs 43 and 44:-

         "43. Therefore, having considered all  the  circumstances  of  your
                particular  case,  it  has  been  concluded  that  you  have
                provided no evidence which might  justify  allowing  you  to
                remain here exceptionally.

         44.   Careful  consideration  has   been   given   to   all   these
                circumstances individually and together, but for the reasons
                given above it is not accepted that  there  are  exceptional
                circumstances   in   your   case   considered   sufficiently
                compelling to justify allowing you to remain in  the  United
                Kingdom."

13.  It is thus apparent in the form of the letter that albeit it refers  to
    353 at the outset and indicates that in the  view  of  the  author  the
    additional material,  it  being  accepted  that  there  was  additional
    material which had not  been  previously  considered,  would  not  have
    created a realistic prospect of  success.   Unfortunately,  instead  of
    dealing with and focusing on that material, the letter then goes on  to
    a detailed consideration whether overall the claim  is  made  out,  and
    thus, as it seems to me, the situation is much the same as  that  which
    persuaded the Tribunal in Sheidu that it had not been  decided  in  the
    letter that there was no claim.  Indeed, the whole letter  was  drafted
    on the basis that there was a claim and on the basis that the claim was
    not one which would succeed.  This was, I am afraid, a failure to  deal
    with the matter in the appropriate manner. I have indicated what should
    have been done.  It is to be  noted  that  the  subsequent  letters  in
    January and March 2017 do focus on the additional material to a greater
    extent, albeit they have their own flaws.  Nonetheless, as I have said,
    they  cannot  be  taken  into  account.   It  seems  to  me  in   those
    circumstances that this was treated as a claim based  on  human  rights
    and was rejected as such, and in those circumstances, having regard  to
    the clear wording of Section 82 as amended, there was a right of appeal
    to the Tribunal.

14.  Accordingly, this application must succeed and  I  propose  to  declare
    that the applicant did have and should be granted a right of appeal  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  There is of course a time limit normally  for
    exercising such a right, and for obvious reasons  that  time  has  long
    since passed, but having regard to the need for judicial review and  my
    decision, what I shall direct is that the time for appeal will run from
    today and thus an appeal must be lodged if  it  is  to  be  within  the
    relevant period which is allowed to appeal against a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State which is appealable.

15.  I refuse permission for leave to appeal.

Costs

16.  Detailed assessment if not agreed. ~~~~0~~~~

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/9850/2016


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                       The Queen on the application of

                             Femintola Bamidele
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



     Before Mr Justice Collins sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr J Walsh, of Counsel, instructed  by  Universe
Solicitors,  on  behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Ms  E  Dring  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on 22nd June 2017.

Order


(1)  Application allowed for reasons set out in the attached judgment.

(2)  Declaration that the applicant should have  been  granted  a  right  of
      appeal to the first tier tribunal. The time to serve a notice  to  run
      from today.

(3)  Leave to appeal refused.

(3)  The defendant to pay the applicant's costs to be  subject  to  detailed
      assessment if not agreed.



                                    [pic]

         Signed:


                                     The Honourable Mr Justice Collins




        Dated:    22 June 2017










Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).







