
                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                                                 Field House
                                                                      London


                                                   Heard on: 30 October 2017

                                   Between

                      THE QUEEN (on the application of)
                                 NAHID AHMED
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
                               - - - - - - - -

For the Applicant:     Mr R. Pennington-Benton, instructed by Connaughts
                  Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Z. Malik, instructed by the Government Legal
                  Department


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

   1. This application for judicial review raises a narrow but according  to
      counsel for both parties, important, issue of construction  of  a  not
      infrequently encountered provision of the Immigration Rules.

   2. Paragraph 245ZX(ha) of the Immigration Rules provides in respect of an
      application for further leave to  remain  as  a  student,  subject  to
      certain exceptions that do not apply in this case:

           If the course is at degree level or above, the grant of leave to
           remain the applicant is seeking must not lead to  the  applicant
           having been granted more than 5 years in the  UK  as  a  Tier  4
           (General) Migrant, or as a student, to study at degree level  or
           above unless:

           ...

   3. The question that arises to be addressed is whether, when  calculating
      that period of 5 years, any period during which a  previous  grant  of
      leave as a Tier 4 student  has  been  extended  by  operation  of  s3C
      Immigration Act 1971 is to be included as a period he has leave  as  a
      student or whether it is to be disregarded.

   4. The importance of this is illustrated by  the  circumstances  of  this
      particular  applicant.  Although  the  parties  are  not  in   precise
      agreement as to the dates of his various periods of leave  and  study,
      it is not necessary to calculate precisely those periods of  leave  or
      extended leave. That is because it is agreed between the parties  that
      if the period of 3C leave is to count  towards  the  period  of  leave
      granted for study at or above degree level then the  application  made
      by the applicant for a further period of 12 months  to  study  at  the
      Global Banking School was correctly refused but if,  as  a  matter  of
      law, leave extended by s3C does not count, even though  the  applicant
      was studying during part of that period of leave extended by  s3C  the
      very course that he sought further leave to pursue, then the  decision
      to refuse was unlawful and must be quashed.

   5. The chronology of relevant events may be summarised as follows:

        a. The applicant, who is a citizen of Bangladesh,  arrived  in  the
           United Kingdom with entry clearance as a Tier 4 student and  was
           admitted with leave to remain between 20 January 2011  until  30
           April 2014. While present with this leave he was enrolled  on  a
           course at degree level at London Metrocity  College  between  29
           March 2011 and 28 November 2013.

        b. Having completed that course, but still having leave granted  to
           pursue it, he made an application for further leave to pursue  a
           one-year degree level course at the University of Sunderland (at
           their campus in London E14).

        c. That application was refused, but the applicant lodged an appeal
           and enrolled with the University  of  Sunderland  and  completed
           that course between 28 April 2014 and  20  January  2015,  as  a
           result of which he was awarded a BSc  in  International  Tourism
           and Hospitality Management.

        d. Although his appeal against refusal  of  leave  was  successful,
           being allowed  on  27  August  2015,  by  then  he  had  already
           completed the course that was  subject  of  the  appeal  against
           refusal to grant leave to remain. Despite this,  as  his  appeal
           had been allowed, the respondent granted the  remainder  of  the
           leave initially sought, so that on 11 January 2016 the applicant
           was granted a further 4 months of leave until 11 May 2016.

        e. Before the expiry of that short period of leave he  submitted  a
           further application for leave to remain as a student, once again
           at or above degree level, this time  to  pursue  a  1-year  long
           course at the Global School of Banking (although,  as  we  shall
           see, in fact the course  lasted  10  months)  and  he  has  been
           granted permission to bring a judicial review of a  decision  of
           the respondent, made on 8 June 2016, to refuse that  application
           and against a decision of 13 July 2016 to maintain that  refusal
           on administrative review.

   6. It can be seen from this brief summary that by the time the  applicant
      made this latest application for  an  additional  years'  leave  as  a
      student he had had the benefit of three periods of leave:

        a. The original grant of leave 20.1.2011-30.4.2014, a period of  39
           months;

        b. A period of 3C leave 1.5.2014-11 January 2016, a  period  of  20
           months;

        c. The grant of leave following his successful appeal  11.1.2016-11
           May 2016, a period of 4 months.

      Thus, the total period he had been present in the  United  Kingdom  on
      the basis of being a Tier 4 student was 63 months, if the period of 3C
      leave is included as leave as a Tier 4  Student.  Had  the  period  of
      further leave he sought for  the  purpose  of  the  course  at  Global
      Banking School been granted, that would have amounted  to  75  months,
      plainly more than the maximum period allowed for  study  at  or  above
      degree level of 5 years. Put another way,  as  did  Mr  Malik  in  his
      submissions, even if one included  of  the  period  during  which  the
      applicant held leave extended by s3C only that part of it that he  was
      actually studying at University of Sunderland, that being  10  months,
      he would still have spent more than 5 years in the United Kingdom as a
      Tier 4 Student, studying courses at degree level or above.

   7. For that reason, the application was refused.

   8. In seeking Administrative Review, the applicant argued that the period
      during which he was present pursuant to leave  extended  by  statutory
      effect of s3C Immigration Act 1971 between 25 March 2014, when he made
      an application for further leave to remain, and 11 January  2016  when
      leave was granted following a successful appeal, should not count  for
      the purposes of applying the provisions of 245ZX(ha).

   9. This was not accepted by the respondent. In maintaining  the  refusal,
      the respondent referred to the Tier 4  Policy  Guidance  published  in
      April 2016 (with emphasis as added by the respondent):

           Calculating periods of leave counting towards time limits

           106. To calculate the maximum amount of time that you have spent
           studying at a specified level, we will consider how  much  leave
           you have already received to study courses as a Tier 4 (General)
           migrant or a Student, and add the length of leave that you  will
           receive if your current application is granted.

           ...

           109. We will also count any previous periods of leave  you  have
           held under Tier 4 (General) and/or the Student route, where  you
           have subsequently left the UK. This period will be counted  from
           the date the leave began until  the  date  it  expired.  If  you
           extend your Tier 4 / Student leave, or  received  an  period  of
           continuing  leave  in  accordance  with  section   3c   of   the
           Immigration Act 1971, this will be included. If your  leave  was
           curtailed, we will take the date the curtailed leave expired.

      Applying this policy guidance, the position before the respondent  was
      clear. The period of 3C  leave  was  to  count  for  the  purposes  of
      245ZX(ha)  which  meant,  as  a  matter  of  simple  arithmetic,   the
      application was one that could not succeed. The respondent  considered
      representations made in  the  application  for  Administrative  review
      founded upon R (Alvi) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 33, but said only that:

           "However, the policy guidance we use is published  and  approved
           by the Home Office, we do not believe this case law is  relevant
           to your substantiate (sic) your claims nor do  we  believe  that
           the policy guidance has been misapplied in your case."

  10. Mr Pennington-Benton, on behalf of the applicant, had set out  in  his
      skeleton argument two strands of challenge to  the  refusal  to  grant
      leave. The second of those was a submission founded upon  "conspicuous
      unfairness in an individual case".  Realistically,  and  as  had  been
      anticipated  by  the  judge  who  granted  permission  to  bring  this
      application for judicial review, he did not pursue that argument as  a
      separate issue in his oral submissions, although it still informs  the
      arguments he does pursue. He was plainly right  not  to  do  so.  This
      applicant has suffered no unfairness, having been able to continue his
      studies notwithstanding the impugned decision. And, as we  shall  see,
      that was possible because the legal  framework  in  play  is  designed
      precisely to accommodate such  an  outcome  so  that  studies  do  not
      necessarily have to be put  on  hold  while  the  applicant  awaits  a
      decision on an application to pursue  them  or  to  appeal  against  a
      decision to refuse his application.

  11. Mr Pennington-Benton urges caution in reliance upon the facts of  this
      particular case because, he submits, it is relatively unusual  for  an
      applicant for further leave as a  student  to  embark  upon  his  next
      course  of  study  before  his  application  for  further   leave   is
      determined.  Although  he  referred  to  judicial  comment  concerning
      difficulties  encountered  by  students  in  such  circumstances,   no
      evidence was offered to support that submission and, as is pointed out
      by  Mr  Malik  for  the  respondent,  and  as  discussed  below,  that
      submission  sits  uncomfortably  both  with  the  framework  in  place
      designed specifically to accommodate that occurring and with the  fact
      that this particular applicant was  able  to  proceed  to  pursue  and
      complete his course, even though his application for leave  to  do  so
      had been refused and he remained present  on  leave  extended  by  s3C
      while he pursued an appeal.

  12. Distilled to its essence, Mr Pennington-Benton's  submission  is  that
      there is a distinction to  be  drawn  between  leave  granted  by  the
      respondent to an applicant for leave to remain as a Tier 4 Migrant and
      leave extended by statutory effect because an applicant has made an in-
      time application that has not been determined or because he  continues
      to pursue a right of appeal against an  adverse  decision.  He  argues
      that s3C leave  arises  by  statutory  effect  and  so  is  not  leave
      "granted" by the respondent.

  13. He submits that where a period of 3C leave is lengthy, this  can  have
      the result that a significant part of the 5-year  maximum  period  for
      study at or above degree level will be taken up and  this  would  give
      rise to a level of unfairness  that  cannot  be  taken  to  have  been
      intended by the rule maker.  He  seeks  also  to  draw  a  distinction
      between the original period of leave granted, which is that which,  in
      his submission, para 245ZX(ha) refers to, which is the  leave  granted
      by the SSHD, and the period of leave extended by the statutory  effect
      of s3C, which is not, he says, leave "granted by the SSHD". He relies,
      in particular, upon the final statement to be found in para 245ZX(ha):

           "For the avoidance of doubt,  the  calculation  of  whether  the
           applicant has exceeded the time limit will be based on what  was
           previously granted by way of period of leave and level of course
           rather  than  (if  different)  periods  and   courses   actually
           studied."

      Although it seems clear that the purpose of this provision  is  simply
      to make clear that the focus is upon the leave granted and not whether
      the applicant  used  that  period  of  leave  to  pursue  studies,  Mr
      Pennington Benton submits that the focus is upon the leave  previously
      granted by the SSHD and not the length of any statutory  extension  of
      it. He submits that the rule-maker could have focussed on  periods  of
      actual study in the United Kingdom rather than the  periods  of  leave
      granted for the purpose of study, but chose not to. He argues that the
      intention was a bright line  rule,  focussed  upon  periods  of  leave
      granted for study rather than periods of actual study  which  has  the
      advantage of clarity and simplicity.

  14. Mr Pennington-Benton submits also that the approach urged by the SSHD,
      that s3C leave must be included as leave granted as a Tier 4  student,
      leads to unfairness because, as he puts it in his  skeleton  argument,
      students may

           "... fall one side or the other of the 5-year rule, by  dint  of
           no more than chance occurrences resulting in them spending  more
           or less periods of time on 3C leave (applications in some cases,
           but not others, being wrongly refused, differing  waiting  times
           for initial decisions...) It is difficult to understand why  the
           rule maker would have intended for this differential  and  often
           arbitrary  treatment.  Much  more  likely  that  the  rule-maker
           thought it best (most clear, coherent and outcome-consistent) to
           simply rely on periods of LTR actually granted..."

      Pointing to the observation in R (Syed) v SSHD [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1059
      that the immigration rules  "...  are  to  be  construed  and  applied
      according to their natural and ordinary meaning, Mr  Pennington-Benton
      submits that:

           "There can be little doubt that,  in  ordinary  parlance,  leave
           "granted" to an applicant connotes a  defined  period  of  leave
           specifically granted to an individual, for a defined purpose."

  15. Thus, the question of law that is to be addressed in these proceedings
      is that neatly summarised by Mr Malik  at  para  11  of  his  skeleton
      argument as being whether:

           a) the Secretary of State misconstrued  Paragraph  245ZX(ha)  of
           the Immigration Rules in holding that the time  spent  on  leave
           extended under section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 ("the 1971
           Act") counts towards that the specified five years' period; and




           b) the  Secretary  of  State  acted  unfairly  in  refusing  the
           Applicant's application.

  16. It is accepted by the respondent  that  if  the  period  of  3C  leave
      enjoyed by the applicant is  disregarded  then  the  period  of  leave
      sought by the applicant would not infringe the 5  year  rule  and,  as
      that was the only reason for refusal, his  application  was  one  that
      fell to be granted.

  17. In submitting that the construction urged by Mr  Pennington-Benton  is
      simply not sustainable, Mr Malik has identified a formidable range  of
      arguments to  the  contrary.  He  submits  that  the  construction  of
      paragraph 245ZX(ha) proposed by the applicant is not  consistent  with
      the natural and ordinary meaning of the vocabulary of that  provision,
      second that it is inconsistent with authority and  third  that  it  is
      inconsistent with the immigration rules read as a whole and the Tier 4
      Points Based System framework.

  18. The focus of the rule  in  question,  245ZX(ha),  is  the  period  the
      applicant has been granted leave "as a Tier 4 (General) Migrant, or as
      a Student". The question is,  therefore,  whether  during  the  period
      leave was extended by s3C he had leave as a  Tier  4  Student.  In  Mr
      Malik's submission there can be no doubt  that  he  did,  and  if  the
      intention had been to exclude s3C leave, the rule would have said  so.
      For the construction sought by the applicant, one would have  to  read
      into the rule a phrase that was absent from it, that being  "excluding
      a period of s3C leave".

  19. QI (Pakistan) v SSHD [2011] EWCA  Civ  614  was  concerned  with  para
      245ZX(l) of the rules, which sets out part of the qualifying  criteria
      for leave as a student:

           The applicant must not be applying for leave to remain  for  the
           purpose of studies which would  commence  more  than  one  month
           after the applicant's current entry clearance or leave to remain
           granted under these rules expires.

      The Upper Tribunal had dismissed QI's appeal against refusal to  grant
      further leave as a Tier 4 Student, holding that leave  extended  under
      s3C does not count for these  purposes  so  that  if  the  applicant's
      initial grant of leave had ended more than  a  month  before  the  new
      course was to commence, then even though his leave had  been  extended
      by s3C he could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  245ZX(l).  Th
      Court of Appeal held that construction to be incorrect  and  wrong  in
      law. At paragraph 14 per Pill LJ:

           "... The natural meaning of the words in the  rule  is  that  it
           will not operate while leave is extended. The leave as  extended
           is not a new or different species of leave; the  existing  leave
           is extended."

      And at paragraph 15, speaking of the effect of s3C:

           "...The section expressly provides that leave is extended  while
           consideration of the application for variation is pending."

  20. Mr Pennington-Benton argued that QI was distinguishable on  the  basis
      of context. The Court of Appeal was there  concerned  with  expiry  of
      leave  and  not  its  extension.  Therefore,  it  does   not   follow,
      "linguistically  or  conceptually"  that  the  view  expressed  in  QI
      properly informs the construction of paragraph 245ZX(ha). I am  unable
      to accept that submission. The decision of the Court of Appeal  in  QI
      establishes clearly  and  unambiguously  that,  correctly  understood,
      leave extended by operation of s3C is simply that: an extension of the
      same leave that was originally granted. It is not something  different
      and simply extends the period during which the applicant has leave  to
      remain as a Tier 4 Student. As an extension of leave, it remains leave
      granted to the applicant by the respondent.

  21. Further support for this construction is provided by R (Mehmood & Ali)
      v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 744. The issue before the Court of  Appeal  was
      whether the phrase "any leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
      previously given to him" in s10(9) Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999
      includes leave extended by s3C. The submission  of  the  applicant  in
      that case was similar to that advanced here by  Mr  Pennington-Benton,
      that as this provision referred specifically to leave "given  to  him"
      that was referring only to the leave granted by the SSHD and  not  the
      leave extended by statutory effect of s3C. Beatson  LJ  explained,  at
      paragraph 34, that 3C leave is a continuation of the same  leave  that
      existed before the application that had been made which generated  the
      extension of leave:

           "... a statutory extension of the same leave that existed before
           it was made."

  22. In Mahad v ECO [2009] UKSC 16 Lord Brown, at paragraph 10, approved an
      earlier observation by Lord Hoffmann that construction:

           "... depends upon the language of the  rule,  construed  against
           the relevant background. That involves a  consideration  of  the
           immigration rules as a whole and the function which  they  serve
           in the administration of immigration policy".

      In this context, it is of particular relevance to have regard  to  the
      provisions of paragraph 245ZY of the rules, the purpose  of  which  is
      plainly and specifically to accommodate the position where  a  student
      seeks to undertake studies before the outcome of his  application  for
      further leave has been determined or his appeal  against  refusal  has
      been determined. So far as is relevant, paragraph 245ZY provides, with
      emphasis added:

           245ZY. Period and conditions of grant

           ...

           (iv) no study except:

           1) study at the institution that the Confirmation of  Acceptance
              for  studies  Checking  Service  records  as  the   migrant's
              Sponsor...

           2) until such time as a  decision  is  received  from  the  Home
              Office on an application which is supported by a Confirmation
              of Acceptance  for  Studies  assigned  by  a  Highly  Trusted
              Sponsor and which is made  while  the  applicant  has  extant
              leave, and any appeal or administrative review  against  that
              decision has been determined, study  at  the  Highly  Trusted
              Sponsor institution which the Confirmation of Acceptance  for
              Studies  Checking  Service  records  as  having  assigned   a
              Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies to the Tier 4 migrant;

              ...

      As Mr Malik pithily observed in oral submissions, it makes no sense to
      specifically allow for study in such circumstances and then to  ignore
      it when calculating periods of leave granted for the purpose of study.



  23. Yet further support for  the  proposition  that  the  legal  framework
      specifically caters for and accommodates periods of study while  leave
      is extended by s3C is provided by the reported decision of  the  Upper
      Tribunal in Patel (revocation of sponsor licence fairness) [2011] UKUT
      00211 (IAC) and the decisions of the Court of Appeal in  SSHD  v  Khan
      [2016] EWCA Civ 137 and R (Raza) v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 36 in each  of
      which it was accepted that students could and did  continue  to  study
      during periods of s3C leave.

  24.  Drawing all  of  this  together,  in  my  judgment  the  position  is
      unambiguously clear. Where a person who is present  with  leave  as  a
      Tier 4 student makes an application for  further  leave  in  the  same
      capacity during the  currency  of  that  leave,  his  leave,  although
      extended by statutory effect of s3C, is  an  extension  of  that  same
      leave and so it continues to be leave granted  to  him  as  a  Tier  4
      Student. Therefore, for the purposes of  paragraph  245ZX(ha)  of  the
      immigration rules, any period during which leave to remain is extended
      by operation of s3C does count towards the five-year limit  for  grant
      of leave for study at or above  degree  level.  That  construction  of
      paragraph 245ZX(ha) is consistent not just  with  the  scheme  of  the
      immigration rules, but also with clear authority  from  the  Court  of
      Appeal and the natural and ordinary meaning of the words used.

  25.  There  has  been  no  unfairness  suffered  by  this  applicant.  The
      additional period of leave he sought, if  granted,  would  have  meant
      that he would have been granted more than the 5  years  permitted  for
      study at or above degree level. There was never any doubt or ambiguity
      about that  limit  on  the  leave  that  would  be  available  to  the
      applicant, it being made clear both in the immigration rule itself and
      in published policy.  The  policy  was  not  seeking  to  add  to  the
      framework applicable  that  was  absent  from  the  immigration  rule.
      Therefore, the decision  under  challenge  in  these  proceedings  was
      correct and lawful and the application for judicial review is refused.






                                  ~~~~0~~~~









                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                                JR/9786/2016


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                 The Queen on the application of Nahid Ahmed
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                    Before Upper Tribunal Judge Southern




Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having  considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  from  Mr  R.
Pennington-Benton of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Connaughts,  Solicitors,  on
behalf of the Applicant and  Mr  Z  Malik  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  the
Government Legal Department, on behalf of the Respondent, at  a  hearing  at
Field House, London on 30 October 2017

Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

For the reasons contained in the judgment attached.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

No application has been made for permission to appeal.  I refuse  permission
to appeal in any event.  There is no arguable error of law in my decision.


Costs

The Applicant shall pay the Respondent's costs of this application  which  I
      have
summarily assessed in the sum of �8,547.00.
         Signed:  [pic]


                       Upper Tribunal Judge Southern




        Dated:         17 November 2017










Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).



