
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                Give orally at Field House on 5 December 2016

                                                               JR/10158/2015

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                   Heard on: 5 December 2016



                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE peter lane

                                   Between

                                  The Queen
                           (on the application of)
                              amanda negbenebor

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr S Karim, instructed by Ineyab Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the respondent.









                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE peter lane:  This is an application for judicial review of a  decision
    of the respondent taken on 7 July 2015 and maintained  subsequently  on
    an administrative review to refuse to  grant  the  applicant  leave  to
    remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant
    pursuant to the points-based Rules.

2.   The applicant's immigration history we find  conveniently  set  out  in
    the detailed grounds of defence.   There  we  see  that  the  applicant
    entered the United Kingdom in September 2010, as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student.  She was granted leave to remain in 2012 as a  Tier  1  (Post-
    Study  Work)  Migrant.   In  January  2014,  she  submitted  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) application, which was refused with a right  of  appeal.
    The applicant  exercised  her  right  of  appeal  but  her  appeal  was
    dismissed by the First-tier  Tribunal  in  October  2014.   She  became
    appeal rights exhausted in respect of that application in May 2015.  On
    27 May 2015, just within the 28 days afforded by the immigration  rules
    to overstayers who wish to make subsequent applications  for  leave  to
    remain, she  submitted  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  application.   That
    application was refused and it is that refusal that gives rise to these
    proceedings.

3.   The decision of 7 July 2015  proceeded  essentially  as  follows.   The
    respondent set out the relevant provisions of the  Rules,  to  which  I
    shall make reference in due course.  The respondent then considered  by
    reference to each requirement of the Rules whether the  points  claimed
    were to be awarded or  not.   The  respondent  took  the  view  that  a
    Companies House Current  Appointment  Report  dated  17  January  2004,
    showing the applicant as registered as a director of a  UK  company  in
    October 2013, did not meet the requirements of the Rules because it was
    dated more than three months prior to the  application.   The  decision
    letter went on to say, in addition, that evidence submitted in relation
    to advertising material did not cover a  continuous  period  commencing
    before 11 July 2014 up to no earlier than three months before the  date
    of the application; and that as regards the applicant's membership of a
    UK trade  body  known  as  the  AICS,  the  respondent  considered  the
    applicant had not registered with that body until September 2014, which
    was after 11 July 2014 and therefore failed to meet the requirements of
    those Rules.

4.   The applicant sought an administrative review of the decision.  So  far
    as the Companies House material was concerned, the applicant  contended
    that the respondent had failed to apply  the  provisions  of  paragraph
    245AA(d)(i) and (ii).  We shall turn to that provision in  due  course.
    The applicant contended that, so far as paragraph 245AA was  concerned,
    the only missing information was the  current  date.  In  other  words,
    whether the applicant was still a director of the company was a  matter
    which she said the respondent should have verified by checking with the
    Companies House website.  The  applicant  also  pointed  out  that  the
    requirement to produce particular relevant advertising material and the
    requirement to belong to a UK trade  body  were  in  fact  alternatives
    under the Rules and so both did not need to be satisfied.  Although the
    applicant failed to comply with membership of a trade body by reference
    to the AICS, she was a member of a trade body, which we will  hereafter
    describe as CISCO, but which is in fact the  "CISCO  Certified  Network
    Associate Routing and Switching Body".

5.   The outcome of the respondent's administrative review was  as  follows.
    The respondent continued to maintain that the applicant failed to  meet
    the relevant requirements of the Rules  relating  to  advertising.   It
    was, however, acknowledged that the applicant had registered with a  UK
    trade body, CISCO, well before the 11 July cut-off date.  However,  the
    point was made by the respondent that, even if the applicant would have
    been awarded points by reference to  that  criterion,  the  application
    would still have fallen  for  refusal  because  of  problems  with  the
    evidence showing the applicant was trading prior to 11 July 2014.   The
    respondent was of the view that the Companies House material  was  non-
    compliant.  So far as 245AA was concerned,  the  respondent's  position
    was that documents would not be requested where (as here)  a  specified
    document had not been submitted or where the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    was satisfied that the application would fall to be refused  for  other
    reasons.  The original decision was accordingly maintained.

6.   The last of the documents to which reference needs to  be  made  before
    turning to the  procedural  history  is  the  PAP  Pre-Action  Protocol
    response letter of 14 August 2015.  Here we see what is asserted by the
    applicant to be a concession that the Secretary of State  had  conceded
    the point about the status of CISCO as a  United  Kingdom  trade  body.
    The respondent, however, said: "please be advised  that  even  if  your
    client were to be awarded points against such criteria,  your  client's
    application would still fall for  refusal  on  the  basis  of  evidence
    provided to confirm that she  was  trading  prior  to  11  July  2014".
    Reference was then made to the document from Companies House  as  being
    too early in date to satisfy the requirements of the  Rules.   The  PAP
    response concluded  for  similar  reasons  to  those  of  the  original
    decision and the administrative review decision, that  paragraph  245AA
    was effectively not in play in this case.

7.   On 29 January 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam  granted  permission
    to bring judicial review proceedings.  Having recited  the  history  to
    which I have just made reference, she stated that it was arguable  that
    the decision maker had misapplied paragraph 41-SD(e)(iii) of Appendix A
    to the Rules, insofar as it was arguable that the applicant  needed  to
    produce both the advertising material and the Companies House material.
     It was also arguable in her view that, had the  evidence  relating  to
    CISCO been considered, then the respondent would  have  been  satisfied
    regarding the alternative requirements at 41-SD(e)(iii)(iv).   On  that
    basis, Judge McWilliam said that the only outstanding problem with  the
    application  at  that  time  was  that  the  Companies  House   Current
    Appointment Report was not up-to-date.  As  to  this,  Judge  McWilliam
    considered it arguable that paragraph 245AA(d)(iii)(3) applied.

8.    As  already  said,  the  relevant  substantive  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules are to be found at paragraph  41-SD  of  Appendix  A.
    This is part of the provisions relating to  entrepreneur  migrants.   I
    shall pass  over  the  issue  relating  to  advertising  and  marketing
    material for the  reason  that  it  is  now  common  ground  that  that
    requirement is not additional to the requirement relating to membership
    of a United Kingdom trade body. Both parties before me are agreed and I
    find it to be the case that the requirement in the Rules to be a member
    of a UK trade body has no definition in the Rules.  I will turn to  the
    significance of that in due course.

9.    The  provision  of  the  Rules  relating  to   the   Companies   House
    documentation does require to be set out in extenso.  It is as follows:

         "(2)(a) if claiming points for being a director of a UK company  at
         the time of his application, a printout from Companies House of the
         company's filing history page and of a Current Appointment  Report,
         listing the applicant as a director of a company that  is  actively
         trading and  not  dormant,  or  struck  off,  or  dissolved  or  in
         liquidation, and showing the date of his appointment as a  director
         of that company."

     And a little further down we find this:

         "... the evidence at (1) and (2) above must cover (either  together
         or individually) a continuous period commencing before 11 July 2014
         or 6 April 2015 as appropriate and ending on  a  date  not  earlier
         than three months before the date of his application."


    There is then an exception which is not relevant.

 10. Paragraph 245AA deals  with  documents  that  are  not  submitted  with
    applications  in  connection  with  points-based   applications.    The
    starting point is that the respondent will only consider documents that
    have been  submitted  with  the  application  and  will  only  consider
    documents after the application when they are submitted  in  accordance
    with subparagraph (b).  That is  where  the  applicant  "has  submitted
    specified documents in which (iv) a document does not contain  all  the
    specified information".  In  those  circumstances  the  respondent  may
    contact the applicant and request the relevant documents.

11.  So far as paragraph (d) is concerned, this reads as follows:

         "(d) If the applicant has submitted a specified document:


             (i)  in the wrong format, or


             (ii) which is a copy and not an original document, or


             (iii)     which  does  not  contain  all  of   the   specified
                  information but the missing information is verifiable from
                  -


                  (1)  other documents submitted with the application,


                  (2)  the website of  the  organisation  which  issued  the
                      document, or


                  (3)  the website of the appropriate regulatory body;


             the application may  be  granted  exceptionally  provided  the
             respondent is  satisfied  that  the  specified  documents  are
             genuine and the applicant meets all the other requirements."


12.  With that necessary detailed introduction we come to the  gist  of  the
    case.  Mr Karim submits that, as for membership of a UK trade body, the
    respondent has stated both in the administrative review decision and in
    the Pre-Action Protocol letter that the body known as CISCO was, so far
    as the respondent was concerned, a UK trade  body.   Mr  Malik  submits
    that the references in those documents do not  amount  to  concessions.
    He says so because they are phrased in such a way as to make  it  plain
    that the Secretary of State was not making an express concession.  This
    was because she did not need to do so.  She was  merely  stating  that,
    regardless of what the position might be regarding UK trade bodies, the
    application  fell  to  be  refused  for  another  reason;   namely  the
    "Companies House" reason.

13.  I have been taken  to  certain  documentation  and  case  law  on  this
    matter.  I said I would reserve my position in relation  to  the  cases
    and the printout from something called British Services which Mr  Malik
    submitted this morning.  I heard submissions from both parties de  bene
    esse on those materials.  I am satisfied in all the circumstances  that
    there is no material unfairness to the applicant in engaging with them.
     I make that finding partly because it was evident that, with his usual
    skill, Mr Karim was able to deal with them entirely satisfactorily from
    the applicant's standpoint.  I also do so because,  for  the  reason  I
    shall give, I am in any event persuaded by the applicant's  submissions
    on the issue of the UK trade body.

14.  The reason why I am so persuaded can be  simply  put.   The  well-known
    case of R v Department of  Education  and  Employment  ex  parte  Begbe
    [2000] 1 WLR 1115, cited in the judgment of Laws LJ in R (Capital  Care
    Services UK Ltd) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1151, is predicated on the basis that there has been a mistake
    of some kind; in other words, that the position is not what the parties
    might earlier have considered it to be.  In  those  circumstances,  the
    case law makes it plain that it will, as a general matter, be difficult
    for a person to persuade a court that the Secretary  of  State  or  any
    other public body should be held to an  original  mistaken  view  of  a
    matter. That is particularly so where the view taken relates to matters
    of law, including the Immigration Rules.

15.    In the present case, however, I do not find  that  the  pre-requisite
    for the application of that doctrine is satisfied.  I am not  satisfied
    at all that the respondent has shown that CISCO was  not,  for  present
    purposes, a UK trade body.  The respondent is severely hampered by  the
    absence of any definition of such a body in the Immigration Rules.   Mr
    Malik was compelled to put before me a list of trade bodies to which  I
    have made reference taken from British Services.  He says, no doubt  on
    instruction, that this is the list which is consulted by the respondent
    whenever she is considering whether an applicant is a member  of  a  UK
    trade body.  Mr Karim, however, makes the good point that  this  is  an
    unofficial list.  We know little  or  nothing  of  its  provenance.  We
    certainly have nothing in writing from the respondent that this is  the
    material to which she goes when deciding whether a body is a  UK  trade
    body.  In those circumstances, therefore, I find that the applicant  is
    correct and that, if she needed to, the respondent could not in fact go
    behind her statements that the CISCO body was a UK trade body.

16.  The respondent, however, does not need to do so because I turn to  what
    is the determining issue in this  case  and  which  the  applicant,  at
    least, originally regarded as such; namely, the Companies House matter.



17. Mr Karim seeks to rely on paragraph 245AA.   He  acknowledges  that  the
    document from Companies House could not satisfy the requirements of the
    Rules, strictly read, because it was a document that bore a  date  that
    was not within the requisite three month  period.   He  says,  however,
    that in those circumstances it would have been an easy matter  for  the
    respondent to consult  the  Companies  House  website  where,  had  the
    respondent done so, it would have  been  plain,  apparently,  that  the
    applicant was still a director of the relevant company.

18.   Does paragraph 245AA assist the applicant?   The  problem  I  find  in
    relation to  paragraph  (d)  and  indeed  paragraph  (b)  is  that  the
    provisions on which Mr Karim is forced to rely are in  each  case  ones
    that contain the requirement that the document "does not contain all of
    the specified information".  The Companies  House  document  is  to  be
    found at H42 of the bundle.  It is short.  It bears the crest and  name
    of Companies House and  then  refers  to  itself  as  being  a  Current
    Appointments Report for FAVSOLUTIONS UK LTD.  It gives  the  registered
    number of that company and it states that the document was  created  on
    17/01/2014 at 11:54:14am.  That document in my view plainly is not  one
    that engages paragraph 245AA.  It is  not  a  document  that  fails  to
    contain all of the specified information.  On the  contrary,  it  is  a
    document which contains all the information it is designed  to  contain
    and which is entirely coherent and complete on its face.

19.  The problem with the document is that is dated too early.   It  is,  in
    other words, the wrong document.  It would in my view be going much too
    far to interpret paragraph 245AA as encompassing documents that are the
    wrong kind of document because they are  produced  at  points  in  time
    other than those required by the Rules.  I have had careful  regard  to
    what  Mr  Karim  has  said,  particularly  as   regards   sub-paragraph
    (d)(iii)(3).  That, as we have seen, is a provision that contemplates a
    decision-maker having access to a website in order to fill in a gap  in
    the missing information.  The fact is, however, that even if  paragraph
    (d) applied, the application would be granted only "exceptionally",  to
    quote the word used in the closing lines of  paragraph  (d).   But  the
    essential point is the one I have just made; namely that this is not on
    its face a document that falls within paragraph 245AA(d).

20.  We must recall the purpose of the points-based Rules and the fact  that
    they are intended to be operated by officials at  a  relatively  modest
    level within government.  As the Higher Courts have said from  time  to
    time, it would frustrate the  purpose  of  the  points-based  Rules  if
    examinations of the kind contended for by Mr Karim were to be required.
     We see that, in particular, from the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal
    in EK (Ivory Coast) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]
    EWCA Civ 1517.

21.   Mr Karim seized upon the example given by Mr Malik  in  oral  argument
    in order to press the case for the  application  of  paragraph  (d)  of
    245AA.  Mr Malik said that it perhaps would  be  permissible  to  apply
    that paragraph where the names of the companies in respect of which the
    applicant was said to be a director were missing but the  correct  date
    was not.  I place no weight on that example or  its  repudiation,  save
    that they underscore the point that the kind  of  document  with  which
    paragraph  (d)  and  paragraph  (b)  are  concerned  is   fundamentally
    different from the one we find at page H42 of the bundle.

22.   For these reasons, therefore, the application falls to  be  dismissed.
    I will hear parties on the issue of costs.
....
Costs

     I am asked to make a decision on the costs  of  this  case.   Mr  Malik
    asks for the respondent's costs on the basis that the  application  has
    been dismissed.  Mr Karim makes two submissions - first to ask for  the
    applicant's costs  up  to  yesterday  and  secondly,  if  that  is  not
    successful, that there be no order as to costs.

         I am certainly not with Mr Karim as  regards  the  first  of  those
    submissions.  It is plain that the issue  of  whether  the  applicant's
    application fell to be dismissed by reference to  the  Companies  House
    issue has been the stumbling block for the applicant all along  and  on
    that issue I have found against her.  I am, however, persuaded that  in
    the circumstances of this case there should indeed be no  order  as  to
    costs.  The issue that has  taken  up  a  considerable  amount  of  the
    parties' time and by extension the Tribunal's time - namely  the  trade
    body issue - was effectively introduced by the  respondent  during  the
    course of these proceedings. It has taken unnecessary time and put  the
    applicant to unnecessary expense. In those  circumstances,  I  consider
    that it would not be right for the respondent to be given her costs.  I
    make no criticism of Mr Malik for his late submission of the  case  law
    and British Services website list but it  does  seem  to  me  that  the
    introduction of this list has served only further to confirm the extent
    that the respondent has caused the applicant to focus on an issue  that
    was not both a poor one for the respondent but also immaterial.

         So there will be no order as to costs.  ~~~~0~~~~
