

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                               JR/10076/2016


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review

                                   before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


              The Queen on the application of SHAKIR ORYAKHAIL
                   (by his litigation friend, Giulia Gosi)

                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                          London Borough of Croydon
                                                                  Respondent


Heard at Field House, London, on 17 - 20 July 2017.

For the applicant: Mr J Dubin, instructed by  Scott-Moncrieff  &  Associates
Ltd, Solicitors

For the respondent:  Mr R Hadden, instructed by London Borough of Croydon

                       NOTICE OF DECISION AND REASONS


1. The applicant arrived in the UK on 6 July 2015 and  sought  asylum  on  8
   July 2015.  The UKBA disputed his stated age of around 14 years 8 months,
   and referred him to the respondent, ascribing a claimed birth date  of  1
   January 2000 in the meantime.  An ascribed date of 1  October  2000  also
   appears  on  some  documentation  (this  was  unexplained,  although  the
   suggestion by Mr Dubin of a transcribing error appears  likely).   On  21
   March 2016, the respondent completed its age assessment and  advised  the
   applicant in writing of the conclusion that he was over the  age  of  18.
   No date of birth was ascribed.

2. Following the grant of permission to apply for judicial  review,  the  UT
   by order dated 15 March 2017 set down the applicant's case  for  a  fact-
   finding hearing to determine whether he is, or when he first presented to
   the respondent as a putative child in need, was a child and  if  so,  his
   date of birth.


3. The factual determination of the applicant's age is determinative of  the
   case, save  for  one  subsidiary  issue:  whether  the  respondent's  age
   assessment is unlawful for saying only that at its date the applicant was
   over 18,  rather  than  ascribing  a  date  of  birth,  to  preclude  the
   possibility that he was entitled to services at the relevant  date.   The
   applicant founds upon R (F) v Lewisham  LBC  [2009]  EWHC  3542  (Admin).
   Apart from that, the parties are not at  issue  on  the  applicable  law,
   which is clearly set out in undisputed terms in the written  submissions,
   and need not be repeated here.

4. The applicant does not claim to know his date of birth.  He asks  for  it
   to be determined as 17 at the date of the hearing, and for a date  to  be
   assigned within the range of 12 March to 4 August 2000.

5. The respondent asks for a finding  that  the  applicant  was  already  an
   adult when he first sought the respondent's services, on 8 July 2015.

6. Counsel properly subjected the  evidence  to  detailed  cross-examination
   and to close analysis.  While that plays its part in the  outcome,  there
   is no need to review each aspect which might tend minutely one way or the
   other.  The precise reality is unknowable, and the assignation of a  date
   of birth, although the best the tribunal can do, is inevitably based on a
   rather broad assessment.

7. As to the credibility of the applicant, it was submitted  on  his  behalf
   that allowance should be made for his apparent  difficulty  at  times  in
   orientation and communication, and in answering questions directly, which
   was spoken to by others  (his  three  support  workers,  in  particular).
   Although no foundation was laid for any mental trouble, he may  be  given
   some benefit of the doubt.

8. Some of the discrepancies identified in  the  applicant's  evidence  were
   minor, or typical of multiple  direct  and  indirect  renderings  of  any
   account - for example, issues over dates and times of events (or  claimed
   events) in Afghanistan, arising mainly from statements  prepared  on  his
   behalf for his asylum case.  Others might arise simply from  being  asked
   to disclose more - for example, the applicant's knowledge of his age when
   he began attending madrassa, and his father talking to him about his  age
   on the way to obtain his taskera.

9. Taking account of the above,  and  having  heard  and  reflected  on  his
   evidence as a whole, the applicant has not persuaded  me  that  he  is  a
   reliable  witness  as  to  his  identity,  place  of   origin,   or   the
   circumstances which led him to travel to the UK.  Some of the features of
   the evidence which have led to this conclusion are these:

        i) While being cross-examined about how he  obtained  his  taskera,
           the applicant said, "When I left home and was in bad  health,  I
           tried to call my uncle to come home, and he told me I can't come
           home".   I was minded to follow this up, to find out whether the
           applicant meant his home and uncle in Afghanistan  or  with  his
           foster-carer in the UK, to whom he  had  referred  at  times  as
           "uncle".  I confirmed my note of the evidence with counsel,  not
           mentioning the reason.  The applicant then said that he had  not
           called anyone, and had not said  "uncle",  flatly  contradicting
           his evidence of moments before.  This I took as back-tracking to
           escape a point of difficulty, and an indication of unwillingness
           to give honest evidence.

       ii) When cross-examined about his home village, the applicant  would
           not be drawn about its size, "Not  that  big,  it's  small",  or
           population, "Several houses, a mountain, a desert, a river,  how
           would I know the number of houses?"   I asked if there were more
           than 10 houses, or fewer,  to  which  he  answered,  "I  haven't
           counted them".  Counsel  interjected  that  there  had  been  no
           evidence of  the  applicant's  ability  to  count,  but  it  was
           apparent from the rest of his evidence  that  he  can  count  in
           simple numbers, and he said later that  he  could  count  to  at
           least 100 in Pashtu.  Counsel  submitted  that  the  applicant's
           knowledge of his village had not been explored in any detail, so
           lack of knowledge should not go against him.  The witness  Fazal
           Orykhel said he is from the same village, and described it thus:
           it is in two parts,  upper  and  lower;  the  houses  are  quite
           scattered; population unknown, but about 100  houses,  inhabited
           by those with money; others live in tents.  He  volunteered  the
           information that although  it  is  his  ancestral  village,  his
           family left at the time of the Russian invasion, and he was born
           and brought up in Pakistan.  He has  visited  the  village  only
           once or twice, the last time when aged about 10.  Despite  that,
           his evidence about the village was much more  illuminating,  and
           belied the feeble description by the applicant, who  claimed  to
           have lived there from birth until he was forced to  flee.   From
           both  his  unwillingness  and  his  inability  to  describe  the
           village, I am not satisfied that he is a truthful witness  about
           his place of origin.


      iii) In the account of events leading to his flight  given  prior  to
           the hearing, the applicant said that his father and his  brother
           had been killed, and his mother had been shot in the foot or  in
           the leg.  The respondent sought to make something of the  latter
           discrepancy,  although  I  would  not   have   found   it   very
           significant.  Several times in his oral evidence  the  applicant
           referred to his mother and father both having been killed.  This
           was drawn to his attention in re-examination, when he  corrected
           himself to say that his father and brother were killed, and  his
           mother shot in the foot.  He appeared to find the matter  of  no
           moment.  I find that whether his mother was killed is  much  too
           important for self-contradiction in an honest account.

       iv) The applicants' foster-carers reported that  his  name  was  not
           Shakir Oryakhail but Shakir Khan.   He  said  that  his  foster-
           carers had simply adopted another  form  of  address.   That  is
           possible, but would not explain why it was  thought  to  be  his
           real name.  The package in which the taskera  was  received  was
           addressed to the applicant  as  Shakir  Oryakhail  Rohani.   The
           witness who assisted, Fazal Orykhel, suggested that R  was  part
           of the sender's name, but his  account  made  no  sense  of  why
           Rohani appeared as part of the applicant's name.   The  evidence
           for the respondent included a revealing account of the applicant
           being taken aback when  this  was  pointed  out.   Taking  these
           points along with other reasons to doubt his evidence, I am  not
           satisfied that Shakir Oryakhail is the applicant's true name.

        v) The applicant explained how he obtained his  taskera  indirectly
           from his family in Afghanistan, yet he had no apparent  interest
           in any other communication with his mother or anyone else  since
           he  left.   Against  the  claimed  background  and  the  natural
           strength of family ties, this is a strong indication that he  is
           not giving a reliable account of the circumstances which led him
           to leave or the state of communications since.

10. I bear in mind (a) that although not generally  credible  the  applicant
   may be reliable about his age and (b) that he may be underestimating  his
   age, yet still have been a minor when he entered the UK.

11. The applicant has repeated himself often about his age and the  ages  of
   his relatives, without varying those ages, even when clearly directed  to
   points of time years after he left Afghanistan.  He suggested  in  cross-
   examination, and it was submitted for him, that he was unable to tell the
   difference, in effect that he was unable to see that  the  passage  of  3
   years meant the addition of 3 years to his own age, and to the age of his
   "younger brother", or  of  anyone  else.   That  interpretation  did  not
   correspond with the rest of his evidence, in  which  he  understood  such
   simple matters as the passage of time, the sequence of  events,  and  the
   progression of his own age.  He appeared  sullen  and  recalcitrant  when
   pressed.  I conclude that he has been primed to  stick  to  the  prepared
   story that he was aged 14 years and 8 months when  he  left  Afghanistan.
   Hence,  this  is  the  one  feature  on  which  he  has  been  remarkably
   consistent, even when it draws him into giving  evidence  to  the  effect
   that his relatives' ages are fixed rather than changing  over  time,  and
   into resisting  the  charge  of  inconsistency  with  a  false  claim  of
   inability to perform very simple arithmetic.


12. My finding  of  lack  of  credibility  therefore  extends  to  what  the
   applicant says about his age.

13. The taskera is not a strong piece of evidence for  the  applicant,  even
   at face value.  It is at best the rudimentary  impression  of  an  Afghan
   official who saw the applicant once.

14. Even if it is a genuinely produced document, the terms  of  the  taskera
   are likely to have been influenced by information from the applicant  and
   his relatives, that is, by what they wished or expected the  document  to
   say.

15. The description on the taskera of the applicant as a labourer  does  not
   fit with his evidence or his claimed age.

16. The obtaining of the taskera was spoken to by a witness, Fazal  Orykhel,
   whose other evidence tended to undermine the applicant's case rather than
   to support it.  I am not satisfied that it was produced  or  come  by  as
   claimed.

17. The taskera does not significantly advance the applicant's case.

18. Susan Hume is a social worker, employed by  Croydon  as  an  Independent
   Reviewing Officer from November 2014 to July 2016.  Many of  the  reviews
   for which  she  was  responsible  concerned  young  unaccompanied  asylum
   seekers.  She has not conducted age assessments.  She met  the  applicant
   twice, and chaired the first review of his  case.   She  fairly  accepted
   some points put to her in cross-examination, principally these:  physical
   appearance can be misleading; the reported view of the applicant's age by
   a police officer who brought the applicant home late at night  was  based
   on one brief encounter; a 15 year old  might  be  equally  or  even  more
   rather than less likely than an 18 year old to "test the boundaries"; and
   the applicant's association in foster care with a  cannabis-smoking  "bad
   influence" was a matter which had not been brought to her attention,  but
   if that was the case, it ought to have been.  She maintained her view  of
   the applicant's age, which she said was  based  on  "a  constellation  of
   factors", not on one alone.

19. I find that the evidence of Susan Hume tends  significantly  to  support
   the respondent's position.

20. Giulia Gosi, the applicant's litigation friend, and  two  other  support
   workers gave evidence which may be treated together.  They all considered
   that  the  applicant  finds  orientation  and  communication   difficult,
   presents  as  a  vulnerable  person,  and  going  by  his  behaviour  and
   associates is a young person, no older  than  he  says.   They  all  have
   worthwhile experience in these matters but they do not  purport  to  have
   expertise in age assessment.  They fairly accepted that their role is  to
   help the applicant in achieving his goals.

21.  The  support  workers  all  saw  the  applicant  in  a  particular  and
   sympathetic context, designed for his assistance.  He behaved  with  them
   as might be expected under those circumstances.  The rest of the evidence
   went to showing the applicant in various other  circumstances.   Clearly,
   like most people, he presents in different ways in different situations.

22. The evidence of the support workers was straightforward and honest,  but
   it was also limited, and it leant distinctly in his favour.  It helps his
   case, but is readily outweighed by other evidence.

23. The thrust of the cross-examination of the respondent's  witnesses  Jeff
   Williams and Amaal Ally and of the submissions about their  evidence  was
   that they began with  the  view,  adopted  from  the  applicant's  foster
   carers, that he was at least 18; that everything  encountered  thereafter
   was interpreted to confirm that view;  and  that  although  the  "Merton"
   formalities were observed, there was nothing  the  applicant  could  have
   done to change it.  That was a legitimate line of argument,  and  it  did
   emerge that many behaviours  might  equally  be  analysed  as  disclosing
   either an older or a younger age group - in particular, that children and
   adults both make unwise decisions, and have associates of  various  ages.
   However, the witnesses were careful not to take  flimsy  matters  against
   the applicant - for example, hints, perhaps malicious, and known only  at
   second or third hand, that he has a daughter  in  Afghanistan;  and  they
   were willing to accept that some (minor) points ought not  to  have  been
   interpreted as they were - for example, on full reading of  the  evidence
   there was no reason to take it against the  applicant  that  he  had  not
   named the grandparent who is mentioned on the  taskera.   Both  witnesses
   said that although they accepted a few criticisms, they  stood  by  their
   assessment.  They impressed me as  conscientious  witnesses.   I  do  not
   accept that they proceeded by way of unshakable prejudgments.


24.  I find  the  respondent's  age  assessment  to  have  been  methodical,
   professional and reasoned.  It does not have scientific accuracy but  the
   evidence going the other way is only that  of  the  support  workers,  of
   comparatively little weight, and  the  taskera,  of  very  little  or  no
   weight.  The evidence of the applicant and of Fazal Orykhel goes  against
   rather than in favour of his  case.   The  age  assessment  is  the  best
   evidence by a distance.

25. The assignation of a date of birth remains a conundrum, but  making  the
   best I can of the evidence as a whole, I select 1  July  1997.   By  that
   token, his 18th birthday was shortly before he landed in the UK.

26. On that assessment, no other matters need to be resolved.

27. The judicial review application is dismissed.

28. The applicant has not sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
   Appeal, but I am bound to deal with the matter.  The case  involves  only
   an assessment of the facts.  It raises no issue which might  qualify  for
   the attention of the Court.  Permission is refused.

29. There is no further need to preserve anonymity, so the order  previously
   made is discharged, and this decision has not been anonymised.

30. The applicant is to pay the  respondent's  costs  of  this  application,
   subject  to  detailed  assessment  if  not   agreed,   and   subject   to
   determination of his ability to pay such costs pursuant to section 26  of
   the Legal Aid, Sentencing & Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.

31. I am obliged to both counsel for their assistance throughout  the  case,
   including the finalisation of this decision.


[pic]

UT Judge Macleman
16 August 2017




Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:







Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).
