
IAC-FH-CK-V2

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                               JR/10340/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                              6 October 2017


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF
                                   [C J L]
                                 Nicanor [B]
                                Periana [B])
                                                                  Applicants


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr P Turner, instructed by Law Lane Solicitors, appeared on behalf of the
Applicants.

Mr V Mandalia, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE ALLEN: The first applicant in this case is a child of  7  at  the
    date of application  and  the  second  and  third  applicants  are  her
    maternal grandparents, who applied for entry  clearance  to  visit  the
    sponsors, the first applicant's paternal grandparents,  in  the  United
    Kingdom and mentioned also as part of the reason for the visit was  the
    fact that the first applicant's parents are in the United  Kingdom.   I
    think on her application form they were described  as  being  temporary
    residents in the United Kingdom.  The challenge is to  decisions  dated
    respectively 22 July 2016 in respect of the first applicant and 23 July
    2016 in respect of the second and third applicants.

2.   The position has moved on somewhat in the sense that,  as  was  flagged
    up in the detailed  grounds  of  defence  in  March  of  this  year  at
    paragraph 13 it was said that the respondent had withdrawn the  earlier
    refusal decisions made in respect of the second and third applicants.

         "13. The Entry Clearance Officer  has  decided  to  reconsider  the
                applications made by the second and third  applicants.   The
                Entry Clearance Officer will make  fresh  decisions  in  due
                course."

    In the circumstances, it was said, this judicial review claim,  insofar
    it concerns them, is academic, and then, in more detail on that  in  Mr
    Mandalia's skeleton,  that  the  earlier  refusal  decisions  had  been
    withdrawn on 10 March 2017 following the review of the decision by  the
    Entry Clearance Manager and those decisions had  been  communicated  by
    email to the second and third applicants.

3.   I agree with the submissions in this regard  that,  as  a  consequence,
    the applications for judicial review of the second and third applicants
    are academic.  Of course that was not the case at the stage  where  the
    matter was considered by Judge Lindsley when she granted permission  on
    the basis as follows:

         "1.  It is arguable that the decision is unlawful as it is arguable
             that insufficient reasoning is contained in  the  decision  to
             mean that it was lawfully open to the respondent to refuse the
             visit applications of  the  second  and  third  applicants  on
             grounds of a false representation."

    That of course now, in that their claims are academic, goes out.

             "It is arguable that a right of appeal on human rights grounds
             is not an alternative remedy if the first applicant wishes  to
             vindicate her right to visit the UK  in  accordance  with  the
             Immigration Rules.  It is also arguable that the  decision  to
             refuse entry clearance to the applicants on the basis  of  the
             other aspects of the Immigration Rules  is  irrational  and/or
             insufficiently reasoned."

4.   She then went on to express some concerns about the lack of clarity  as
    to the history of the first applicant's parents' appeal.  We  now  have
    that and I am grateful for the documentation that  has  been  provided.
    We have the First-tier decision and we have the decision of  the  Upper
    Tribunal also and the position is that they had applied for  derivative
    residence  cards  in  respect  of  the   first   applicant's   paternal
    grandparents.

5.   Their appeal against the refusal decision was upheld in the  First-tier
    and was then overturned in the Upper Tribunal and there is due to be an
    oral permission hearing for appeal to the Court of Appeal  in  November
    this year.

6.   I will move on  to  the  refusal  decision  in  respect  of  the  first
    applicant and it is right of course, as Mr Turner says,  that  elements
    of this decision are no  longer  applicable  in  the  sense  that,  for
    example, where part of the refusal was  based  on  the  fact  that  her
    grandparents' entry clearance applications had been refused  must  fall
    away:

         "In light of the fact that the adults with whom you seek to  travel
         do not have permission to enter the UK  I  am  not  satisfied  that
         adequate arrangements have been made for your travel to the UK."

    Of course now they do have or are able to have permission.  Mr Mandalia
    was able to clarify the position on that, that they would still be able
    to go and get visas.

7.   The decision letter also  goes  on  to  refer  to  the  fact  that  the
    decision maker was satisfied that the overriding reason for  the  visit
    was actually to visit the parents and it is that  next  paragraph,  the
    first main paragraph on page 69 of the bundle, which seems to me to  be
    of particular relevance here:

         "You live with your grandparents (and guardians) in the Philippines
         where you attend school..."

    I should say in passing that I agree that it has not  been  shown  that
    any form of legal guardianship has been established in this case or  de
    facto parenthood.  They are guardians, it  seems  to  me  on  a  proper
    reading of this,  in  the  sense  that  they  look  after  her  in  the
    Philippines.  She has  lived  with  them  for  most  of  her  life  and
    therefore they are the people who are on  a  day-to-day  basis  looking
    after her.

         "However",

    the letter goes on to say,

         "both of your parents are  in  the  UK  and  attempting  to  remain
         permanently there, having made repeated attempts to do  so  over  a
         number of years.  In previous applications made  by  you  and  your
         grandparents your parents' presence in the  UK  was  not  declared.
         Given this information, I am not satisfied that you  are  genuinely
         seeking entry for a limited period as stated by you  and  that  you
         are likely to seek to remain with them for a longer period, if  not
         permanently.  This is particularly true given the previous  attempt
         to hide your parents' presence in  the  UK.   I  am  therefore  not
         satisfied that you will leave the UK at the end of  your  visit  as
         stated by you."

8.   The decision maker then went on, having refused the  application  under
    the Immigration Rules, to consider  whether  the  claim  could  succeed
    outside the Rules, hence the reference to exceptional circumstances and
    whether they existed and the consideration of her best interests  as  a
    child.

         "I note that your mother and  father  have  made  the  decision  to
         remain in the UK through choice,  albeit  without  obtaining  legal
         status, and leave  you  in  the  Philippines.   Whilst  I  consider
         Article 8 is engaged I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  nothing  to
         prevent them from returning to the Philippines if  they  wanted  to
         visit you or  establish  a  family  unit  and  that  refusing  your
         application is proportionate and  appropriate.   It  has  therefore
         been decided that there are no exceptional  circumstances  in  your
         case."

9.   As I say, I do not see any basis for arguing, or  arguing  successfully
    anyway, that any kind of  quasi-parenthood  has  been  established  and
    there is the point that Mr Mandalia identified that  the  parents  gave
    written permission for their child to travel with the  grandparents  to
    the United Kingdom.  She was going to be staying with her  parents  and
    the plan was that in the United Kingdom the second and third applicants
    would be staying in a hotel and it seems to me that there is  not  this
    "by your own choice" element as suggested by Mr Turner.

10.  I think it is an abuse of language, frankly, to suggest as  it  was  by
    Mr Turner that the implication of the original decision is that somehow
    the grandparents are trafficking a child into the United Kingdom.   The
    decision does not suggest or imply that that would be the case and  nor
    does the fact that it now  has been decided to grant them visas in  any
    sense indicate that, as a consequence, it must follow  that  the  first
    applicant's application has to succeed.  It is necessary of  course  to
    bear in mind the point  clearly  central  to  this  case  that  we  are
    concerned with a judicial review and not an appeal.

11.  As a consequence, what I have to decide is whether  the  decision  made
    by the Entry Clearance Officer is a rational one or that, given that it
    is for the applicant who is challenging the decision, it is for her  to
    show that it is an irrational decision and that relevant  factors  have
    not been considered or irrelevant factors have been taken into  account
    or on any other basis that it is not a decision to which  a  reasonable
    Entry Clearance Officer could come  to.   It  seems  to  me  be  wholly
    rational for the Entry Clearance Officer to  take  into  account,  even
    taking the grandparents' refusal out of the equation, that in light  of
    the situation of the applicant as a child  of  parents  in  the  United
    Kingdom who are seeking to remain in the  United  Kingdom,  bearing  in
    mind also the previous failure to  mention  the  parents  in  the  2015
    application, and to conclude that the decision maker was not  satisfied
    that she would leave the United Kingdom at the  end  of  the  visit  as
    stated by her.

12.  It seems to me also to be entirely rational thereafter to have gone  on
    to consider the situation outside the Rules and to conclude, bearing in
    mind the section 55 responsibilities of the decision maker, that  other
    choices existed and Mr Mandalia referred  to  the  possibility  of  one
    grandparent or the other or both indeed deciding after all to remain in
    the Philippines and look after the first applicant.  Alternatively,  as
    is mentioned in the decision, and it is the rationality  of  that  with
    which of course I am concerned, it is made clear that there is  nothing
    to  prevent  the  first  applicant's  parents  from  returning  to  the
    Philippines if they wanted to visit her or  establish  a  family  unit.
    Again, I see that as an entirely rational and proper response.

13.  There is a further issue which was touched on in the detailed  grounds,
    in the skeleton argument and in the submissions by  Mr  Mandalia  today
    and that is the fact that the first applicant has all along had a right
    of appeal against this decision  and  this  was  flagged  up  by  Judge
    Lindsley, suggesting that it was arguable that the opportunity to  make
    a human rights appeal against a decision was not the same as the  right
    to challenge the decision under the Immigration Rules. I remind  myself
    that it is clearly established that judicial  review  is  very  much  a
    remedy of last resort.

14.  The opportunity existed for the applicant to bring  an  appeal  against
    the decision and have the factual issues tested in an appeal and  after
    all the approach, as it has developed in hearing Article 8  appeals  in
    respect of cases where there has been a refusal under  the  Immigration
    Rules, is to  examine  whether  there  has  been  compliance  with  the
    Immigration Rules as part of  the  proportionality  evaluation  and  so
    there would in an  appeal  have  been  an  evaluation  of  the  factual
    situation on the basis of the kind of more detailed approach  which  is
    simply not appropriate in a judicial review.  As I say, all  I  can  be
    concerned with here is the rationality or  otherwise  of  the  decision
    that has been made.

15.  So it seems to me, bringing these matters together, that,  putting  the
    latter matter first, judicial review was not an appropriate  course  of
    action to follow in this case because the applicant had a  right  to  a
    statutory appeal which on her behalf it was chosen not to exercise  but
    that  in  any  event  I  see  no  irrationality  or  other  public  law
    unlawfulness in the decision of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  this
    case and so for all these reasons this application for judicial  review
    is refused.

Costs

16.  I have not had any submissions on costs or schedules or anything  so  I
    will say no more than that the applicants are to pay the  Secretary  of
    State's reasonable costs to be assessed if not agreed.

Application for Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

17.  I refuse the application. ~~~~0~~~~
