



                                                               JR/11300/2016


                         Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review
                               Decision Notice







                 The Queen on the application of FAISAL [C]
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered all the documents filed  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr P.  Richardson,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by
Nasim & Co. Solicitors, on behalf of the applicant and Mr D.  Sternberg,  of
Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department,  on  behalf  of  the
respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on 02 March 2017.

      Decision: the application for judicial review is granted

1.    The applicant sought to challenge the respondent's decision  dated  21
      July 2016 to refuse a protection and human rights claim and to certify
      the claim as 'clearly unfounded'. The effect  of  the  certificate  is
      that the applicant can only appeal the decision from outside  the  UK.
      In so far as this formed part of the  original  claim  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Pitt refused permission in an order sent on  30  November  2016.
      The applicant did not seek to renew that application orally.

2.    The second part of the challenge  was  to  the  respondent's  decision
      dated 30 August 2016 to refuse to treat further submissions made on  5
      August 2016 as a fresh claim.

3.    Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt refused permission in so far as the  further
      submissions might relate to a  claim  made  under  Article  3  of  the
      European Convention on Human Rights, but  granted  permission  in  the
      following terms:

           "It remains arguable that an Immigration Judge  might  view  the
           report differently notwithstanding the points made about  it  by
           the respondent. The letter of 30 August 2016 treats the  further
           submissions as being "non-protection  based"  and  so  fails  to
           address at all the submissions of 5 August 2016 that the  report
           supports the applicant's claim that his mental  health  affected
           his ability to give a clear account in his interviews  and  made
           the processing of his protection playing unreliable it  is  also
           arguable that if an Immigration Judge took  the  report  at  its
           highest it could be capable of making a material  difference  in
           an Article 8 claim in the context of the  applicant's  potential
           age when he came to the UK and his history here."

4.    The written grounds of challenge made general submissions relating  to
      substantive  aspects  of  the  human  rights   claim   but   did   not
      particularise any clear public law grounds  save  to  make  a  general
      assertion that the decision was 'irrational' without proper  reference
      to the legal framework relating to fresh claims. At [14]  the  grounds
      stated that the applicant did not  want  to  claim  asylum.  This  was
      stated at interview. The applicant relied on his private life  in  the
      UK. On the face of it  the  interview  record  appears  to  have  been
      amended to record that it was  a  "human  rights  interview"  [pg.  67
      applicant's bundle "AB"]. At the hearing, Mr Richardson confirmed that
      the applicant did not seek to pursue a protection  claim.  Insofar  as
      the respondent's decision in relation to a human  rights  claim  under
      Article 8 ECHR dated 30 August 2016 was being challenged the following
      points were made:

        i) The respondent failed to engage with  the  psychological  report
           sufficiently as part of an assessment of whether there were very
           significant  obstacles  to  integration  for  the   purpose   of
           paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the immigration rules. The fact  that
           the applicant arrived in the UK when he was 13  years  old,  the
           difficult circumstances from which he fled Pakistan, the lack of
           familial or other connections there, and the  evidence  relating
           to his mental health, combined to show  that  the  claim  has  a
           realistic prospect of success before an Immigration Judge.

       ii) In the alternative, the psychological report  raised  compelling
           circumstances that engaged Article  8  outside  the  immigration
           rules.

5.    The further submissions made on 05 August 2016  were  limited  to  the
      following representations:

           "We submit that we had earlier mentioned in  our  representation
           dated 10 June 2016 that our client was not mentally well and you
           were requested to conduct his mental  health  assessment  before
           conducting his interview, but our request was denied by you  for
           the reasons best known to you.


           However, on 3 August 2016 our client's mental  health  condition
           has been examined by a Psychiatrist who has confirmed  that  our
           client is suffering from mental  health  issues.  We  therefore,
           maintain that our client was in fact interviewed when he was not
           medically fit to attend  the  interview.  Please  refer  to  the
           attached medical report for confirmation of the same.


           We therefore, believe that our client's all previous  interviews
           including the decision dated 21 July 2016  are  voidable.  Given
           the situation, we ask that you kindly reassess our client's case
           in the light of submitted medical report and immediately  cancel
           removal  directions  in  relation  to  our  client  as  soon  as
           possible."

6.    The further submissions attached a  report  prepared  by  Dr  Muhammad
      Shafi who is a general psychiatrist. There is no  dispute  as  to  his
      qualification to comment on the applicant's mental  health.  Dr  Shafi
      outlined the instructions given by the applicant's solicitors.

           "1.   Is Mr Faisal [C] capable of understanding the  issues  and
                 circumstances around him.
           2.    Is Mr Faisal  [C]  capable  of  concentrating  for  longer
           period of time.
           3.     Is   his   current   mental   condition   affecting   his
                 concentration skills over a lengthy period of time so  that
                 he could follow process.
           4.    Is Mr Faisal [C] able to understand questions properly put
                 forward to him and is he able to respond them accordingly.
           5.    His future treatment plan, any medication, if required.
           6.    Is Mr  Faisal  [C]  suffering  from  mental  disorders  as
                 defined under the Mental Health Act 1983."

7.    Dr Shafi outlined the limited circumstances in which he  assessed  the
      applicant's mental health. He made clear that he was unable to  review
      the applicant's medical records. He outlined the brief  background  to
      the  applicant's   immigration   history   provided   by   his   legal
      representatives in their letter of instruction.

           "Mr Chaudhury came to the UK on a visit Visa on 19 December 2006
           when he was 13 years old. He overstayed in this country. He  was
           encountered on 10 November 2008 by the  immigration  enforcement
           team and was asked questions about his status. Home Office  case
           is that when the Subject was encountered in 2008,  he  mentioned
           that he was born in 1983 and claimed Asylum however the  Subject
           asserts that he could not understand questions  put  forward  to
           him at that time and he never mentioned  that  he  was  born  in
           1983. Nevertheless according  to  the  HO  the  Subject  claimed
           Asylum and never returned for reporting.


           The Subject was again apprehended and currently  in  immigration
           detention and accordingly to the HO he again claimed  Asylum  to
           which the Subject denies however interview was conducted by  the
           HO."


8.    Dr Shafi said that he  assessed  the  applicant  in  detention  on  03
      August 2016. The assessment lasted one hour and  thirty  minutes.  The
      doctor went on to outline the history provide  by  the  applicant.  He
      noted  the  difficulty  that  the  applicant  appeared  to   have   in
      remembering past events. He recorded that  the  applicant  claimed  to
      have self-harmed with blades. Dr Shafi  noted  one  old  scar  on  his
      forearm that the applicant alleged was due to self-harm. He also noted
      other old scars on his elbow area but was unable to  give  details  of
      the events which led to self-harm. The doctor noted that the applicant
      claimed to have an uncle in the UK although he was unable  to  provide
      any details, not even his name. Dr Shafi's observation  was  that  the
      applicant appeared anxious and distressed during  the  assessment  and
      struggled to understand his questions even when he was interviewed  in
      Urdu or Punjabi. He noted that the applicant reported  hearing  voices
      but denied any visual  hallucinations.  Dr  Shafi  observed  that  the
      applicant "was not orientated to time, place and person.  During  this
      interview, his attention and concentration  did  not  seem  good."  Dr
      Shafi concluded that there was evidence to suggest  "severe  cognitive
      impairment" because of the low score (5/30) in his Mini  Mental  State
      Examination (MMSE). Dr Shafi's summarised his opinion as follows:

           "i.   Mr Faisal [C] is a 23 years old male of Pakistani  origin;
                 he had a difficult childhood and his parents died  when  he
                 was 10 years of age. He had never been to either primary or
                 secondary school.  He  reports  difficulty  in  memory  and
                 concentration. He has a language barrier as he cannot speak
                 English and has no friends. He admits of  self-harming.  He
                 denied any issues with alcohol or illicit drugs.


           ii.   In my opinion Mr Faisal [C] suffers from a mental disorder
                 namely "Major depressive disorder, recurrent,  severe  with
                 psychotic  symptoms"   ICD10   code   F   33.3.   This   is
                 characterised  by  low  energy,   disturbed   sleep,   poor
                 concentration,  low  self-confidence,  low  mood,  loss  of
                 interests  or  pleasure,  suicidal   thoughts,   diminished
                 ability to think or concentrate, persecutory  and  auditory
                 hallucination.


           [iii.]      There  has  been  deterioration  in  Mr  Faisal  [C]
                 symptoms after detention and the  risk  to  self  has  been
                 increased. He denied any active plans but had  thoughts  to
                 end his life and is not guarded. He still feels low and has
                 the feeling of emptiness  however,  the  intensity  of  his
                 symptoms has increased and he appears  to  be  in  distress
                 while being detained.


           [iv.] Mr Faisal [C] had not had  any  medications  and  I  would
                 suggest antidepressant and antipsychotic  usage.  He  would
                 benefit also from engagement with  psychologist  and  doing
                 possibly art therapies which may help his confidence.  This
                 would be possible by an admission to hospital in a  general
                 adult psychiatric unit local to Ilford (North  East  London
                 Foundation Trust - Goodmayes hospital)."

9.     In  response  to  the  questions  put  forward  by  the   applicant's
      solicitors Dr Shafi concluded that (1) the applicant was  not  capable
      of understanding the issues and circumstances around him; (2) that  he
      was not capable of concentrating for long periods of time; (3) that he
      was being affected by his  current  mental  condition  and  that  this
      affected his concentration skills over a lengthy period of  time;  (4)
      that the applicant was not able to understand or respond to  questions
      properly; (5) that he would benefit from admission to hospital and  by
      engagement with local mental  health  services,  which  might  include
      treatment such as CBT (Cognitive Behavioural Therapy) and  medication;
      and  (6)  that  he  was  suffering  from  Major  Depressive  Disorder,
      recurrent, severe with psychotic symptoms.

10.   The respondent considered the further submissions and  evidence  in  a
      decision dated 30 August 2016.  In  considering  whether  the  further
      submissions amounted to a fresh claim the respondent stated:

           "Your legal representatives have raised concerns regarding  your
           mental health and in support  of  this  they  have  submitted  a
           Psychiatric Report written by Dr Shafi dated 5th August 2016.


           Dr Shafi in his report states you suffer from "Major  depressive
           disorder, recurrent, severe with  psychotic  symptoms".  At  the
           request  of  your  legal  representatives  Dr  Shafi  has   more
           specifically made an assessment on your ability  to  concentrate
           for lengthy  periods  of  time,  comprehend  and  questions  and
           formulate coherent responses. It  is  noted  that  there  is  no
           indication contained in the medical report that  the  doctor  or
           psychiatrist has taken into account the evidence and  statements
           you have presented to the Home Office. As noted, the caselaw  of
           BN (psychiatric evidence - discrepancies)  Albania  [2010]  UKUT
           279 (IAC) states:


                 "Yet the psychiatrists had either not  read  the  interview
                 records, statement and letters or had not evaluated them in
                 reaching their  conclusions.  This  obviously  means  their
                 views are not informed by crucial information available  to
                 the Immigration Judge and to this Tribunal" (para 53)


           In light of the above it is considered Dr Shafi's assessment  of
           your mental health was based on your mental health  of  the  day
           you were assessed. Without Dr Shafi having access to your asylum
           interview and previous representations it  is  not  possible  to
           conclude on this report alone  that  you  suffered  from  mental
           health  issues  affecting  your  concentration  and  ability  to
           understand prior to this assessment. This is supported  by  your
           ability to provide answers to questions  asked  in  your  asylum
           interview and your failure to inform  the  interviewing  officer
           during the asylum interview that you were unable  to  understand
           the questions or the interpreter.


           In addition to the above it is important to note  that  you  and
           your legal representatives were given 5 working days after  your
           asylum interview to submit any  comments  regarding  the  asylum
           interview record and your asylum claim. However despite this  no
           requests were made  to  delay  your  asylum  decision  whilst  a
           medical assessment was being carried out.


           Therefore, it is concluded that your further submissions have no
           realistic prospect of success because there is no evidence  when
           you began suffering from such conditions. Furthermore you failed
           to raise such concerns during your asylum interview."

11.     Under   a   heading   entitled   "Consideration   of   compassionate
      circumstances" the respondent went on to state:

           "In deciding whether there are exceptional  circumstances  which
           mean  that  removal  from  the  United  Kingdom  is  no   longer
           appropriate, I have taken into account the requirements set  out
           in paragraph 353B of the Immigration Rules. It is noted that you
           claimed asylum when you were encountered 10/11/2008 however  you
           failed to  attend  your  interview  and  failed  to  attend  for
           reporting. You have prolonged your stay in the UK by absconding.
           Sine the refusal of your asylum claim you have remained  UK  due
           to you submitting a Judicial review.  I  am  content  that  your
           removal from the United  Kingdom  remains  appropriate  for  the
           reasons mentioned above.


           In accordance with  the  published  Home  Office  Asylum  Policy
           Instruction on Further Submissions, your asylum and human rights
           claim has  been  carefully  reconsidered  on  all  the  evidence
           available  including  the  new  further  submissions   and   the
           previously considered material. I have also taken  into  account
           any more recent relevant case law and  any  country  information
           that may apply to your current situation.


           I  have  concluded  that  your  submissions  do  not  meet   the
           requirements of paragraph 353 of the Immigration  Rules  and  do
           not amount to a fresh claim. The new submissions taken  together
           with  the  previously  considered  material  do  not  create   a
           realistic prospect  of  success.  This  means  that  it  is  not
           accepted  that  should  this  material  be  considered   by   an
           Immigration Judge, that this could result in a decision to grant
           you asylum, Humanitarian Protection, limited leave to  enter  on
           the basis of your family and/or private  life  or  Discretionary
           Leave for the reasons set out above."

12.   There is a  factual  dispute  as  to  the  applicant's  age.  Although
      various documents and arguments have been put forward in  this  claim,
      both parties accepted that the Tribunal was not required to  determine
      this factual issue. It is only said to be relevant in  so  far  as  it
      might impact on the assessment of paragraph 276ADE of the  immigration
      rules i.e. whether there might be very significant  obstacles  to  the
      applicant's  integration  in  Pakistan  in  circumstances  where,   if
      believed,  he  might  not  have  had  previous  experience  of  living
      independently as an adult.

Decision and reasons

13.   The further submissions made on 5 August 2016 were vague  and  limited
      in nature. They failed to particularise the applicant's  case  in  any
      detail. They made general assertions about whether the  appellant  was
      fit for interview, but failed  to  say  how  or  why  the  psychiatric
      evidence might impact on the substance of his human rights claim.

14.   Dr Shafi outlined the limitations of the instructions  he  was  given.
      He was only asked to answer general questions  about  the  applicant's
      ability to understand the issues and his ability  to  concentrate  for
      long periods of time. The report does not give a specific  opinion  on
      the applicant's fitness for interview or his fitness for  removal.  Dr
      Shafi was not asked to  comment  on  the  impact  of  removal  on  the
      applicant's mental health. The report does not give an opinion  as  to
      whether the applicant is so unwell that  he  is  unable  to  care  for
      himself. Regardless of the age dispute he is now an adult who, despite
      his vulnerabilities, has been able to live and support himself in  the
      UK for a number of years.

15.   At the date when Dr Shafi  assessed  the  applicant  he  was  detained
      pending removal. In the circumstances, it is  understandable  that  he
      was distressed by his situation. The further submissions were of  poor
      quality and failed to set out how or why the  further  evidence  might
      impact on his claim. However, at minimum, they did at  least  ask  the
      respondent to "reassess our client's case in the  light  of  submitted
      medical report".

16.   In view of the poor quality  of  the  representations  it  is  perhaps
      understandable that the respondent focused  on  whether  the  evidence
      showed that the applicant was fit for interview. I find  that  it  was
      within a range  of  reasonable  responses  to  the  evidence  for  the
      respondent to conclude that the psychiatric  report  was  insufficient
      evidence to show that the applicant was too unwell to be  interviewed.
      Although Dr Shafi commented on his mental state at the  date  when  he
      assessed him on 03 August 2016, he was not asked for his opinion as to
      whether the applicant's condition was likely to have been sufficiently
      long standing that he may not have been fit for  interview  two  weeks
      previously.

17.   However, the respondent has  duties  under  section  6  of  the  Human
      Rights Act 1998. She was asked to re-assess the case in light  of  the
      psychiatric evidence, which required  an  assessment  of  whether  the
      evidence might have been relevant to other aspects of the  applicant's
      claim. Although the instructions given to Dr Shafi  were  limited,  at
      the very least, the report indicated that the applicant was likely  to
      be suffering from severe cognitive  impairment  as  well  as  a  major
      depressive disorder with psychotic symptoms. Although Dr Shafi was not
      asked to comment on all the elements that  might  be  relevant  to  an
      assessment of suicide risk, the report did give rise to concerns about
      the possibility of an increased risk of self-harm  and  outlined  that
      the applicant had thoughts about ending his life.

18.   While the respondent is not obliged to search  out  finer  aspects  of
      the claim that were not put forward  in  further  submissions,  it  is
      incumbent on the respondent to consider any issues that might properly
      arise from the face of the evidence. In this case I conclude  that  it
      was insufficient for the respondent to reject the further  submissions
      as a fresh claim on the ground that there was no evidence to show when
      the applicant began suffering from  the  conditions  outlined  in  the
      report. The evidence before the respondent showed that this was likely
      to have been the applicant's mental state at the date of decision  and
      it  should  have  been  considered  accordingly.  When  it   came   to
      considering whether there were any  compassionate  circumstances  that
      might justify a grant of leave to remain no consideration was given to
      the substance of Dr Shafi's report, which gave rise to concerns  about
      the applicant's  mental  health,  and  on  the  face  of  it,  engaged
      potential human rights issues that previously had not been considered.



19.   I find that the age dispute is simply not relevant to the issues  that
      need to be determined in this judicial review claim. Although it seems
      clear from the evidence produced by both parties that it has  been  an
      issue in the past it did not form any part of the further  submissions
      or evidence  put  forward  by  the  applicant's  representatives.  The
      respondent could not be criticised for failing to consider  the  issue
      in such circumstances.

20.   However, I conclude that, despite the  vague  nature  of  the  further
      submissions, the respondent's failure to consider how the substance of
      Dr Shafi's report might impact on the human rights issues in this case
      does give rise to  a  public  law  error.  The  respondent  failed  to
      consider  relevant  matters  before  deciding  whether   the   further
      evidence, taken with previously considered  material,  was  likely  to
      give rise to a realistic prospect of  success  before  an  immigration
      judge.

21.   The decision to refuse to treat further submissions as a  fresh  claim
      dated 30 August 2016 is quashed.

22.   The effect of this order is that the respondent will need  to  make  a
      fresh  decision.   If   the   applicant   wishes   to   make   further
      representations  they  should  contain  sufficient  detail   for   the
      respondent to understand all the arguments that  are  relied  upon  to
      support his claim.

                    [pic]
      Signed:
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


      Dated:          11 May 2017













                                                               JR/11300/2016


                         Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review
                               Decision Notice







                 The Queen on the application of FAISAL [C]
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered all the documents filed  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr P.  Richardson,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by
Nasim & Co. Solicitors, on behalf of the applicant and Mr D.  Sternberg,  of
Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department,  on  behalf  of  the
respondent, at a hearing at Field House, London on 02 March 2017.

      Decision: the application for judicial review is granted

1.    For the reasons given in the written judgment (attached).

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

2.    I refuse permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal  because  the
      decision does not disclose any arguable errors of law.

 Costs

3.    The respondent shall  pay  the  applicant's  reasonable  costs,  which
      shall be subject to detailed assessment if not agreed.

                    [pic]
      Signed:
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


      Dated:          11 May 2017




Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:12/05/2017
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).




