



                                                               JR/11283/2014


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice



                    The Queen on the application of H S F
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision




Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
the Applicant is granted anonymity throughout these proceedings.  No  report
of these  proceedings  (in  whatever  form)  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify the Applicant. Failure to comply with this order could  lead  to  a
contempt of court".

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr Symes,  of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Wilsons
Solicitors, on  behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Mr  Anderson,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on 7 October 2019.



Decision: the application for judicial review is granted



The adjournment request:

    1. There has  been  a  long  procedural  history  with  regard  to  this
       application that need not be set out at this stage. There have been a
       number of late developments resulting in leave being granted  to  the
       Applicant to amend the grounds of claim and, on 1  October  2019,  an
       order  granting  the  Applicant  leave  to  admit  a  second  witness
       statement dated 9 August 2019.

    2. On 4  October  2019  the  Respondent  made  an  application  for  the
       substantive hearing on 7 October  2019  to  be  adjourned  which  was
       refused by another judge of the Upper Tribunal who was not  persuaded
       there was any merit in the Respondent's submission she had  not  been
       afforded adequate time in which  to  consider  the  applicant's  'new
       claim' nor that it was in the interests of  justice  to  adjourn  the
       matter at that late stage.

    3. Mr Anderson was instructed to renew the application on behalf of  the
       Secretary of State. At [3 - 4] of the  Detailed  Grounds  of  Defence
       dated 3 October 2019 it is written:

           "3.   It is respectfully submitted that the Respondent  has  not
                been afforded adequate time in which to fully  consider  and
                respond to what is effectively a new claim, which  has  been
                accompanied by new evidence in the form of a further witness
                statement from the Applicant. The Applicant has provided  no
                explanation whatsoever as to why his  application  to  amend
                his grounds was not made  until  some  14  months  after  he
                received  the  Respondent's  supplementary   decision.   The
                Applicant has not previously argued that this was  a  matter
                which should be dealt with by  way  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
                making findings of fact. While the Respondent  submits  that
                the Applicant is wrong so to argue, the Respondent  has  not
                had a proper opportunity to consider  his  further  evidence
                and the claim that the  Upper  Tribunal  should  treat  this
                application as involving  issues  of  precedent  fact  is  a
                fundamentally new claim, of potentially  wider  significance
                than the instant case.

           4.    In the circumstances, the Respondent respectfully  applies
                for an adjournment of the hearing listed for 7 October  2019
                and for directions to be made in order to ensure the orderly
                progress of this matter to a conclusion."

    4. Mr Anderson  was  asked  what  the  Secretary  of  State  needed  the
       additional time for in light of the fact the  witness  statement  and
       Applicant's skeleton argument in which the alleged  'new  issue'  had
       been raised had been in the Respondent's  representatives  possession
       for some time. Other than indicating  that  it  would  give  time  to
       consider the content of the documents  there  was  no  indication  of
       anything that will be done that had not already  been  done  or  that
       required further time to do, such as to  warrant  the  hearing  being
       adjourned this late in the day.

    5. It is also of note that at [70] of Mr Anderson's skeleton argument it
       is written "the Respondent of course  reserves  the  right  to  cross
       examine the Applicant if the Upper Tribunal considers it  appropriate
       to proceed, but does so without prejudice to the contention that  the
       Respondent is prejudiced in being able to prepare to do so".

    6. The key question when considering whether to adjourn the  hearing  or
       not is that of fairness. Whilst it is accepted that many things  have
       occurred late in the day  it  is  not  considered  the  principle  of
       fairness, or the overriding objectives, require the proceedings to be
       adjourned to a later date. In any event Mr Anderson was clearly  able
       to represent the interests of the Secretary of State in  relation  to
       this matter  and  no  prejudice  to  either  party  in  refusing  the
       adjournment request was made out.

The correct approach

    7. The above question arises as  a  result  of  a  dispute  between  the
       parties concerning the approach to be taken  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
       when considering the issues at large in this appeal.

    8. The Respondent relies upon the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       O'Connor, in R (on the application of RM) v Secretary  of  State  for
       the Home Department (Dublin; Article 27 (1); procedure)  [2017]  UKUT
       00260 (IAC) the head note of which reads:

            "(1) the scope of a challenge to a transfer  decision  brought,
           pursuant to art.27 of Regulation 604/13  (Dublin  III),  on  the
           basis that the decision infringes the second paragraph  of  art.
           19(2) of Dublin III  is  limited  to  'traditional'  public  law
           grounds.

           (2)   Section 15 (5A) of the Tribunal's, Courts and  Enforcement
           Act 2007 applies to applications for judicial review,  in  which
           the application for permission to  bring  such  proceedings  was
           received by the Upper Tribunal on, or after, 8 August 2016."

    9. The Applicant relies upon a later decision of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Grubb and Upper Tribunal Judge Blum, of R (on the application of  MS)
       (a child by his litigation friend MAS) v Secretary of  State  of  the
       Home Department (Dublin III: duty to investigate) [2019] UKUT 9 (IAC)
       the head note of which reads:

           "(1)        A Member State  considering  a  Take  Charge Request
                ("TCR") made by another Member State under  the  Dublin  III
                Regulation has a duty to investigate the  basis  upon  which
                that TCR request is made and whether the requirements of the
                Dublin III Regulation are met.   ( R (on the application  of
                MK, IK (a child by his litigation friend MK) and HK (a child
                by her litigation friend MK) v Secretary of  State  for  the
                Home   Department   (Calais;   Dublin   III   Regulation   -
                investigative duty) IJR [2016] UKUT 00231 (IAC) followed).

           (2)         The Member State's duty is to  "act  reasonably" and
                take "reasonable steps" in carrying  out  the  investigative
                duty, including determining (where appropriate) the  options
                of DNA testing in the requesting State and, if not,  in  the
                UK ( MK, IK explained).

           (3)         The duty of investigation is  not  a  'rolling one'.
                The duty does not  continue  beyond  the  second  rejection,
                subject to  the  requirements  of  fairness  (  MK,  IK  not
                followed).

           (4)         Fairness requires that the applicant,  even  after a
                second rejection, must know the 'gist' of what is being said
                against him in respect of the application  of  the  criteria
                relevant to the TCR and must have  an  opportunity  to  make
                representations on the issues and material being  relied  on
                if  that  has  not  previously  been  the  case.  In   those
                circumstances,  fairness  requires   that   the   respondent
                consider any representations and  material  raised  (perhaps
                for the first time) to deal  with  a  matter  of  which  the
                individual was 'taken by surprise' in the  second  rejection
                decision. To that extent only, the duty  continues  and  may
                require the requested State to reconsider the  rejection  of
                the TCR.

           (5)         In judicial review proceedings challenging  a Member
                State's refusal to accept a TCR, it  is  for  the  court  or
                tribunal to decide  for  itself  whether  the  criteria  for
                determining responsibility under the Dublin  III  Regulation
                have been correctly applied.  This may require the court  or
                tribunal to reach factual findings on the evidence and it is
                not restricted to public law principles of challenge.

           (6)         The tribunal or court's role should not be  taken as
                an open invitation to parties to urge the court or  tribunal
                to review and determine the facts in a Dublin case and, as a
                concomitant,  to  admit  oral  evidence  subject  to  cross-
                examination. Often there will be  no  factual  dispute:  the
                issue will be a legal one on the proper application  of  the
                Dublin III Regulation.  Even if there is  a  factual  issue,
                the need to assess the evidence may  not  always  mean  also
                admitting "oral" evidence subject to cross-examination.   It
                will only be so if it is "necessary in order to resolve  the
                matter fairly and accurately"."

   10. It is not disputed the Applicant is entitled to an effective  remedy,
       Article  27(1)  the  Dublin  III  Regulations  (Regulation  (EU)   No
       604/2013) provides:

           '1. The applicant or another person is referred  to  in  Article
           18(1)(c) or (d) shall have the right to an effective remedy,  in
           the form of an appeal or a review, in fact and in law, against a
           transfer decision, before a court or tribunal.'

   11. The case of RM concerned the scope  of  a  challenge  to  a  transfer
       decision brought pursuant to Article 27 of Dublin III  on  the  basis
       the decision in that case infringed the second paragraph  of  Article
       19(2).  The  Upper  Tribunal  found  any  challenge  was  limited  to
       traditional public law grounds following an examination of  case  law
       then available to the Tribunal. At [52 - 53] the Tribunal wrote:

           "52.  For the reasons given above, and having considered Article
                27(1) of Dublin III in the context of  the  wording  of  the
                Regulation as a whole, its general  scheme,  its  objectives
                and its context, I conclude, as Advocate  General  Sharpston
                did in Karim (at [AG44]) that the, 'intensity of any  appeal
                or review process is not  laid  down  in  the  [Dublin  III]
                regulation and must  therefore  be  a  matter  for  national
                procedural rules...".

           53.    I  am  satisfied  that  adherence  of  the  Tribunal   to
                traditional principles of judicial review does  not,  either
                in this case or more  generally  in  challenges  brought  to
                decisions made in relation to  the  second  subparagraph  of
                Article 19(2), result in a breach of either  Article  27  of
                Dublin III or Article 47 of the Charter."

   12. The question of a  precedent  fact  is  not  unheard  of  within  the
       judicial review jurisdiction albeit that it  is  not  an  issue  that
       frequently  arises.  Mr  Symes  referred  to  it  as  "unconventional
       judicial review".

   13. The Tribunal in RM when examining  the  structure  of  a  Dublin  III
       decision found as follows:

           "58.  More significantly, however, is my  view  that  Mr  Toal's
                submission does not align  itself  with  the  structure  and
                application of Dublin III. There are  three  stages  to  the
                process leading to a transfer decision, to be undertaken  by
                a member state in which an asylum applicant is present (i.e.
                the United Kingdom in the instant case).

           59.   First, it is for that member state to determine for itself
                which member State is responsible for considering the asylum
                applicant's claim. This assessment is to be undertaken based
                on the criteria in Chapter III of Dublin  III.  The  "second
                subparagraph of [Article] 19(2) of Dublin  III]  establishes
                the framework within which [the]  process  [of  establishing
                the member state responsible] must be conducted"  (Karim  at
                [23]).

           60.   Second, if it is concluded that another  member  state  is
                responsible, the member state in which the asylum  applicant
                is present may make a takeback or  take  charge  request  to
                this second member state  (in  the  instant  case,  France).
                After making the necessary checks this second  member  state
                (France) must  decide  either  to  accept,  or  reject,  the
                request made of it. A failure  to  decide  within  the  time
                limit specified  within  Dublin  III  is  treated  as  being
                "tantamount to  accepting  the  request".  In  the  case  of
                dispute between the two member  states  the  matter  may  be
                referred to a 'conciliation committee', which will impose  a
                final and irrevocable solution in relation to  the  disputed
                issue.

           61.   A transfer decision (the third stage) can only be made  by
                the member state in which the asylum  applicant  is  present
                (the  UK)  where  there  has  been  an  actual,  or  deemed,
                acceptance  by  another  member  state   (France)   to   the
                takeback/take charge request,  or  such  solution  has  been
                imposed by a conciliation committee."

   14. The  Tribunal  in  RM  did  not  accept  this  is  a  precedent  fact
       jurisdiction on the basis that acceptance of the takeback request was
       sufficient. At [62] it stated:

           "62.  On this analysis, it  is  plain  that  the  structure  and
                application of Dublin III does not  support  the  contention
                that the power of a member state to make a transfer decision
                is dependent on  the  prior  establishment  of  the  matters
                identified in Article 19(2); rather, the  power  to  make  a
                transfer decision in relation to an asylum applicant present
                on the territory of a  member  state  is  dependent  on  the
                actual or deemed acceptance by another  member  state  of  a
                takeback/take  charge  request  made  in  relation  to  that
                application, or such  a  solution  has  been  imposed  by  a
                conciliation committee."

   15. The Respondent's position in  the  current  case  is  that  following
       Bulgaria being deemed to have accepted responsibility  for  assessing
       the claim no further enquiry into the merits of the transfer decision
       is permitted. This is challenged by the  Applicant  who  submits  the
       positive duty to effectively  review  issues  of  fact  and  law  may
       require post-decision matters to be assessed. Mr Symes in support  of
       this contention refers to the  decision  in  Hasan  [2018]  EUECJ  C-
       360/16, a decision which postdates RM and the finding  in  that  case
       that post transfer decision evidence was not admissible  in  judicial
       review proceedings examining Article 19(2) cases, where at [31] it is
       written:

            ".... an applicant must have  an  effective  and  rapid  remedy
           available to him which enables  him  to  rely  on  circumstances
           subsequent to the adoption of the decision to transfer him, when
           the correct application of the Dublin  III  Regulations  depends
           upon those circumstances being taken into account."

   16. Reliance is also placed by Mr Symes upon the decision  in  Ghezelbash
       [2016] EUECJ C-63/15, a case predicated on evidence that post-dated a
       transfer decision.

   17. The Upper Tribunal in MS,  whilst  considering  a  different  factual
       matrix, examined in considerable detail the question of  whether  the
       Tribunal  should  for  itself  consider  whether  the  criteria   for
       determining responsibility under Dublin III Regulations  are  met  on
       the facts. The Tribunal examined in some detail the decision  of  the
       Grand Chamber in Ghezelbash in relation to which the Tribunal  in  MS
       wrote:

           "175. We begin with the Grand Chamber decision in Ghezelbash. In
                that case, the CJEU was concerned  with  a  challenge  to  a
                decision to transfer the applicant from the  Netherlands  to
                France on the basis that under the 'criteria 'in article  12
                of the Dublin III Regulation,  France  was  responsible  for
                examining his asylum application as he had  been  granted  a
                visa residence document in France. Having been requested  by
                the Dutch authorities to "take charge"  of  the  applicant's
                asylum claim, the French authorities accepted responsibility
                under the Dublin III Regulation.  The Grand Chamber accepted
                that article 27, read in  the  context  of  the  Dublin  III
                Regulation as a whole, meant that the applicant was entitled
                to challenge the application on the  'criteria'  upon  which
                the transfer decision  was  based.  The  applicant  was  not
                restricted, as had been the  case  under  Dublin  II,  to  a
                challenge to the conditions he would face in the EU  country
                to which he would be returned relying upon article 3 of  the
                ECHR. The Grand Chamber recognised that such a challenge  is
                not inconsistent with  the  overall  scheme,  including  the
                timescales for reaching decisions  on  responsibility  under
                the Dublin II Regulations. The Grand  Chamber  drew  support
                for a more extensive right of challenge  which  extended  to
                cover both "fact and law" from Recital (19) which is in  the
                following terms:

                     "In order to  guarantee  effective  protection  of  the
                    rights of the persons concerned,  legal  safeguards  and
                    the right to an effective remedy in respect of decisions
                    regarding transfers  to  the  Member  State  responsible
                    should be established,  in  accordance,  in  particular,
                    with Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights  of
                    the  European   Union.   In   order   to   ensure   that
                    international law  is  respected,  an  effective  remedy
                    against such decisions should cover both the examination
                    of the application of this Regulation and of  the  legal
                    and factual situation in the Member State to  which  the
                    applicant is transferred.""

   18. That judgment was examined by the Tribunal in MS  in  further  detail
       leading to the finding at [179]:

           "179. It is readily  apparent  to  us  that  the  Grand  Chamber
                accepted that a 'transfer decision' could be  challenged  by
                an individual on the basis that the  'criteria'  determining
                responsibility for examining an asylum application had  been
                wrongly or incorrectly applied. The challenge is not limited
                to the legality of such a decision. Further, it is clear  to
                us that the Grand  Chamber  envisage  such  a  challenge  to
                "cover questions of both fact and law" (at [36])."

   19. The Tribunal in MS also examined the decision in Mengesteab (Case  C-
       670/16) in which the Grand Chamber applied the decision in Ghezelbash
       and accepted that the remedy envisaged by article 27 applied to allow
       for a challenge to a 'transfer decision'  even  where  the  requested
       Member State is willing to take charge even after the time for making
       a TCR under Article 21 of Dublin III Regulation has expired  and  the
       subsequent state is deemed to have taken responsibility.

   20. In relation to any conflict between the above  Tribunal  decisions  I
       find the correct guidance on the appropriate approach is that set out
       at [190] of MS in the following terms:

           "190.  What,  then,  is  the  role  of  the  Tribunal  in  these
                proceedings? In Ghezelbash, the Grand Chamber affirmed  that
                the effective remedy "cover[s] questions of  both  fact  and
                law" (at [36]).  There is no suggestion that  the  court  or
                tribunal in determining whether the criteria in  the  Dublin
                III Regulation have been "correctly" applied is  limited  to
                determining the legality of the decision based  upon  public
                law principles. We were not referred by either party to  any
                passages  in  the  relevant  CJEU   decisions   to   suggest
                otherwise."

   21. The Tribunal  in  MS  considered  the  opinion  of  Advocate  General
       Sharpston in Ghezelbash in which this issue  was  considered  and  in
       which it is noted that  the  Advocate  General  did  not  state  that
       Article 27 requires a full enquiry into the facts in relation to  the
       application  of  the  Dublin  III  Regulation  criteria  but   rather
       recognised that it involved the assessment of the lawfulness  of  the
       decision and whether it was taken on  a  sufficiently  solid  factual
       basis. The Tribunal in  MS  also  state  the  Advocate  General  (AG)
       recognises the scope of the review was  a  matter  for  the  domestic
       courts subject to their procedures but that the review  process  must
       have the appropriate intensity given the principle  of  effectiveness
       and specifically contemplated that it was for the domestic courts  to
       determine whether a successful challenge would result in the decision-
       maker having to reconsider the decision or whether  the  court  could
       take the decision for itself.

   22. The Tribunal sets out its conclusions in relation to the AG's opinion
       at [193] in the following terms:

           "193.       The  Advocate  General's  opinion  is  far  from  an
                unambiguous statement of the approach that Ms Kilroy invites
                us to take.  It does, however, provide some support for  the
                view that the challenge is not restricted to legality  alone
                in the requirement for any decision to have a  "sufficiently
                solid factual basis".  It is, perhaps, illuminating that the
                CJEU  made  no  comment  on  this  aspect  of  the  Advocate
                General's opinion, confining itself to stating, as  we  have
                pointed out, that the review covers "questions of  fact  and
                law".  That  may,  in  its  simplicity  be,  in  effect,  an
                unambiguous acknowledgment that the individual must have the
                ability to challenge the application  of  the  criteria  not
                only as legally wrong, but also as factually wrong.  We have
                concluded that it is."

   23. The Tribunal find there is no insurmountable procedural obstacle to a
       factual enquiry  being  undertaken  in  judicial  review  proceedings
       referring at [195] to a  passage  in  Auburn,  Moffet  and  Sharland,
       Judicial Review: Principles and  Procedure  (2013)  (at  para  20.23)
       where it is stated:

           'Parliament has provided that a public body's power or  duty  to
           act in  a  particular  way  depends  upon  the  existence  of  a
           particular factual situation and the public body's assessment of
           that factual situation is challenged, in certain cases the court
           will determine whether the relevant factual  situation  actually
           exists. In such cases, the court will not permit the public body
           to confirm itself power to act (or to deny itself power to  act)
           by an erroneous conclusion as to the relevant fact.'

   24. The above is not an invitation for a court or tribunal to admit  oral
       evidence subject to cross-examination in all cases. The  majority  of
       judicial review claims contain  no  factual  dispute  in  Dublin  III
       cases; the issue ordinarily being whether there  has  been  a  proper
       lawful application of the Regulations. It is also the case that  even
       if there is a factual dispute it may not be necessary  to  call  oral
       evidence for a court or tribunal to determine the same. It is settled
       law that it will only be if it is necessary in  order  to  resolve  a
       matter fairly and accurately that  oral  evidence  is  likely  to  be
       permitted.

   25. Mr Anderson on behalf of the Secretary of State places reliance  upon
       the earlier decision of RM arguing that  this  tribunal  must  follow
       that decision unless there are compelling reasons arise not to do so.
       Mr Anderson repeats the conclusion of RM that in a question  of  this
       nature a deciding body is restricted to assessing the merits  of  any
       challenge on traditional public law grounds. Mr  Anderson  relies  in
       particular upon Article 18 Dublin III which sets out the  obligations
       on a member state responsible in Article 19 relating to the cessation
       of responsibilities. Mr Anderson specifically refers to Article 19(2)
       which provides:

           'The obligations specified in Article 18(1)  shall  cease  where
           the Member State responsible can establish,  when  requested  to
           take charge or take back  an  applicant  or  another  person  is
           referred  to  in  Article  18(1)(c)  or  (d),  that  the  person
           concerned has left the territory of  the  Member  State  for  at
           least three months unless the person concerned is in  possession
           of a  valid  residence  document  issued  by  the  Member  State
           responsible.'

   26. The Respondents case is that this  condition  of  residence  for  the
       required period had not been made out  on  the  evidence  before  the
       decision maker.

   27. This provision is pertinent to the Applicant's claim  as  he  asserts
       that he left Hungary and returned to Turkey, where  he  remained  for
       approximately six months, and was therefore out of the  territory  of
       European Union for more than the requisite three  month  period  such
       that the responsibility for determining his  claim  should  therefore
       now rest with the United Kingdom.

   28. Article 22 of Dublin III states a Member State shall  make  necessary
       checks and give a decision on  the  request  to  take  charge  of  an
       applicant within two months of receipt of the request and, at Article
       22(7), that failure to act within the two month period  mentioned  in
       paragraph 1 and one month period mentioned in paragraph  6  shall  be
       tantamount to accepting the request, and  entail  the  obligation  to
       take charge of the person, including the obligation  to  provide  for
       proper arrangements for arrival.

   29. These provisions are not disputed  in  this  case,  the  issue  being
       whether the  criteria  have  been  satisfied  permitting  the  United
       Kingdom government to make a take charge request or whether the  fact
       the Applicant had been out of the territory of a Member State for  in
       excess of three months meant any responsibility for another state  to
       take back the Appellant had expired. As noted in RM the  first  stage
       of the assessment is for that member state to  determine  for  itself
       which  member  State  is  responsible  for  considering  the   asylum
       applicant's claim. This assessment is to be undertaken based  on  the
       criteria in Chapter III of Dublin III. The  "second  subparagraph  of
       [Article] 19(2) of Dublin III] establishes the framework within which
       [the] process [of establishing the member state responsible] must  be
       conducted" (Karim at [23]).

   30. Mr Anderson submitted that the decision RM remains good law and  that
       for the  Applicant  to  exercise  an  effective  remedy  it  was  not
       necessary to revisit the facts.

   31. It is accepted there  are  factual  differences  in  the  authorities
       relied upon particularly by the Applicant, but it  is  not  made  out
       that RM remains the determinative authority having been decided as it
       was in 2017 prior to the decisions of the Grand Chamber  referred  to
       by Mr Symes and considered by the tribunal in MS.  I  find  that  the
       decision in MS decided in 2019 contains a more accurate reflection of
       the current legal position and applicable principles when determining
       challenges to Dublin III decisions.

   32. It is not suggested judicial  review  is  not  an  effective  remedy.
       Whilst MS did not engage with RM (it is not clear  from  reading  the
       later determination whether that tribunal was referred to the earlier
       determination) that  does  not  mean  MS  cannot  or  should  not  be
       followed.

   33. As recognised by the Grand Chamber it is necessary for both fact  and
       law issues to be considered to enable an individual to have a  proper
       effective remedy. Whilst Mr Anderson  asserts  the  findings  of  the
       Tribunal in MS at [193]  relating  to  Advocate  General  Sharpston's
       opinion cannot be right, no evidence was provided to this tribunal of
       any successful challenge by way of appeal by the Secretary  of  State
       to that decision.

   34. As announced in court, I accept Mr Symes's submissions regarding  the
       proper approach to the challenge in this case and  choose  to  follow
       the tribunal decision in MS, which postdates RM, and  which  had  the
       benefit of decisions of  the  Grand  Chamber  not  available  to  the
       earlier tribunal which clearly establish merit in Mr Symes argument.



The merits

   35. This is also a case in which there  is  a  hard-edged  factual  issue
       namely the question of whether the Applicant resided  in  Turkey  for
       longer than the period specified in Article 19 of Dublin III.  If  he
       did responsibility upon the member  state  subject  to  the  takeback
       request never legally arose and responsibility  has  always  remained
       with the United Kingdom.

   36. The Applicant was called to give oral evidence was subject to  cross-
       examination by Mr Anderson.

Precedent fact decision

   37. The Applicant has been consistent throughout these proceedings in his
       claim. The essential facts summarised in Mr  Symes  in  his  skeleton
       argument at [9 - 10], are in the following terms:

           "9.   A fled Iraq on 20 October 2013. He travelled  to  Bulgaria
                via Turkey. He experienced mistreatment in Bulgaria  as  set
                out most fully  in  the  medical  report.  He  travelled  to
                Hungary where he  spent  several  days,  including  a  short
                period of time whilst detained for illegal entry. His  agent
                then procured his transportation to Turkey (without A having
                agreed to depart the EU) before making arrangements for  his
                travel across the EU via countries unknown to A.  A  arrived
                in the UK and claimed asylum on 23 July 2014.

           10.   A hit on the EURODAC system indicated a prior asylum claim
                in Hungary on 20 January 2014, and prior  unlawful  presence
                in Bulgaria on 3 November 2013  (B  16),  R  requested  both
                countries to  take  responsibility  for  A's  asylum  claim;
                Hungary refused, but Bulgaria was deemed  to  have  accepted
                responsibility by default on 21  August  2014  (B  21).  A's
                asylum claim was certified  as  amenable  to  third  country
                procedures on 21 August 2014 (B 19 - 20), and  A's  advisers
                having made representations as to why to return to  Bulgaria
                would contravene A's rights to be  free  from  inhumane  and
                degrading treatment (as well as raising the Article  19  (2)
                issue) (B 24ff ),  that  claim  was  certified  as  "clearly
                unfounded" on 15 September  2014,  on  the  basis  that  the
                evidence did not establish systemic or  other  human  rights
                deficiencies there (C1ff)."

   38. The procedural history is also of some importance and is set  out  at
       [11 -13] of Mr Symes skeleton argument in the following terms:

           "11.  A's claim has a lengthy procedural history. The  essential
                facts are these.

                 a.    The claim was lodged on 16  September  2014  (in  the
                    Administrative Court, as it was at that  time  generally
                    understood  that  any  "safe  third  country"  challenge
                    needed to request  a  declaration  of  incompatibility),
                    accompanied by the  statement  of  grounds  (B7ff):  two
                    challenges were made,  as  to  the  compatibility  of  a
                    return to Bulgaria  with  A's  right  to  be  free  from
                    inhumane and degrading treatment (Grounds 1, 3  and  4),
                    and as to Bulgaria's responsibility for the asylum claim
                    in any event given A's departure from the  EU  for  more
                    than 3 months (Ground 2). The removal hitherto  proposed
                    for 17 September was deferred.

                 b. The claim was refused permission by  the  Administrative
                    Court on 3  July  2015.  The  Court  of  Appeal  granted
                    permission to appeal  for  the  judicial  review  on  12
                    October 2015 (D3) and remitted the matter  back  to  the
                    Administrative Court, where the case was  stayed  on  15
                    February 2016 (D5)  in  line  with  lead  cases  on  the
                    returnability of asylum seekers to Bulgaria. On 29  June
                    2016 R invited A to withdraw this  claim  following  the
                    dismissal of those claims in  the  Administrative  Court
                    (F71-F72).

                 c.    On 11 July 2016 A wrote (F73-74) noting that Ground 2
                    remained a live  issue  between  the  parties  and  that
                    accordingly it would be appropriate for the  parties  to
                    agree to the amendment of the grounds,  maintaining  the
                    challenge as to return to  Bulgaria  being  incompatible
                    with   A's   fundamental   rights   and    more    fully
                    particularising Ground 2; as R did not agree (F75-76), A
                    made a formal application on 10 August 2016 (F77).

                 d. A formally applied for medical evidence from Dr Cohen to
                    be admitted in these  proceedings  on  2  December  2015
                    (F48ff) and to amend his grounds for judicial review. No
                    ruling has been made on that application, which  remains
                    outstanding.   However  subsequent   developments   have
                    overtaken that application.

                 e.    On 23 November 2017 the  decision  of  the  Court  of
                    Appeal in HK (Iraq) [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1871  upheld  the
                    decision of the Administrative Court that, on  the  then
                    available evidence, human rights claims  raised  against
                    the removal of  asylum  seekers  to  Bulgaria  could  be
                    lawfully certified as clearly unfounded. On  24  January
                    2018  (F2)  A  wrote   to   the   Administrative   Court
                    recognising that for present purposes HK, Article  19(2)
                    aside, determined the original Grounds of  the  judicial
                    review against him; hence it was proposed that the claim
                    advanced now only on the second ground.

           12.   On 5 July 2018  (C23ff)  R  wrote  a  Response  Letter  in
                respect  of  Certification  Decision   (AKA   "Supplementary
                Letter") arguing that

                 a.    The burden of proof in an Article 19(2) case  was  on
                    the requested Member State;

                 b. A's claim to have departed the EU for 3 months was based
                    wholly on his own unsupported testimony and  lacked  any
                    supporting corroboration, there being  no  probative  or
                    indicative  evidence  of  the  kind  specified  in   the
                    Commission Implementing Regulation;

                 c.    There was  no  review  process  envisaged  under  the
                    scheme of Dublin III and thus R's  decision  was  lawful
                    given the limited information then available;

                 d. In any event the indicative evidence now supplied by way
                    of A's witness statement was  wanting:  it  was  neither
                    "detailed"  nor  "verifiable"  as  certain  matters  now
                    raised by R were  considered  to  deprive  it  of  those
                    characteristics (C27 -28).

           13.   A has repeatedly provided interview and witness  statement
                of evidence attesting to his time outside the EU in Turkey:

                 a.    In his asylum  screening  interview  (23  July  2014:
                    E4/2.1);

                 b. In his "Immigration Service" interview (23  July  2014):
                    E19;

                 c.    In his Travel History interview (28  July  2014):  (E
                    24/2.7, E 26/3.2.1);

                 d. In his statement of 15 September 2014 (necessarily brief
                    and taken in difficult conditions, as it was  made  over
                    the telephone) A9ff, A16 [35-36]);

                 e.    In the  medicolegal  report  from  the  Helen  Bamber
                    foundation (F4, F12 [25]);

                 f.    In the witness statement of  9  August  2019  (A1-A8)
                    responding to the points made by R in the  supplementary
                    refusal letter of 5 July 2018."

   39. The Respondent in the supplementary refusal letter  of  5  July  2018
       acknowledges the issue of the Applicant being out of the territory of
       the EU for over three months had  been  raised  in  a  letter  of  12
       September 2014, the evidence submitted to  the  Home  Office  in  the
       asylum screening interview, travel history interview, medical  report
       and witness statement of 15 September 2014.

   40. The decision-maker asserts at [12] that the  burden  of  proving  the
       Applicant had left the territory of the  European  Union  for  longer
       than three months is on the requested  Member  State,  in  this  case
       Bulgaria, and not on the requesting Member State. The  Implementation
       Regulations are referred to at [14] setting out what is considered to
       be  'probative'  evidence   required   to   show   a   cessation   of
       responsibility under Article 19(2) which, in  relation  to  departure
       from the territory of the  member  state,  includes  an  exit  stamp,
       extracts from a third country bordering on a Member State bearing  in
       mind the route taken by the applicant  and  the  date  on  which  the
       frontier was crossed, written proof from  the  authorities  that  the
       alien had been  expelled,  extracts  from  third  country  registrars
       substantiating  residence,  tickets   conclusively   establishing   a
       departure from or entry at an external frontier,  report/confirmation
       by the Member State from which the applicant left  the  territory  of
       the Member State, stamps from third countries bordering on  a  Member
       State bearing in mind the route taken by the applicant and  the  date
       the frontier  was  crossed.  'Indicative'  evidence  is  said  to  be
       detailed    and    verifiable    statements    by    an    applicant,
       reports/confirmation of the information by an  internal  organisation
       such as UNHCR,  report/confirmation  of  the  information  by  family
       members, travel companies etc, fingerprints except in cases where the
       authorities decided to take fingerprints when the alien  crossed  the
       external frontier, in such case they constitute probative evidence as
       defined. Also tickets, hotel bills, appointment  cards  for  doctors,
       dentists etc in a third country, information showing  an  applicant's
       use of  the  services  of  a  carrier  or  travel  agency,  or  other
       circumstantial evidence of the same kind.

   41. The Respondent's response to the Applicant's claim  set  out  at  [16
       -23] of the Supplementary Letter is as follows:

           "16.  The Home Office maintains that  at  the  time  the  formal
                requests were made to both Hungry and Bulgaria on  1  August
                2014, the evidence available to  the  Home  Office  at  that
                point in time, considered solely of your clients  testimony,
                not supported by any other evidence probative or indicative,
                which was communicated to both Member States.

           17.   The purpose of the process under the Dublin Regulation  to
                identify a single Member State responsible  for  determining
                an applicant's claim for international protection under  the
                Dublin III  Regulation  (EU  Regulation  604/2013)  criteria
                begins with the communication  of  the  formal  request  and
                ends, either with an acceptance, or  following  a  challenge
                process, an acceptance or final rejection of the request  in
                question. Clearly, if  sufficient  probative  or  indicative
                evidence (as outlined above), is presented, or known to  the
                requested Member State at the time  the  Formal  Request  is
                made, or before a decision has been made, that Member  State
                can decide not to accept responsibility for the case on this
                basis.

           18.   However, there is  no  review  process  foreseen  once  an
                acceptance has been received. An acceptance under the Dublin
                III Regulation has  to  be  based  on  the  information  and
                evidence available at the time the Formal  Request  is  made
                and accepted, otherwise the determination of  a  responsible
                Member State could be challenged ad infinitum and  therefore
                defeat the primary purpose of the Regulation,  which  is  to
                identify and determine at a  particular  point  in  time,  a
                responsible Member State  such  that  the  applicant  can  -
                without undue delay - come to a substantive consideration of
                their claim for international protection.

           19.   Neither at the time the United Kingdom's  formal  requests
                to Bulgaria and Hungary on 1 August 2014, were made, nor  in
                the period before a  deemed  acceptance  was  received,  was
                either probative  or  indicative  evidence  presented  which
                would meet the criteria listed in paragraph 16 and 17 above.

           20.   Furthermore, in the intervening period  no  new  evidence,
                has been presented which  would  have  made  a  case  for  a
                compelling engagement of Article 19(2) likely  at  the  time
                the formal request was made, after the deemed acceptance  by
                Bulgaria, or even if this were possible, at the time of  the
                certification of the asylum claim on 21 August 2014, or when
                the Article 3 ECHR response letter dated 12  September  2014
                was drafted and approved.

           21.   It must be considered that in  light  of  the  information
                available, the evidence  provided  by  your  client  of  his
                having left the EU member States cannot  be  considered  not
                probative. There is no document exhibiting an exit stamp, no
                extracts  from  third  country  registrars,  no  report   or
                confirmation from a Member State  substantiating  residence,
                no tickets, entry/exit stamps etcetera.  Such  evidence  was
                not provided in 2014 and has not been presented to date.

           22.   Neither  is  the  indicative  evidence  in  this  case  is
                compelling.  Firstly,  the  statements  of  your  client  in
                respect of his leaving Hungary and presence in Turkey  until
                June 2014 are neither "detail" nor "verifiable" as  required
                by the Regulation. There is for instance:

                  - No information as to why your client or his agent decide
                    to travel back to Turkey having spent so much  time  and
                    effort crossing from Turkey into Bulgaria and again from
                    Bulgaria  into  Hungary.  Given  that  your  client  was
                    already in Hungary, it would have been much  easier  for
                    your client to continue his journey to  Western  Europe,
                    if, as your client states the agent's goal was to  bring
                    your client to a safe country. In fact  this  move,  was
                    illogical in light of the agents claimed goals,  as  the
                    agent clearly did not wish his  "customer"  to  stay  in
                    Bulgaria and Hungary and must have already had plans  in
                    place to move your client to Western Europe.

                  - Given that other parts of your clients witness statement
                    are particularly detailed,  the  account  of  the  claim
                    journey back to Turkey is, in contrast, both  brief  and
                    vague. There is for instance no information on:

                  - whether  your  client  agreed  or  disagreed  with  this
                    decision,

                  - no description of the route or mode of transport used,

                  - no description as  to  how  the  applicant  reached  the
                    unknown  address  in  Istanbul,  conditions/location  of
                    where he was living, who else was there, measures  taken
                    not to be noticed etcetera

                  - how he spent his time,

                  - whether he ventured out, despite not having papers

                  - how he checked the progress of his onward travel,

                  - how he funded his claim six-month stay,

                  - whether he was in contact with family members, how,  and
                    for what purpose

                  - who the friend or person was, whom he  claims  prevented
                    him from committing suicide,

                  - how he travelled out of Turkey etcetera

                  - given  that  your  client  was  encountered  twice  when
                    travelling from Turkey  to  Bulgaria  and  onto  Hungary
                    early in 2014, it seems remarkable that your client  was
                    then able to make the journey from Turkey to the  French
                    coast,  without  once  being  encountered  by   Turkish,
                    Bulgarian,  Hungarian,  Serbian,  Austrian,  German   or
                    French officials. There is  no  second  set  of  EURODAC
                    fingerprint evidence definitely placing your client  re-
                    entering the EU after his claim sojourn in Turkey.

           23.   In light of the fact your client, neither at the  time  of
                his various statements prior, during or after the conclusion
                of the Dublin III Regulation determination procedure has not
                established that he left the European  Union  for  at  least
                three months. It is also considered that  the  Secretary  of
                State would have reached this decision even  without  regard
                to the specified categories in the  Commission  Implementing
                Regulation cited.

   42. It is not disputed that the decision-maker advised the authorities as
       part of the formal takeback request of the Applicant's claim. A  copy
       of the transfer request sent to Bulgaria on 1 August 2014  is  to  be
       found at E32 - E36 of the judicial review bundle and the  request  to
       Hungary of the same date at E 37 - E 39. In the section headed "Other
       useful information" it is written:

           "Applicant claimed asylum in  the  UK  on  23.7.2014.  Applicant
           stated to have travelled from Iraq to Turkey, Bulgaria, Hungary,
           Turkey and entered the UK and that the transit  took  about  one
           month and that he travelled in 3 or 4 different lorries.

           EURODAC search confirmed  that  he  entered  Bulgaria  illegally
           on.3.11.2013 and claimed asylum in Hungary on 20.1.2014.

           Applicant  admitted  having  been  fingerprinted   in   Bulgaria
           approximately in December 2013. He  stated  that  after  he  was
           fingerprinted he remained there for one months and 10 - 15 days.
           He then stated to have travelled to Hungary where he stayed less
           than a week in a city in a building and  that  he  was  also  in
           prison for 2 or 3 days. He then  stated  to  have  travelled  to
           Turkey where he stayed  for  around  6  months  but  he  is  not
           entirely sure and the agent provided him with  accommodation  in
           Istanbul. He then stated to have travelled to an unknown country
           staying for 3 - 4 days and then travelled  to  France  where  he
           stayed for about 20 days in a woodland before he entered the  UK
           on 21.7.2014. Please note that applicant did not provide us with
           any documentary evidence of his travel to Turkey. He stated that
           he used his own passport when he travelled to  Turkey  and  that
           the agent took the passport from him after  he  entered  Turkey.
           Applicant stated that he travelled from Iraq to  Turkey  but  he
           didn't mention how long he was in Turkey. He also stated that he
           applied for a Visa to Turkey as he was a lorry  driver,  but  he
           didn't state if he was granted this Visa or not.

   43. The Applicant explained in his asylum screening interview of 23  July
       2014 his route of travel, as set out in the takeback request, but did
       not state the journey from Iraq to Turkey, Bulgaria, Hungary, Turkey,
       and to the UK took one month. The question the  Applicant  was  asked
       was how long was the transit which he stated was one month which must
       relate to the period in which he travelled from Turkey to the UK  and
       not the journey from Iraq to the UK as a whole.

   44. In the Immigration Service interview of the same  day  the  Applicant
       provided a slightly different version of events claiming that he  had
       travelled from Iraq to Turkey and by lorry  straight  to  the  United
       Kingdom. The Applicant, however, also confirmed in the same interview
       that his agent had taken him to Hungary but then pulled him  back  to
       Turkey. The Applicant lied to the interviewing officer about  whether
       he had been fingerprinted or made a claim for asylum  in  Hungary  or
       Bulgaria where he claimed he had not made any claim for international
       protection which was later shown to be incorrect.

   45. In the Travel History Interview the Applicant was asked where he went
       after he left Hungary to which he stated that he went to Turkey.  The
       Applicant was therefore asked on what date he arrived  in  Turkey  to
       which he replied he was not sure. The Applicant was asked how long he
       remained there which he stated was around six months but that he  was
       not entirely sure, that  the  agent  provided  the  accommodation  in
       Istanbul, that the agent provided for everything,  that  he  did  not
       work whilst in Turkey, that he left after six months or  so  but  was
       not sure of the date, and that he was put in a lorry and into a  flat
       in an unknown country.

   46. In his statement of the 15 September 2014 at [35 - 36] the  Appellant
       stated:

           "35.  I tried to leave Bulgaria a number of times and I  finally
                managed to leave the country. We were  helped  by  a  person
                whose house was on the border. He took us to  his  house  at
                night and the next day in the morning  we  set  out  and  we
                crossed the border. We walked for two and a half  hours  and
                the rest was by car. We were then in Hungary.  I  have  been
                through a  very  difficult  time,  travelling  and  sleeping
                rough, and this makes it more difficult for me  to  remember
                the exact dates but I know I was in Hungary in January 2014.
                I was fingerprinted in Hungary but I did not claim asylum. I
                was in detention for 3 or 4 days. After  I  was  released  I
                stayed in a camp for 4 or 5 days and then I left the country
                and I went back to Turkey. My mother and  uncle  had  sought
                the help of an agent to take me to a safe country and it was
                the agent's decision; he didn't want me to stay  in  another
                country. I did not know where I was going until I arrived in
                the UK. I was under the control of that agent and he was  in
                contact through telephone; he would hand me from one  person
                to another.

           36.   I stayed in Turkey for 5 to 6  months.  I  stayed  in  the
                agent's flat and he paid for my food during this period.  He
                said I should  stay  there  until  he  managed  to  take  me
                somewhere safe. While I was there I wanted  to  kill  myself
                because I was fed up with my situation with my life.  I  was
                sad and I didn't want to continue. Then the  agent  arranged
                for me to go to France, which took me  10  days  to  arrive.
                Then I stayed in France for around 20  days  after  which  I
                travelled to the UK. I was so fed up with the  situation  in
                France and I used a rope to try to hang myself but a Kurdish
                guy who I met there saved me. I then travel to  the  UK  and
                claimed asylum."

   47. The Applicant's witness statement of 9 August 2019 confirmed that the
       2014 witness statement was taken over the telephone whilst he was  in
       detention. The statement  also  responds  to  issues  raised  in  the
       Respondent's letter of 5 July 2018 providing further details  of  the
       Applicant's experiences in Hungary, details of the journey to  Turkey
       after leaving Hungary, the Applicant's experiences  in  Hungary,  and
       his journey from Turkey to the United Kingdom.

   48. The Applicant was cross-examined by Mr Anderson in which he  repeated
       his claim to have been in the hands of  an  agent  and  in  which  he
       answered questions regarding his experiences in Turkey. The Applicant
       claimed in his witness statement that he was free to leave  the  camp
       in Hungary where they were kept from early morning until evening, and
       that after approximately 4-5 days in the camp the agent came  to  see
       him and took him away after which he travelled to Budapest  by  train
       with an unknown person and  by  van  and  lorry  before  arriving  in
       Istanbul. The Applicant claims he remained in the  flat  in  Istanbul
       for between five to six months and that although he complained to the
       agent that he was not happy about being taken back to Turkey  he  was
       told by the agent that he would try to take the Applicant to  a  safe
       country later as he had been paid in advance so he had to be taken to
       a safe country. The Applicant explained  he  had  no  documents  that
       allowed him  to  stay  in  Turkey  and  so  could  only  venture  out
       occasionally. In his  oral  evidence  the  Applicant  confirmed  this
       account and the claim the agent had asked him  to  work  for  him  to
       assist with his people smuggling activities but  that  the  Applicant
       refused. The Applicant confirmed that his mother paid the  agent  any
       increased costs. The Applicant confirmed he was  aware  he  had  been
       brought to the United Kingdom and remained in contact with his mother
       who had remained in contact with the agent.  The  Applicant  accepted
       there was no evidence from the agent  or  his  mother  regarding  his
       second stay in Turkey.

   49. What is clear  from  the  papers  is  that  the  Applicant  has  been
       consistent in his evidence of having left Hungary  and  returning  to
       Turkey. Mr Anderson, although the Applicant indicated some  confusion
       during cross-examination, was  unable  to  materially  undermine  the
       credibility of the Applicants claim.

   50. The Respondent's position has been predicated upon a belief that much
       of the Applicant's account is implausible.   There  is  merit  in  Mr
       Symes submission that the Respondent's conclusions appear to be based
       upon a viewpoint and understanding of a person in the UK rather  than
       the experiences of a person under the control of an agent.

   51. The Respondent appears to have been aware of the  deficiency  in  the
       assessment of  the  application  in  the  decision  letter  dated  15
       September 2014 resulting in the supplementary decision  letter  of  5
       July 2018.

   52.  There appears no consideration of whether [21]  of  that  letter  is
       realistic. A person under the control of an agent  travelling  across
       international boundaries travelling illegally may not  be  likely  to
       have type of evidence referred to and stated  to  be  'probative'  or
       'indicative'. Consideration has to be given as to whether a person in
       their individual circumstances is likely to have such  material.  The
       Applicant never claimed he had.

   53. In relation to the 'indicative' evidence it is arguable the decision-
       maker's  conclusions   and   questions   are   in   part   irrational
       demonstrating a failure to understand the reality of the situation of
       a person in  the  control  of  an  agent  seeking  to  bypass  lawful
       immigration control. It has often been said  that  a  number  of  the
       external borders of the EU are porous  with  internal  borders  being
       practically non-existent in light of the free movement principles. In
       some  cases  an  individual  is  only  be  required  to   cross   one
       international border at which evidence of a right to enter has to  be
       shown  before  being   able   to   travel   freely   within   Europe.
       Notwithstanding the tighter  immigration  controls  employed  by  the
       United Kingdom there are numerous accounts of individuals being  able
       to enter the UK illegally. The recent example of the 39 deaths in the
       refrigerated container lorry in Essex in a  classic  example  of  the
       ability of those seeking to enter the UK to be able to do so  without
       detection.

   54. The  recent  decision  letter  is  also  inaccurate  in  claiming  no
       information was provided as to why the Applicant or his agent decided
       to travel back to Turkey. The Applicant did not make  this  decision,
       it was the agent's decision and the explanation for doing so  was  to
       enable the agent to bring the Applicant to a safe third country. That
       is not implausible.  The  decision-maker  considered  such  a  choice
       irrational in light of time and effort spent crossing from Turkey  to
       Bulgaria and Bulgaria and Hungary but none of  those  countries  were
       the intended destination. Thus, although the decision-maker claims it
       may be easier to continue the journey to Western Europe from  Hungary
       this does not make it implausible, if it was not  considered  viable,
       to transport a person from Hungary into  other  parts  of  Europe  or
       elsewhere to enable another route to  be  followed.  The  Applicant's
       evidence is also that while in the hands of  the  agent  it  was  the
       agent who made the decisions. It is not unrealistic  to  assume  that
       people smugglers have their own methods of  bringing  individuals  in
       their care into the UK or elsewhere which  may  include  routes  they
       know to be successful, those who can assist, such that an agent  will
       then be paid. It is also the case the  decision-maker  speculates  in
       terms of the intention of the agent in such a statement.

   55. The assertion by the decision-maker that the account of  the  claimed
       journey back to Turkey was brief and vague  and  that  there  was  no
       information on the various points set out has been explained  in  the
       evidence and has now been resolved in the Applicant's latest  witness
       statement of 9 August 2019. The decision-maker  was,  however,  fully
       aware of the Applicant's claim and despite there being  a  number  of
       interviews with the Applicant it does not appear any effort was  made
       during the course of those  interviews  to  fully  explore  with  the
       Applicant these issues. It is not unrealistic to expect  that  if  an
       issue arises relevant to  whether  the  criteria  for  a  Dublin  III
       transfer request are satisfied to enable a  takeback  request  to  be
       made  the  decision-maker  will  ensure  that  all  appropriate   and
       available enquiries are made on such issues. Article 5 of Dublin  III
       provides that an interview must ensure "the proper  understanding  of
       the information supplied" which did not occur in this case.  In  this
       case the Applicant has been consistent throughout yet  other  than  a
       cursory examination by the decision-maker there has been no effort to
       undertake the necessary degree of anxious scrutiny into this issue.

   56. In Mushtaq [2015] UKUT  224  (IAC)  it  was  found  that  that  Entry
       Clearance interviews serve the basic  twofold  purposes  of  enabling
       applications to  be  probed  and  investigated  and,  simultaneously,
       giving the applicant a fair opportunity  to  respond  to  potentially
       adverse  matters.  The  ensuing  decisions  must  accord   with   the
       principles of procedural fairness. The Upper Tribunal recognising  at
       [19] that fairness will often require that the interviewer invite the
       subject to clarify or expand an answer or probe a response.

   57. This approach has received recent support from the Court  of  Appeal,
       Underhill LJ, in Balajigari [2019] EWCA Civ 673 in which it was found
       on the facts of that case that the respondent's approach in  deciding
       to refuse an application for  leave  to  remain  was  legally  flawed
       principally because the respondent proceeded  directly  from  finding
       that the discrepancies occurred to a  decision  that  they  were  the
       result of dishonesty without giving the applicants an opportunity  to
       proffer an innocent explanation.

   58. The statement by the decision-maker  that  given  the  Applicant  was
       encountered twice travelling from Turkey to Bulgaria and then  on  to
       Hungary in 2014 it seemed remarkable he was able to make the  journey
       from Turkey to the French coast without being encountered by  any  of
       the named officials is an irrational  observation  in  light  of  the
       substantial number of  individuals  able  to  travel  across  Western
       Europe as evidenced by the numbers in Calais and other Channel  ports
       in relation to whom not all have  been  encountered  prior  to  being
       fingerprinted in France. It is also not made out that  everybody  who
       arrives in France or at any of the migrant camps awaiting  the  means
       to  transit  into  the  United  Kingdom  will   be   encountered   or
       fingerprinted by the French or other authorities.

   59. I find  merit  in  Mr  Symes  submission  that  the  decision-maker's
       rejection is based upon implausibility and  speculation  applying  an
       incorrect and unrealistic standard to the assessment of the evidence.



   60. The weight of the evidence suggests that the decision-maker made  the
       impugned  decisions  in  the  terms   specified,   particularly   the
       supplementary letter of 5 July 2018,  as  she  did  not  believe  the
       Applicant's claim. The claim had not been put to  the  Applicant  for
       further clarification resulting  in  the  third  country  certificate
       being issued on the basis of the decision-maker's  disbelief  of  the
       claim.

   61. It is also the case that at no point in the original decision did the
       Respondent outline the existence of Article 19(3), full consideration
       of which would have necessitated a far  more  detailed  interview  to
       enable a proper understanding of the Applicant's position.

   62. As noted by Mr Symes, Dublin III places  significant  weight  on  the
       procedural   safeguards,   including   recognising   the   right   to
       information, which requires a requirement to clarify the consequences
       of moving between Member States (4(1)(a)), the hierarchy of  criteria
       and the possibility of responsibility shifting between Member  States
       (4(1)(b)), the importance of the personal  interview  (4(1)(c)),  the
       possibility of challenging a transfer  decision  (4(1)(d))  including
       that, where necessary for the proper understanding of  the  applicant
       with the information to be supplied orally, for example in connection
       with a personal interview.

   63. There is also merit in the submission  that  the  decision  fails  to
       touch on the real  issue  in  this  case  resulted  in  an  unfounded
       decision. It is also arguable the  principles  of  fairness  together
       with requirement of the Respondent to consider the evidence with  the
       required degree of anxious  scrutiny,  both  traditional  public  law
       remedies, have been infringed in this matter.

   64. The Respondent's initial decision did not deal with  the  Article  19
       point  at  all  despite  the  decision-maker  being  aware   of   the
       Applicant's position regarding time  out  of  the  territory  of  the
       European Union. That decision is therefore unlawful. The decision  of
       July 2018  asserts  there  is  no  challenge  to  the  third  country
       acceptance but that is wrong both in fact and law in a case in  which
       the Applicant has been  consistent  that  he  does  not  satisfy  the
       criteria for transfer pursuant to Dublin III.

   65. I find the Applicant has established his case  on  the  evidence  and
       that the impugned decisions are infected by public law error material
       to the Respondent's decision. No  allegation  of  dishonesty  in  the
       applicant's claim is made out or even run in the  impugned  decision,
       the question is whether the Applicant's evidence is reliable.  As  Mr
       Anderson correctly submitted  if  it  was  found  the  Applicant  was
       outside the EU this means that the UK becomes the  responsible  State
       for considering the Applicant's asylum  claim.  As  noted  above  the
       Respondent has not shaken the Applicant's case or undermined it to  a
       sufficient degree  to  warrant  an  adverse  credibility  finding  in
       relation to the Applicant's claim to have left the territory  of  the
       European Union for more than a three-month period. I find this aspect
       of the Applicants claim made out on the available  evidence.   Whilst
       Mr Anderson submits the Applicant's account is not plausible this  is
       not established on the evidence  when  considered  as  a  whole.  The
       decision-maker was required to do more than he or she did in light of
       the material before the decision-maker.




ORDER

        a) The application for judicial review is allowed.

        b) The 21 August 2014, 15 September 2014 and 5 July  2018  decision
           are quashed.

        c) The respondent is to pay 75% of  the  applicants  costs  of  and
           incidental to the proceedings, the applicant having  succeed  in
           part, to be assessed if not agreed.

        d) There be a detailed assessment of the applicants publicly funded
           costs.

        e) Permission to  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  refused.  The
           application amounts  to  no  more  than  disagreement  with  the
           rejection of the submission of Mr Anderson that the approach  in
           RM should have been followed in this case and disagreement  with
           the finding the impugned decisions are infected  by  public  law
           error. All relevant considerations were taken into account as  a
           reading the decision shows and the fact the conclusions are  not
           of the respondents choice does not  support  the  claim  in  the
           alternative. The application for permission fails  to  establish
           an arguable case warranting a grant of permission to appeal.






                       [pic]
            Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson




        Dated:    2 December 2019






Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).

