
                                                               JR/11244/2016


                           Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review
                               Decision Notice






                       The Queen on the application of
                             SHAZIA MUNAWAR KHAN
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered all the documents filed  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective  representatives,  Mr  C.  Ijezie,  Solicitor  Advocate,  of  Sky
Solicitors on behalf of the applicant  and  Mr  L.  Glenister,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on 05/03/19.

      Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

Immigration history

1.    The applicant entered the UK on 05/04/11 with  entry  clearance  as  a
      Tier 4 (General) Student which was valid until 29/04/11.  She  applied
      for, and was granted, extensions of  stay  on  the  same  basis  until
      13/02/15. The last grant of  leave  as  a  Tier  4  student  was  from
      01/10/13 until 28/12/15.  The  respondent  curtailed  the  applicant's
      leave to remain on 10/12/14 to expire on 13/02/15.

2.    On 13/02/15 the applicant applied for further leave  to  remain  as  a
      Tier 4 student and made an application as a Tier 2  (General)  Migrant
      with a Certificate of Sponsorship (CoS) issued by Fisher Ash Ltd.  The
      application for leave to remain under Tier 2 was refused on  29/07/15.
      The applicant did not apply for Administrative Review of the decision.
      The application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 student was  found  to
      be invalid. The applicant's leave to remain was extended by  operation
      of section 3C of the  Immigration  Act  1971  ("IA  1971")  while  the
      application was pending. Section 3C(2)(d) extended her leave up to and
      including  the  period  in  which   she   could   have   applied   for
      Administrative Review of the decision  dated  29/07/15  i.e.  14  days
      after deemed receipt of the decision.

3.    On 06/08/15 the  applicant  made  another  application  for  leave  to
      remain as a Tier 2 migrant with  a  CoS  issued  by  Fisher  Ash  Ltd.
      Although the subsequent application was  made  during  the  period  in
      which she could have applied for Administrative Review, section  3C(4)
      makes clear that a person may not make an application  to  vary  their
      leave to remain while leave is extended by operation  of  section  3C.
      Despite having made the application promptly, by operation of law, the
      applicant  became  an  overstayer  when  the  period  to   apply   for
      Administrative Review of the  decision  dated  29/07/15  expired.  The
      application was made within the 28-day grace period (as it  then  was)
      in which the respondent would  accept  an  application  for  leave  to
      remain as a valid application, but this did not alter her status as an
      overstayer.

4.    The second application for leave to remain as a  Tier  2  migrant  was
      refused on 08/10/15 because the respondent was not satisfied that  the
      Standard Occupational Classification code (SOC) given in the  CoS  was
      appropriate for the role. A subsequent Administrative Review  decision
      dated 29/10/15 upheld the decision. The applicant sought to  challenge
      the decisions by way of judicial review. The claim  was  withdrawn  by
      way of a consent order  approved  on  17/03/16  after  the  respondent
      agreed to reconsider and undertook to make a new decision within three
      months. It seems that further correspondence from the Tier  2  sponsor
      dated 12/11/15 may have played a role in the respondent's decision  to
      reconsider  the  application.  In  that  letter  the  Tier  2  sponsor
      explained why the code asserted by the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
      appropriate  to  the  applicant  because  she  was  not  a   qualified
      accountant (as the respondent had noted) and it was not intended  that
      she would be employed in such a role.

5.    The respondent's chronology of events states that a  compliance  visit
      was carried out at  Fisher  Ash  Ltd  on  12/04/16.  On  05/05/16  the
      respondent suspended the Tier 2 licence of Fisher Ash Ltd. The licence
      was revoked on 03/06/16. The respondent refused the application  in  a
      decision dated 06/06/16,  which  was  within  the  three-month  period
      outlined in the consent order.

Procedural history

6.    The applicant seeks  to  challenge  the  respondent's  decision  dated
      06/06/16 to refuse leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General)  Migrant  and
      the associated Administrative Review decision dated 20/07/16.

7.    The respondent refused the application  because  there  was  no  valid
      CoS. The CoS number provided with the application was cancelled by the
      UK Border Agency because the Tier 2 sponsor licence was revoked.

8.    The applicant filed an application for permission  to  bring  judicial
      review proceedings on 14/10/16. The grounds  were  rather  general  in
      nature, but essentially made a single assertion that it  was  'unfair'
      to refuse the application without giving the applicant an  opportunity
      to find another Tier 2 sponsor.

 9.   Upper Tribunal Judge King refused  permission  on  the  papers  in  an
      order sent on 11/01/17. The application for oral renewal was stayed by
      order of Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 22/03/17 to await  the  outcome
      of the anticipated Upper Tribunal decision in R (on the application of
      Islam & Pathan) v SSHD (Tier 2 licence -  revocation  -  consequences)
      [2017] UKUT 00369,  which  was  published  on  14/09/17.  Judge  Bruce
      directed the applicant to file amended grounds within 14 days  of  the
      decision is she wished to pursue the claim and for the  respondent  to
      file amended summary grounds of defence thereafter.

10.   The court records indicate  that  an  email  was  received  from  the
      applicant's representatives on 02/10/17 to  say  that  she  wished  to
      continue the claim, but there is no record of  any  amendment  to  the
      grounds. On 05/10/17 the respondent filed amended summary  grounds  of
      defence.


11.   The application was listed for an oral renewal hearing  on  23/01/18.
      Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rimington  adjourned  the  application  giving
      permission for the applicant to amend her grounds in light of a recent
      decision of the Upper Tribunal in R (on the application  of  Pirta)  v
      SSHD (JR/11941/2016) (19/12/17). The applicant was  directed  to  file
      amended grounds within seven days of the date Judge Rimington's  order
      was sent (25/01/18).


12.   The applicant filed amended grounds on 02/02/18 (one  day  late).  In
      essence, the single ground of 'unfairness' remained the same, but  now
      relied on the decision in Pirta. It was  argued  that  the  respondent
      delayed in deciding the application for leave  to  remain  until  such
      time as the sponsor  licence  was  revoked  and  failed  to  give  the
      applicant  an  opportunity  to  "address  this  development".  It  was
      asserted that the applicant was not an overstayer,  and  even  if  she
      was, the procedure was still conspicuously unfair.

 13.  In response, the respondent argued  that  the  decision  in  Pathan  &
      Islam disposed of any arguments relating to the policy  not  to  treat
      Tier 2 applicants in the same way as Tier 4 applicants after a sponsor
      licence is revoked. It was not arguable that there was  unfairness  on
      the individual facts of this case and there was no comparison with the
      facts in Pirta.

 14.  Judge Bruce granted permission at a hearing on  17/04/18  because  she
      considered it was arguable that the Tribunal in Pathan & Islam did not
      consider potentially relevant policy statements. She stayed the  claim
      behind the pending judicial review in Yoke Mun Kum (JR/13672/2016) and
      directed the applicant to file any amended grounds of challenge within
      14 days of the publication of the judgment. If the applicant failed to
      notify the Tribunal whether  she  wished  to  pursue  the  proceedings
      within that time, the proceedings would be struck  out  and  the  only
      further order would be in respect of costs.

15.   The decision  in  Kum  was  published  on  29/10/18.  The  substantive
      hearing listed on 19/11/18 was vacated by way of an  approved  consent
      order. The applicant was to file amended grounds no later than 28 days
      before the fresh hearing date. The  respondent  was  to  file  amended
      grounds of defence no later than 14  days  before  the  fresh  hearing
      date.

16.   On 17/01/19 the  parties  were  sent  a  hearing  notice  listing  the
      substantive hearing for 05/03/19. The  applicant  notified  the  Upper
      Tribunal by email on 08/02/19 that she did  not  intend  to  make  any
      further amendments to her grounds.

17.   The respondent filed a position statement  on  19/02/19  arguing  that
      the claim should have  been  struck  out  pursuant  to  Judge  Bruce's
      directions granting permission and that the grounds were unarguable in
      light of the Court of Appeal decision in Pathan v SSHD  [2018]  4  WLR
      161.

 18.  In an order sent on 01/03/19 Upper Tribunal Lawyer Hussain found  that
      there was no basis to strike out the claim pursuant to  Judge  Bruce's
      directions following the grant of permission. Both  parties  continued
      to engage with the proceedings thereafter.

 Grounds of challenge

 19.  The applicant's case, as stated in the amended  grounds  of  challenge
      filed on 02/02/18, upon which permission was granted, argue  that  the
      decision was procedurally unfair on the facts of  this  case  for  the
      following reasons:


        i) Like the applicant in Pirta, this applicant was not working  for
           the Tier 2 sponsor and  was  not  likely  to  be  aware  of  the
           revocation of the licence. A fresh  decision  was  made  without
           informing the applicant that the sponsor licence  was  suspended
           or revoked. It is argued that  the  respondent  had  a  duty  to
           inform the applicant of the suspension and subsequent revocation
           of the licence to allow  time  for  her  to  seek  to  vary  the
           application or to arrange her affairs before leaving the UK.


       ii) Like the applicant in Pirta, the respondent delayed in making  a
           fresh decision  in  relation  to  the  application  pending  the
           investigation of the Tier 2 sponsor and the  revocation  of  the
           licence. The delay is said to be procedurally unfair.


      iii) The third point changed over the course of the written pleadings
           and  oral  submissions  to  the  extent  that  it  bore   little
           resemblance to what was pleaded in the  amended  grounds.  As  I
           understood it, it is argued  that  the  respondent's  agreement,
           during the judicial review proceedings in  2016,  to  reconsider
           the application made on  06/08/15  indicated  that  the  initial
           decision to refuse leave to remain on 08/10/15 was  flawed.  Had
           the respondent not made a flawed decision at a time when the CoS
           was valid the applicant may have been granted leave. At the date
           when the sponsor licence was eventually revoked she  would  have
           benefited from the terms of the Tier 2 policy to allow a  period
           to review her position.

 Grounds of defence

 20.  The respondent made the  following  points  in  his  response  to  the
      amended grounds of challenge:

        i) The decision in Pathan disposes of any challenge to the  Tier  2
           policy.


       ii) The facts of this case do not disclose  unfairness  and  can  be
           distinguished from the individual  circumstances  considered  by
           the Upper Tribunal in Pirta.  There was no undue  delay  by  the
           respondent. It was open to him to investigate the Tier 2 sponsor
           and revoke the licence. Fairness did not require the  respondent
           to inform the applicant of the  revocation  of  the  licence  to
           provide the applicant with time to find a new  Tier  2  sponsor.
           Pathan rejected that argument.

 Decision and reasons

21.   Mr Ijezie made  clear  that  he  was  not  seeking  to  challenge  the
      decision on the ground of  the  distinction  made  by  the  respondent
      between the approach taken to revocation  of  sponsor  licences  under
      Tier 4 and Tier 2. This concession was properly made  given  that  the
      Court of Appeal in Pathan found that there was a  rational  basis  for
      distinguishing between the two categories for the following reasons:

           "71.  In all the circumstances it seems to me that the essential
                 question then becomes whether  there  was  in  the  present
                 context such unfairness as to amount to irrationality. I am
                 unable to accept the submission that  there  was.  This  is
                 essentially for the  reasons  which  are  set  out  in  the
                 witness statements filed on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
                 State and relied upon in submission by Mr Payne. In essence
                 the reasons are as follows.


           72.   First, the purpose of the two regimes, Tier 2 and Tier  4,
                 are very different.  This  is  expressly  set  out  in  the
                 Immigration Rules themselves, as I have mentioned  earlier.
                 The purpose of Tier 4 is to enable students  from  overseas
                 to come to this country  to  pursue  their  studies.  If  a
                 particular educational institution's licence is revoked  by
                 the Secretary of State, it is understandable why  a  period
                 of grace should be given to that student to try to  see  if
                 they can pursue their studies  at  another  institution  in
                 this country. There may be no good public  interest  reason
                 to refuse them that opportunity.  In  contrast,  the  whole
                 purpose of the Tier 2 regime  for  migrant  workers  is  to
                 match up their application  for  leave  with  a  particular
                 vacancy in this country in circumstances  where  the  local
                 labour market (including for this purpose the EEA) has been
                 shown not to lead to a suitable worker being employable. In
                 those  circumstances,  it  is  pre-eminently  a   political
                 judgment on the part of  the  Secretary  of  State  whether
                 people should be able to put forward an alternative sponsor
                 if the particular sponsor  has  had  its  licence  revoked.
                 People may reasonably disagree on whether that would  be  a
                 good thing or a bad thing. However, as  a  matter  of  law,
                 this Court cannot possibly stigmatise  the  decision  which
                 the Secretary of State has taken as being irrational.


           73.   Secondly, I do not consider there to  be  any  unfairness,
                 certainly not such as to be  irrational,  in  circumstances
                 where  fair  notice  was  given  to   everyone   concerned,
                 including these Appellants, that  the  regime  which  would
                 apply would be exactly the one which was applied  to  them.
                 This was made  particularly  clear  in  para.  190  of  the
                 guidance for applicants which I have quoted earlier.


           74.   Thirdly, although the consequences could on  one  view  be
                 regarded as being  harsh,  on  another  view  they  can  be
                 avoided by the voluntary action of an applicant by  leaving
                 the UK and applying for leave to enter again  by  reference
                 to an alternative sponsor from overseas. In that  way,  the
                 risks (and  I  do  not  underestimate  them)  of  potential
                 liability  to  removal,  detention  pending  removal,   the
                 possibility of a criminal prosecution  for  overstaying  in
                 breach of immigration law and the likelihood that a  future
                 application for entry clearance would  be  refused  for  10
                 years, can all be avoided by voluntarily leaving the UK and
                 applying from overseas. I stress again in that context that
                 no-one who is given leave as a Tier 2 migrant can have  any
                 reasonable expectation  that  they  will  be  permitted  to
                 remain in this country if the particular  employer  who  is
                 their sponsor has its licence revoked. This is because,  as
                 I have already said, the Tier 2 scheme is closely  tied  to
                 there being a particular vacancy in the labour market which
                 cannot otherwise be filled. It is not a general  permission
                 to come to this country for the  purposes  of  work,  still
                 less for the purposes of looking for work.


           75.   Fourthly, there is a rational basis  for  the  distinction
                 drawn by the Secretary  of  State  between  cases  where  a
                 person has his or her leave to  remain  curtailed  and  the
                 present sort of case. Where leave is curtailed, as a matter
                 of policy, a period of up to 60 days grace  will  be  given
                 but it is important to appreciate that in such a  case  the
                 individual concerned may still have several years leave  to
                 run and so a considerable  reduction  will  be  imposed  on
                 them. If they have less than 60 days leave left  they  will
                 not be given any more leave. If they have more than 60 days
                 leave left they will be allowed a period of 60  days.  That
                 is both understandable and reasonable,  given  that  people
                 may have to re-arrange  their  affairs,  including  perhaps
                 having to move children out of school.  However,  the  fact
                 that the Secretary of State is  willing,  as  a  matter  of
                 policy, to afford such a period of  grace  in  cases  where
                 leave to remain is curtailed does not, in my  view,  render
                 his  decision  not  to  do  so  in  the   present   context
                 irrational."

22.   The applicant seeks to rely on the unreported decision  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal in Pirta. The Tribunal refused to  depart  from  the  general
      principles relating to the Tier 2  policy  established  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal decision in R (on the application of Islam & Pathan)  v  SSHD
      (Tier 2 licence - revocation - consequences)  [2017]  UKUT  00369  but
      concluded that the decision-making process was procedurally unfair  in
      the circumstances of that particular case. The applicant does not seek
      to  rely  on  the  decision  for  any  legal  principle,  because   it
      establishes none, but solely as a comparator  to  the  facts  of  this
      case.

23.   The facts in Pirta were unusual. Mr Pirta was granted leave to  remain
      as a Tier 2 migrant. Although the Tier 2 sponsor licence was  revoked,
      the Secretary of State took no action to curtail Mr Pirta's  leave  to
      remain, which was valid for another seven months.  Mr  Pirta  promptly
      took steps to find another Tier 2 sponsor  and  applied  to  vary  his
      leave to remain at least five months before his existing leave was due
      to expire. He paid for a premium service to obtain a  decision  within
      10  days.  In  the  meantime,  the  Secretary  of   State   began   an
      investigation into his new Tier 2 sponsor. The respondent wrote to  Mr
      Pirta on two occasions to  inform  him  that  there  was  a  delay  in
      deciding the application. Having taken the trouble to  inform  him  of
      the fact, the Secretary of State did not explain the  reason  for  the
      delay. Because Mr Pirta had not begun work for the Tier 2  sponsor  he
      was unaware of  the  investigation  into  the  licence.  There  was  a
      substantial delay before the Tier 2 sponsor licence  was  revoked.  In
      the meantime, Mr Pirta's leave to remain expired thereby depriving him
      of the benefit of the 60-day  curtailment  policy  under  the  Tier  2
      policy in force at the time.

24.   It is argued on  behalf  of  the  applicant  in  this  case  that  the
      respondent had a duty, as a matter of procedural fairness,  to  inform
      her that the Tier 2 sponsor licence for Fisher Ash was suspended.  She
      was in the same position as Mr Pirta in that she  had  not  yet  begun
      work  for  the  sponsor  and  was  unlikely  to  be   aware   of   the
      investigation. It is also argued that, but for  the  initial  refusal,
      which was  subsequently  withdrawn,  the  applicant  might  have  been
      granted leave to remain at a much earlier stage when Fisher Ash  still
      had a Tier 2  sponsor  licence.  During  the  delay  in  deciding  the
      application the situation changed and the application  eventually  was
      refused on a different ground only three days after the revocation  of
      the sponsor licence on 03/06/16.

25.   The third point argued by Mr Ijezie was rather  tenuous  and  unclear.
      It appeared to relate  back  to  the  policy  although  this  was  not
      particularised in the original pleadings and no application  was  made
      to amend the grounds. He accepted that paragraph 190 of the "Tier 2 of
      the Points Based System - Policy Guidance" for applications made on or
      after 06/04/15 (which is the applicable guidance in this case contrary
      to Mr Glenister handing up the guidance for applications  made  on  or
      after 06/04/16) stated that a CoS could be withdrawn or  cancelled  at
      any time by the Home Office or the sponsor. This is plainly  a  lawful
      policy statement. He noted that paragraph 261 of the  guidance  stated
      that  any  applications  submitted  while  the  sponsor's  licence  is
      suspended would be put on hold until the suspension ends  and  then  a
      decision would be made. He argued that the policy did  not  cover  the
      circumstances of this case because the application was made before the
      Tier 2 sponsor licence was suspended. As I understood his argument, he
      asserted that the principle outlined by Singh LJ at  paragraph  72  of
      Pathan did not apply because the policy did  not  give  the  applicant
      fair notice of the position in the circumstances of this case.

26.   In  my  assessment,  the  arguments  put  forward  on  behalf  of  the
      applicant are misconceived. There was no undue delay in this case. The
      respondent decided the application  on  the  evidence  before  him  on
      08/10/15 and  reviewed  the  position  when  further  evidence  became
      available in the judicial review proceedings. Having acted  fairly  by
      reviewing the situation,  the  respondent  agreed  to  reconsider  the
      application. Contrary to the argument put forward by  Mr  Ijezie,  the
      "fair notice" referred to by Singh LJ at [74]  of  Pathan  related  to
      paragraph 190 of the policy:

           "Secondly, I  do  not  consider  there  to  be  any  unfairness,
           certainly not such as to be irrational, in  circumstances  where
           fair notice was given to  everyone  concerned,  including  these
           Appellants, that the regime which would apply would  be  exactly
           the one which was applied to them. This  was  made  particularly
           clear in para.190 of the guidance, which I have quoted earlier."

27.   The notice given in the policy was the same as the  one  that  applied
      to her and the appellants in Pathan & Islam i.e. that  the  respondent
      can suspend or revoke a Tier 2 sponsor licence at any time and that an
      application  will  be  refused  if  the  CoS  has  been  withdrawn  or
      cancelled. Mr Ijezie was unable to point to any authority  to  suggest
      that the respondent  had  a  duty  to  inform  the  applicant  of  the
      suspension of the licence just because the application was made before
      the licence was suspended. The point relating to paragraph 261 of  the
      policy was considered and rejected  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  for  the
      reasons given at [37] of the decision in Kum.

           "The fact that paragraph 261 of the Tier 2 Policy Guidance makes
           it clear that Tier 2 applications submitted while the  sponsor's
           licence has  been  suspended  will  not  be  considered,  and  a
           decision will not be made until the suspension ends does not, in
           my view, entail that a decision on an application made prior  to
           suspension can or will not be made similarly when the suspension
           ends.  The  specific  provision  made  in  the  case  where  the
           application is made after suspension is made for the  particular
           reasons relevant to that situation. It does not follow  that  it
           is not appropriately equally for the decision in a case such  as
           the instant one to be made when it was in this case."

28.   The circumstances of this case do not bear close  resemblance  to  the
      unusual circumstances in Pirta. The applicant was an overstayer  while
      the application for leave to remain was pending. Mr  Pirta  still  had
      several months of existing leave remaining while the  application  was
      pending and could have benefited from  the  curtailment  policy  if  a
      prompt decision was made  in  line  with  the  premium  he  paid.  The
      additional feature, absent in this case, was  that  the  Secretary  of
      State wrote to Mr Pirta on two occasions, but having done  so,  failed
      to explain the reason for the delay.

29.   In this case the respondent agreed to reconsider  the  application  by
      way of the consent order approved on 17/03/16 but it cannot be assumed
      that leave to remain would have been granted even if the decision  had
      been made before the sponsor licence was suspended or revoked.  Having
      agreed to reconsider the application a fresh decision was made  within
      the three-month period agreed  in  the  order.  It  was  open  to  the
      respondent to rely on the revocation  of  the  sponsor  licence  as  a
      reason for refusal if, by that time, the  CoS  was  no  longer  valid.
      There was no undue delay.

30.   When properly analysed, the circumstances of  this  case  bear  closer
      resemblance those in Islam. Like this  applicant,  Mr  Islam  made  an
      application for leave to remain within the 28-day grace period allowed
      by the Secretary of State for overstayers.  Like  this  applicant,  Mr
      Islam was an overstayer while the application was pending. Even if the
      applicant had been notified of the suspension  or  revocation  of  the
      licence in advance she did not have extant leave and  would  not  have
      benefited from the 60-day Tier 2 curtailment policy (paragraph 242-246
      of the  guidance).  The  decision  in  Pathan  makes  clear  that  the
      respondent's  policy  not  to  apply  the  same  60-day  grace  period
      (distinct from curtailment) given to the Tier 4  students  to  Tier  2
      applicants is lawful. Like this applicant, the Tier 2 sponsor  licence
      was revoked without separate notice to Mr Islam while the  application
      was pending. The Tier 2 policy made clear  that  a  licence  could  be
      suspended or revoked at any time and the consequence would be that  an
      application for leave to remain would be refused. Like this applicant,
      Mr Islam's application for leave  to  remain  was  refused  after  the
      sponsor licence was revoked.

31.   In Pathan the Court of Appeal made clear  that  there  is  a  rational
      basis for the distinction drawn by  the  Secretary  of  State  between
      cases where a person has his or her  leave  to  remain  curtailed  and
      cases where a person does not have extant leave. The Court  of  Appeal
      also noted that if a person wishes to obtain a new Tier 2 sponsor,  it
      is open to them to return to their country of  origin  and  apply  for
      entry clearance from overseas. Even though  the  sponsor  licence  was
      revoked as long ago as June 2016 the applicant has chosen to remain in
      the UK pursuing this application well  beyond  any  grace  period  she
      wrongly hoped to gain, which in any event, was not provided for  under
      the policy. Because she did not have extant leave to remain she  could
      not have hoped to benefit from the curtailment provisions either.

32.   The applicant may feel that the procedure was 'unfair' in the  general
      sense of the  word,  but  the  procedure  followed  for  refusing  the
      application  for  leave  to  remain  did  not  elevate  any  perceived
      unfairness to a level whereby it became 'procedurally  unfair'  within
      the legal meaning  of  the  phrase  given  the  strict  terms  of  the
      immigration rules, which require a valid  CoS,  and  the  respondent's
      lawful policy relating to Tier 2 migrants.

33.   For the reasons given above, I refuse the application and  the  relief
      sought.

                 [pic]
Signed:
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

Dated:               18 March 2019



                                                               JR/11244/2016


                           Upper Tribunal
           Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review
                               Decision Notice







             The Queen on the application of SHAZIA MUNAWAR KHAN
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


___________________________________________________________________________

                                    ORDER
___________________________________________________________________________

UPON HEARING from Mr C. Ijezie, on  behalf  of  the  applicant,  and  Mr  L.
Glenister, on behalf of the respondent at a hearing on 05/03/19.

AND UPON judgment being handed down on 18/03/19.

IT IS ORDERED:

Decision: application refused

1.    The application for judicial review is refused.

2.    No relief is granted.

Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

3.    The grounds set out a series of disagreements with the Upper  Tribunal
      decision without particularising any arguable errors of law that would
      justify granting permission to appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal.  The
      cases of Doody, Fayed, Thakur and  Pathan  &  Islam  set  out  general
      principles of procedural fairness. The Upper Tribunal considered those
      general principles. The Court  of  Appeal  in  Pathan  considered  the
      situation applicable to Tier 2 applicants, such as  the  applicant  in
      this  case  but  concluded  that   the   respondent's   approach   was
      procedurally fair. The Upper Tribunal gave adequate reasons to explain
      why the facts of this case are similar to Islam.

4.     Permission  to  appeal  to  the   Court   of   Appeal   is   refused.


Costs

5.    The applicant  will  pay  the  respondent's  reasonable  costs  to  be
      assessed if not agreed.


                    [pic]
      Signed:
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan


      Dated:          18 March 2019




Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3.


