

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                               JR/11954/2015

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                            13 December 2016


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE rimington

                                   Between

                              waqar ahmed butt
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr J Dhanji, instructed by ATM Law Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                         APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


JUDGE riMINGTON:  This is the applicant's claim for judicial review  of  the
    respondent's  decision  of  6  July  2015  to  reject  as  invalid  his
    application for leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) Student.

 1. The applicant is a national of Pakistan, born on 10 July  1986  and  he
    entered the United Kingdom on 8 October 2011  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student.  His leave was extended but subsequently and finally curtailed
    to expire on 15 May 2015 following  the  revocation  of  his  sponsor's
    licence.  He made his application for further leave to remain as a Tier
    4 (General) Student on 12 May 2015.

 2. His application was rejected by the Secretary of  State,  who  asserted
    the applicant failed to submit his biometric  data  in  line  with  the
    Immigration Rules and failed to respond to reminders.  His  application
    was rejected under paragraphs 34A and 34C of the Immigration Rules. The
    Secretary of State advanced that the rejection decision was sent to the
    same correspondence address as the biometric invitation letters.

 3. The applicant's position is that he did not receive any  correspondence
    including any reminders from the respondent until a letter dated 6 July
    2015,   which    was    sent    to    his    home    address    at    [
                   ]  by  recorded  delivery,  substantively  refusing  his
    application on the ground that it was invalid for failure to enrol  his
    biometric information within the required timescale.

 4. The respondent's position is that a biometric enrolment letter was sent
    to him on 22 May 2015 and that a biometric  enrolment  reminder  letter
    was sent to him on 6 June 2015.  Following the applicant's  failure  to
    enrol his biometric information the respondent rejected his application
    as invalid.

 5. The background to the current judicial review proceedings is  that  the
    application was first refused on the papers and  certified  as  totally
    without merit by Upper Tribunal Judge Storey.  He subsequently  granted
    permission on an application to the Court of Appeal.

 6. On 21 January 2016 Upper Tribunal Judge King noted that a search of the
    data file following a request of 17 August 2015 revealed that no record
    of such letters had been sent and placed the respondent  on  notice  to
    establish by evidence that such letters were indeed sent.

 7. The next occurrence is that Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor  concluded
    that the respondent's decision of  6  July  to  treat  the  applicant's
    application as invalid was arguably irrational given the information as
    evidence that must have been before her when the decision was made.

 8. It was agreed at the hearing before me that there was no actual dispute
    as to the relevant law and policy.

 9.  Under  Regulation  3  of  the   Immigration   Biometric   Registration
    Regulations 2008

         "Requirement to apply for a Biometric Immigration Document:

         3-(1)    A person subject to immigration control must apply for the
         issue of a biometric immigration document where he satisfies -

             (a)  One of the conditions in paragraph (2); and

             (b)  the condition in paragraph (3).

         (2)  The conditions are that the person makes  an  application  for
             limited leave to remain -

             (a)  Under one of the  categories  of  the  Immigration  Rules
                  specified in Regulation 4; or

             (b)  As a dependant of a person who is applying  at  the  same
                  time for limited  leave  to  remain  under  one  of  those
                  categories.

         (3)  The condition is that the person  makes  the  application  for
             limited leave to remain on the form specified for that purpose
             in accordance with the Immigration Rules."

 3. Paragraph 34C of the Immigraiton Rules, in summary,  provides  that  an
    application for leave to  remain  would  be  invalid  if,  among  other
    things, it does not comply with the Requirement in Paragraph  34A  (iv)
    such that if the application form and/or related guidance notes require
    the applicant to provide biometric information. Such  information  must
    be provided as specficied and further to 34(v) an appointment  for  the
    purposes must be made and must take place by the  dates  specificed  in
    any subsequent notification by the Secretary of State following receipt
    of the application.

 4. It was agreed that an applicant, such as in  the  present  case,  would
    need to apply for a Biometric Immigration Document and he would be sent
    a letter ("biometric entitlement notification letter") inviting him  to
    enrol his biometric information  at  a  participating  post  office  by
    taking the letter sent to him, which has a unique bar code, to the post
    office in  person.   This  is  set  out  in  the  respondent's  policy,
    Biometric Information: Enrolment - version 4.0 (published  on  7  April
    2015).

 5. The respondent's policy and instructions to caseworkers sets  out  that
    "if a person who is eligible to enrol their biometric information at  a
    post office does not attend the post office within fifteen days of  the
    date of their biometric information notification letter, you must  send
    them a "biometric appointment warning letter".

 6. If a person is sent a  rejection  warning  letter,  they  then  have  a
    further ten working days from the date of the warning letter  to  enrol
    at a post office.  This allows the Home Office to specify  the  process
    and the place where the  biometric  information  can  be  enrolled  and
    monitor the situation.  This is especially  important  when  applicants
    claim to have enrolled at a post office, but the Home Office  does  not
    have any record of this.

 7. The second policy Biometric information: case  working  -  version  4.0
    also published on 7 April 2015 - sets out the sanctions  which  can  be
    imposed on people who do not  comply  with  the  Biometric  Information
    Registration  Regulations  and  this  includes  the  rejection  of  the
    person's application for leave to remain in the UK and the  refusal  to
    issue a biometric immigration document.

 8. It was the applicant's case that  the  respondent  failed  to  properly
    follow her published  policy  guidance  and  failed  to  send  him  the
    biometric entitlement notification letter and second, having failed  to
    send him the biometric entitlement notification letter and  in  failing
    to send him the warning letter.

 9. In  the  grounds  of  application  it  was  noted  that  the  applicant
    acknowledged that it was preferable that judicial review was  not  used
    as a matter of deciding disputed facts.  That said, in the case of Trim
    and North Dorset District Council [2010] EWCA Civ 1446 at paragraph  24
    Carnwath LJ stated:

         "The need to resolve factual disputes does not often arise, because
         of the nature of most judicial review  proceedings.  But,  when  it
         does arise,  it  does  not  create  any  particular  conceptual  or
         procedural problems. The permission  stage  gives  the  court  full
         control of the proceedings. It may give  any  necessary  directions
         for the attendance of witnesses and cross-examinations."

10. In the detailed grounds of defence Mr Malik, on behalf of the Secretary
    of State,  submitted that the question as to whether the two letters in
    issue were actually sent to the applicant was not a question of law but
    a question of fact and judicial review proceedings were not appropriate
    to resolve factual disputes of this kind.  The Upper  Tribunal  in  its
    judicial review jurisdiction could only intervene if the  Secretary  of
    State had made a public law error.  The ultimate question for the Upper
    Tribunal in this judicial review claim was  whether  the  Secretary  of
    State on 6 July 2015 was entitled to form the  view  that  two  letters
    were sent to the applicant that he had not provided his biometrics  and
    to reject his application on that view.  In other words, the  Secretary
    of State's decision was open to challenge only  on  Wednesbury  grounds
    and  there  was  no  issue  of  precedent  fact  following  R  (on  the
    application of Giri) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2015] EWCA Civ 784.

11. At the hearing before me I was provided with the  case  of  R  (on  the
    application of) Westech  College  [2011]  EWHC  1484.   This  case,  at
    paragraph 27, reiterates the proper approach to disputed evidence on  a
    judicial review application  and  which  was  set  out  in  R  (on  the
    application of) McVey & Others v Secretary of State for  Health  [2010]
    EWHC 437 (Admin).  At paragraph 29 of McVey there was an acknowledgment
    by Mr Justice Silber of the case of Doherty v Birmingham  City  Council
    [2008] 3WLR 636 that "judicial review proceedings should be adjusted to
    enable issue of facts to be resolved" but the guiding principles are in
    fact set out at paragraph 35 of McVey:

         "35. In my view, the proper approach to disputed evidence is that:-

             (i)  the basic rule is  that  where  there  is  a  dispute  on
                  evidence in  judicial  review  application,  then  in  the
                  absence of cross-examination, the facts in the defendant's
                  evidence must be assumed to be correct;

             (ii) an exception to this rule arises where the documents show
                  that the defendant's evidence cannot be correct; and that

             (iii)    the proper  course  for  a  claimant  who  wishes  to
                  challenge the correctness of an important  aspect  of  the
                  defendant's evidence relating to a factual matter on which
                  the judge will have to make a critical factual finding  is
                  to  apply  to  cross-examine  the  maker  of  the  witness
                  statement on which the defendant relies."

12. I consider whether, on the  evidence,  the  Respondent  was  rationally
    entitled to draw the conclusions she did that the request and  reminder
    for biometric evidence was requested and sent.  The applicant with  his
    application for judicial review had submitted notes from  an  Integrity
    Search Detailed Report (ISDR) created on  12  October  2015  which,  he
    stated,  showed  that  the  applicant  did  not  receive  a   biometric
    entitlement notification and warning letter.

13. In response to the direction of Upper Tribunal  Judge  King  a  witness
    statement  of  Joanne  Rich  of  Permanent  Migration  UK   Visas   and
    Immigration Service dated 15 September  2016  was  issued.   With  that
    statement was produced an Application Dispatch Requests print-out.

14. Ms Rich explained in her statement the following:

         "3.  A Biometric Enrolment Letter is auto-generated by  the  action
             of Fujitsu scanning the mandatory documents onto the Integrity
             system.  A document reminder letter is generated  by  a  timer
             within ICW if the applicant fails  to  provide  the  mandatory
             documents within the required timescale.

         4.   Once an applicant provides all required  mandatory  documents,
             the Integrity system then auto-generates a Biometric Enrolment
             Letter.  If the applicant fails to enrol within  the  required
             timescales,  the  ICW  system   auto-generates   a   Biometric
             Enrolment Reminder letter.

         5.   When the letters are auto-generated,  they  are  sent  to  the
             Fujitsu print queues, Fujitsu staff  print  off  the  letters,
             place them in an envelope and send to the applicant.  As these
             are automated processes, no manual notes are placed on the ICW
             system.

         6.   In October 2015,  I  was  asked  to  provide  confirmation  of
             despatch of the above letters to the applicant in  this  case.
             Fujitsu, the Document  Centre  Service  Provider,  provided  a
             print out of the Application Dispatch Requests  made  on  this
             case.  (See attached Application Dispatch Request Printout).

         7.   The printout shows all despatch requests submitted on ICW.   A
             Despatch request, is a request to print a  letter  within  the
             ICW system.  The earliest despatch request  is  shown  at  the
             bottom of the page.

         8.   In this case, to clarify -

                . The Document Reminder letter was sent on 21/5/2015

                . The Biometric Enrolment Letter was sent on the 26/05/2015

                . The  Biometric  Enrolment  Reminder  Letter  was  sent  on
                  08/06/2015

         9.   The status of each of the despatches is showing as  'Success'.
             If the despatch task had failed, the status would then show as
             'Fail'.

         10.        The       letters       were       despatched        to[
                ].  This is the address  the  applicant  provided  on  this
             application."

15. There had been an application to the Upper Tribunal in order to  cross-
    examine Ms Joanne Rich  but  that  application  was  refused  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McGeachy on 2nd November 2016.

16. I considered whether there should be a departure from  the  basic  rule
    that where there is a  dispute  on  the  evidence  in  judicial  review
    applications, in the absence of cross-examination  of  the  facts,  and
    which was the case here, the defendant's evidence must be assumed to be
    correct or whether an exception to this Rule arose.   Did the documents
    show that the Respondent's evidence cannot be correct?

17. On close analysis of the documentation I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
    documents show that the defendant's evidence cannot be correct.  Before
    I proceed on this particular point I note that the application made  to
    cross-examine Ms Rich was not made on the basis of her credibility  and
    not even made on the basis of the unreliability of her evidence, merely
    that there would appear to be lacunae in the evidence such that she had
    not shown that any document was sent, merely  that  there  had  been  a
    dispatch request.

18. I turn to whether the documents show the evidence  cannot  be  correct.
    It would appear that the witness statement of Ms Rich  cross-references
    with her Application Dispatch Request but also the events  report  from
    the Integrity Search Detailed Report (ISDR) for  this  applicant  which
    was generated on 12th October 2015.  This is a print out of the  record
    of activity in relation to the Applicant and kept by the  Secretary  of
    State.    As Mr Malik pointed out on this document on 22 May 2015 under
    'Event group' there was listed an "ECO task" and next  to  it,  on  the
    same line, a note "Generate Bio Enrolment Letter" on 22 May 2015.  This
    was the first letter the  Applicant  disputed  that  he  had  received.
    Similarly on 6th June 2015 under 'Event group' there was listed an "ECO
    task" and next to it, on the same line, a note  "Send  Biometric  Enrol
    Reminder" on 6th June 2015. This was the second  letter  the  Applicant
    disputed that he had received. Similarly, under "event group" there was
    listed "ECO task" under  "event type" and next to it there  was  listed
    "case outcome" and under "event outcome" there was listed "reject  ICW"
    next to the date of 6 July 2015.   That  was  followed  by  a  dispatch
    request on 7 July 2015 which the Applicant  acknowledges  he  received.
    Nor does the Applicant  dispute  he  received  the  very  first  letter
    dispatched on 21st May 2015.

19. The  'Application  Dispatch  Requests'  (ADR)  report  was  a  separate
    printout and which listed all  the  Dispatch  requests  that  had  been
    received  in  the  Document  Centre  in  Netherton.   The  process  was
    explained in the witness statement of Ms Rich cited above and  who  was
    the Operations Manager until the shutdown of the  ICW  in  March  2016.
    The ADR records requests to print letters within the ICW  system.   The
    ADR showed that the number of Dispatch requests was  4.   The  earliest
    dispatch request is shown at the bottom of the page  on  the  ADR.   To
    clarify, the dispatch is not necessarily the date of sending out of the
    letter but seemingly the request to print such a letter and which  goes
    to a print queue. The ADR does show the  receipt  of  the  requests  to
    generate letters.   Mr Malik explained that  the  ADR  showed  that  in
    response to the "Generate Bio Enrolment Letter" on 22nd May 2015 on the
    ISDR, there was a letter generated on 26 May 2015 with status "success"
    next to it.   In response to the ECO task listed on 6  June  2015,  and
    the "send biometric enrol reminder" on 6 June 2015 on the  ISDR,  there
    appeared on the ADR a dispatch request to print on  8  June  2015  once
    again with "success" next to it.  I do note that there would appear  to
    be a time delay between the request on the ISDR and the printing of the
    letter on the ADR.

20. Mr Malik pointed out that the applicant had received the  letter  of  7
    July 2015 under the similar system and indeed of key importance is that
    the event record on the ISDR for the applicant, and which reflected the
    records before the Secretary of State, identified a note that there had
    indeed been generated a Bio Enrolment Letter and a Biometric  Enrolment
    Reminder.  Nor does the Applicant dispute he received  the  very  first
    letter dispatched on 21st May 2015 in response to the ISDR  event  type
    'send supporting docs reminder' on 20th May 2016.

21. There was nothing in  the  witness  statement  which  showed  that  the
    Respondent's evidence was not correct and even though there had been an
    application to cross-examine the witness, as I have identified already,
    that would appear to have been  in  relation  to  the  lacunae  in  her
    evidence rather than to any challenge to its reliability.

22. Mr Dhanji submitted that  although  the  Application  Dispatch  Request
    showed that the application had been printed, this did not mean it  had
    been sent.  That is the applicant's contention,  not  the  respondent's
    contention and there is no dispute that the letter  dated  6  July  (or
    indeed the very first letter) was received  and  bar  further  specific
    evidence to show the Respondent's evidence is not  correct,  which  was
    not before me, I consider that the Secretary of State was  entitled  to
    conclude that  the  letters  requested  had  indeed  been  printed  and
    dispatched in line with the other letters.

23. There was in relation to the witness statement a further  challenge  by
    Mr Dhanji on the basis that at paragraph 5 of Ms Rich's  statement  she
    commented that "no manual notes are placed on  the  ICW  system".   The
    case record sheet of the applicant on the GCID notes did not record the
    letters generated and as noted in the ISDR.  Ms Rich merely states that
    as the letters are auto-generated they are sent to Fujitsu print queues
    and Fujitsu staff print off the letters, placing them in envelopes  and
    sending  them  to  the  applicants.   She  said  these  were  automatic
    processes and no manual notes  are  placed  on  the  ICW  system.   She
    refers, however, to the ICW system, not to the GCID case record  sheet.
    It is true to say that there is no mention of the respondent's  letters
    dated 22 May 2015 and 6 June 2015  on  the  GCID  notes  but  there  is
    clearly reference on the ISDR.

24. The second point made by the applicant is that he supplied other minute
    notes from another entirely separate applicant showing  the  GCID  case
    record sheets which showed Biometric request and reminder letters being
    sent out.  Mr Malik's objection to this document was on the basis  that
    this had formed part of an application filed with a  witness  statement
    of 6 December 2016 for which there was no charged application and  this
    should be rejected by the Tribunal.   Even  if  this  application  were
    accepted, which  I  do  not  because  it  has  not  complied  with  the
    procedural formalities required by  the  Tribunal  in  judicial  review
    proceedings, there was no indication of whether this document could  be
    verified, the circumstances of this file copy or to whom it related.

25. Mr Dhanji submitted that Ms Rich had needed to specifically  request  a
    dispatch note and thus this record  would  not  have  been  before  the
    Secretary of State when making her  decision.   That  submission  would
    appear to ignore the Integrity Search document which  is  separate  and
    which does identify and record the generation of letters  and  although
    printed later accurately reflects the refusal letter  which  identifies
    the disputed letters.

26. In S and Airedale NHS Trust [2002] EWHC 1780 (Admin) Stanley Burnton  J
    as he then was, espoused the principle at  paragraph  19  which  is  to
    "adhere to the general rule except where the contemporaneous  documents
    dictate that a witness statement must be incorrect".

27. It must be the case that the basic rule  should  be  followed  in  this
    instance; first  the  documents  do  not  show  that  the  Respondent's
    evidence cannot be correct and further  there  is  the  contemporaneous
    record (albeit that it was printed off at a later date) which  supports
    the contention that the two letters in dispute  were  indeed  generated
    and sent.   The  evidence  goes  no  way  to  undermining  the  witness
    statement of Mr Joanne Rich.  In her report, the letters  of  22nd  May
    and 6th June 2015 would appear to have been treated in exactly the same
    manner as the letters in relation to which there is no  dispute  as  to
    their postage and receipt.

28. I therefore revert to the basic rule is that where there is  a  dispute
    on the evidence the fact in the Respondent's evidence must  be  assumed
    to be correct and therefore that the Secretary of State was entitled to
    proceed on the evidence which was available to her which was that a Bio
    Enrolment Letter had been generated  and  sent  and  that  a  Biometric
    Enrolment Reminder had also been sent.

29. In the circumstances it was open to the Secretary of State to  conclude
    that the applicant had been notified twice of the requirement to  enrol
    his biometrics and that he had failed to act on those notifications and
    his application was invalid.  The Secretary of State's decision  cannot
    be impugned on public law principles and I therefore refuse  the  claim
    for judicial review.

30. The applicant will pay the respondent's  costs  of  these  proceedings,
    assessed at �4000.

31. Either party may apply in writing for permission to appeal to the Court
    of Appeal, any such application to be received not later than noon on 3
    March 2017. In default, I refuse permission to appeal because I am  not
    satisfied that there is any error of law in the judgment I have given.


                  Helen Rimington
     Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

Dated:   24 February 2017
