
IAC-MOC- MS

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                          EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN

                                                               JR/11513/2014


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                             03 January 2019


                                  The QUEEN
                            ON The application OF
                           HUSSEIN IBRAHIM HASSAN
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR


                               - - - - - - - -

UPON HEARING FROM

The Applicant in person (with the assistance of a Court approved
interpreter)

Mr W Hansen, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    JUDGE O'CONNOR:

Introduction


 1. The Applicant, a national of Syria, brings challenge by way of judicial
    review to the respondent's decision of the 5  September  2014  refusing
    his application  for  asylum  and  certifying  the  claim  pursuant  to
    Schedule 3, Part 2,  paragraph  3(2)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    (Treatment  of  Claimants)  etc  Act  2004  i.e.  certifying  that  the
    applicant is not a national of Bulgaria and that it is safe  to  return
    the applicant to Bulgaria, a country which is in the EU  and  in  which
    the applicant previously resided.  Challenge is  also  brought  to  the
    consequential decision of 11 September 2014, setting directions for the
    applicant's removal to Bulgaria.

 2. These decisions were made pursuant to  the  framework  set  out  in  EU
    regulation No 604/2013 - known  as  "Dublin  III".   Broadly  speaking,
    Dublin III regulates as between EU Member States which  state  has  the
    obligation to  determine  an  applicant's  protection  claim.   It  has
    nothing to do with the merits of the underline asylum application,  but
    simply which state must decide that application.

 3. On 18 September 2014, the  applicant's  representatives  made  a  human
    rights claim on the applicant's behalf. This claim  was  refused  in  a
    decision of 22 September  2014  and  certified  as  clearly  unfounded.
    Removal was deferred whilst this application was considered.

Applicant's immigration history

 4. The applicant arrived in the UK on or around the  18  August  2014  and
    made an asylum application at this time.  The  respondent  subsequently
    undertook a screening interview and a  EURODAC  search  (a  fingerprint
    database held by European states), which revealed  that  the  applicant
    had been in Bulgaria on the 21  August  2013.  As  a  consequence,  the
    respondent sent a request to Bulgaria requesting that it determine  the
    applicant's asylum claim.

 5. The Bulgarian authorities  failed  to  respond  to  this  request,  the
    consequence of which - under Dublin III - is the deemed  acceptance  of
    responsibility by Bulgaria for consideration of the applicant's  asylum
    application.

Application for Judicial Review

 6. The basis of  the  pleaded  challenge  brought  by  the  applicant  was
    threefold:

          1) The fact that the applicant has sought asylum in the  UK  puts
             him at risk of  persecution  in  Syria.  Consequently,  he  is
             entitled to a residence card in the UK pursuant to Art  24  of
             the Qualification Directive. It  is,  therefore,  unlawful  to
             remove him to Bulgaria. Permission was  correctly  refused  on
             this ground, so I say no more about it.

          2) The detention conditions and conditions generally in  Bulgaria
             for asylum applicants are such that they breach Article  3  of
             the European Convention of Human Rights and/or  Article  4  of
             the Charter of Fundamental Rights; and,

          3) The applicant would be unlawfully  detained  in  Bulgaria,  in
             breach of Article 5 of the European Convention of Human Rights
             and/or Article 6 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

 7. In a decision of 23 September 2015, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Allen  found
    Grounds 2 and 3 to be arguable.





Discussion

 8. As is clear from the chronology set out previously,  some  three  years
    and four months have passed since the grant of permission.  I have  not
    been told of any further applications made  by  the  applicant  to  the
    Secretary of State during that time. Of course, it is entirely a matter
    for the applicant whether he seeks to make such an application  in  the
    future.

 9. I am today hearing challenges  to  the  original  decisions  from  2014
    which, whilst  of  some  vintage,  nevertheless  remain  the  operative
    decisions for the purpose of this application for judicial review.   As
    Mr Hansen properly stated during the course  of  his  submissions,  any
    further points the applicant wishes to  take  and  further  matters  he
    wishes to raise as a consequence of the four or so years  that  he  has
    spent in the United Kingdom since the 2014 decisions, need to be  taken
    up with the Secretary of State by way of representations. He  can  make
    such representations at any point in time and the  Secretary  of  State
    will consider them.

10. The delay in the Upper Tribunal deciding this case is a consequence  of
    ongoing  litigation  of  similar  issues  elsewhere.   This  claim  was
    initially stayed by consent to await a decision of the High Court in  a
    case called Khaled & Others v The Secretary  for  the  Home  Department
    [2016] EWHC 857. In Khaled the High Court gave  consideration,  on  the
    basis of up-to-date  evidence,  to  the  circumstances  prevailing  for
    asylum seekers was in Bulgaria.  The High Court's judgment  was  issued
    on 18 April 2016, the claimants' claims being dismissed.

11. It is prudent at this stage to summarise the reasoning and  conclusions
    in Khaled:

          a) There is no basis upon which it could  properly  be  concluded
             that wholesale suspension of the returns of asylum seekers  to
             Bulgaria is required;

          b)  Reception  capacity  for  asylum  seekers  in  Bulgaria   has
             significantly  increased  and  improvements  are  in  hand.  A
             substantial sum of money has been allocated  to  Bulgaria  for
             this purpose by the European Commission;

          c) Conditions in reception centres in Bulgaria have significantly
             improved and medical care, legal assistance and warm food  are
             now provided;

          d) There  have  been  improvements  in  the  asylum  registration
             process. Asylum seekers  are  not  held  in  detention  for  a
             significant length of time and steps have been  taken  by  the
             authorities to counter xenophobic incidents. There  have  been
             no reports of ill treatment of asylum seekers;

          e) There are practices in place for the treatment  of  vulnerable
             individuals. I observe that three of the applicants in  Khaled
             were vulnerable individuals - having been  tortured  in  their
             home countries.

          f) There is no substance in the complaints made about the  asylum
             processing system Bulgaria;

          g) Interpreters  are  available  for  the  assistance  of  asylum
             seekers in Bulgaria; and,

          h) The situation in Bulgaria comes nowhere  near  establishing  a
             breach of the Human Rights Convention and no Tribunal properly
             directing itself could  conclude  that  the  claimants'  human
             rights would be breached by removal to Bulgaria;

12. The claimants in Khaled subsequently appealed to the Court  of  Appeal.
    As a consequence, the instant applicant's case was once again stayed by
    consent, because it was thought that the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision
    would be of some importance to the determination of the instant  claim.
    The Court of Appeal's decision was handed down on 23 November 2017  and
    is referenced and HK (Iraq) & Others [2017] EWCA Civ 1871 - the  appeal
    being dismissed with the reasoning of the High Court  in  Khaled  being
    affirmed.

13. Returning to the instant case, the applicant submits  that  during  his
    time in Bulgaria in 2013 he was detained and ill-treated  by  both  the
    authorities and other individuals. He likened the Bulgarian  regime  to
    the regime in Syria.  The  applicant  referred  to  his  mental  health
    issues, which are documented in a medical report of the 4  August  2015
    and a Rule 35 Report from the detention centre. I have  had  regard  to
    this evidence. The applicant further asserts that he would not  receive
    protection in Bulgaria.

14. Of course, it is  significant  that,  even  if  true,  the  applicant's
    recollections about the circumstances in Bulgaria relate to  2013.  The
    information  the  court  considered  in  Khaled  was  more  recent  and
    identified improvements in the situation  in  Bulgaria  which  led  the
    court to conclude as it did. I have no additional  evidence  before  me
    and thus I treat the findings made in Khaled as being  of  significance
    in my consideration of the instant claim.

15. In any event, I make the following observations about  the  information
    provided by the applicant. In his asylum screening interview, which the
    applicant has described as unfair, the applicant indicated that he  had
    been arrested at the border in  Bulgaria,  detained  for  22  days  and
    thereafter deported to Turkey.  Whilst he asserts therein that Bulgaria
    does not care about human rights, he makes no allegations therein  that
    he  was  personally  tortured  or  ill-treated.   In  addition,  on  15
    September 2014 the applicant's solicitors wrote  to  the  Helen  Bamber
    Foundation requesting a medical report. In that letter it is said  that
    the applicant was left in Bulgaria with no food and accommodation,  and
    that he had to sleep on the streets and under  bridges.  There  was  no
    mention therein of the applicant having been detained and  deported.  A
    further version of the applicant's claimed circumstances in Bulgaria is
    to be found in the medical report of Dr Stevens dated 4 August 2015. In
    that report it is said that the applicant was detained for three  weeks
    in Bulgaria, but there was no mention of the applicant having been ill-
    treated whilst in detention. It is also  said  that  upon  release  the
    applicant stayed with a Syrian man on a farm near the border. There  is
    no mention of applicant having lived on the streets or under a bridge.

16. As I say, the truth of the circumstances that the  applicant  faced  in
    Bulgaria in the past is of little relevance in  my  assessment  of  the
    circumstances that would prevail if the applicant were to  be  returned
    to Bulgaria. This is ostensibly  because  the  situation  has  improved
    since 2013 - as to which see Khaled.

17. What  remains  to  be  considered  is  whether  there  is  anything  in
    individual facts of the applicant's case that should lead me to  depart
    from the general findings in Khaled. In my conclusion there is nothing,
    even when the facts are taken at their  highest,  which  differentiates
    this case from the claimants' cases in Khaled. In particular, I observe
    that in Khaled a number of the applicants were vulnerable. Even  if  it
    is  accepted  that  the  applicant  has  mental   health   difficulties
    (including depression), the court in Khaled  observed  that  there  are
    facilities available in Bulgaria for vulnerable asylum seekers and that
    the asylum system there is such that  it  does  not  breach  the  Human
    Rights Convention or the Charter of Fundamental Rights.

18. As such, on the  information  available  to  me  I  come  to  the  same
    conclusion as the High Court in Khaled and the Court of Appeal  in  HK,
    for ostensibly the same reasons as given by those  courts.  Considering
    the circumstances of  this  case  at  their  most  beneficial  for  the
    applicant,  I  find  that  the  applicant  does  not  come   close   to
    establishing that his return to Bulgaria would expose him to  a  breach
    of Article 3 or 5  of  the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights  or
    Articles 4 or 6 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights.  I  further  find
    that there is no prospect of a Tribunal properly  directing  itself  to
    all the evidence coming to a  different  conclusion.   Consequently,  I
    conclude the certifications  in  issue  in  this  application  are  not
    irrational or otherwise unlawful.

19. There is one further issue relied upon by the applicant for  the  first
    time today, that being the fact of his claimed departure from  Bulgaria
    to Turkey and the fact that he remained in Turkey for  over  10  months
    prior to making his way to the UK.  This is not a ground pleaded by the
    applicant previously in this application for judicial review,  and  the
    Secretary of State objections to the grounds being  amended  so  as  to
    include this point.

20. I have considered whether it is in the interests of  justice  to  allow
    the applicant to amend his grounds to incorporate a  challenge  brought
    on the aforementioned basis and conclude that it is not.

21. I reach my conclusion for the following reasons.  First, the  applicant
    lodged this judicial review as long ago as 2014.  He  has,  since  that
    time, had  ample  opportunity  to  raise  this  ground.   He  has  been
    represented by experienced immigration solicitors,  Duncan  Lewis,  for
    the majority of the time he has been in  the  UK  and  his  grounds  of
    application for judicial review were  drafted  by  experience  counsel.
    Furthermore, the Secretary of State wrote to the applicant in  February
    2018 inviting him to amend his grounds or withdraw his  application  in
    light of the decisions of Khaled and HK & Others. If there was  a  time
    to amend the grounds that was it. Duncan Lewis were on record  at  that
    time. In addition, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek  making  an  order
    (sealed on the 18 July 2018) providing the applicant with further  time
    to respond to the SSHD's letter i.e. providing the applicant  with  yet
    further  opportunity  to  amend  his  grounds.  He  did  not   do   so.
    Furthermore, at an  earlier  hearing  I  also  gave  the  applicant  an
    additional seven days within which to amend his grounds. This order was
    reduced to writing and sent out to the parties on  24  September  2018.
    There was no response.

22. In my conclusion, given the numerous opportunities  the  applicant  has
    had to  amend  his  grounds,  the  fact  that  he  was  represented  by
    experienced immigration solicitors for over  four  years  during  these
    proceedings and that his grounds were originally drafted by experienced
    counsel, and the late hour of  the  current  application  leads  me  to
    conclude that it is not in the interests of justice to  admit  the  new
    ground of challenge.

23. For all these reasons, I refuse this application for judicial review. I
    reiterate  once  again  though  that   if   the   applicant   has   any
    representations he wishes to make as a consequence  of  the  length  of
    time he has been in the United Kingdom, the appropriate  course  is  to
    make those representations to the Secretary of State.

                                    ORDER

    1. The application for judicial review is dismissed.

    2. The application for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is
       refused.

    3. The applicant must pay the respondent's costs in a sum to be
       assessed if not agreed, save that the applicant shall not be liable
       to those costs accrued by the respondent at a time when he (the
       applicant) had costs protection pursuant to s26 of LASPO 2012, or
       otherwise.

    4. The applicant's publicly funded costs shall be the subject of
       detailed assessment.

   [pic]

   Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor
