























                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                               JR/11073/2016

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice






                       The Queen on the application of

                                KHAWAR NIAZI


                                                         Applicant
                                      v


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                     Respondent


                                  Before

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 4 May 2017



                  Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr. D. Bazini of  counsel,  instructed  by  Jain
Solicitors, on behalf of the  Applicant,  and  Mr.  J.  Parker  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on 4 May 2017.

Decision: The application for judicial review is refused.




THE HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

1.    The Applicant, who was born on  23  August  1983,  is  a  national  of
    Pakistan. He was granted leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom,  as  a
    student, on 18 January 2009 on a visa which was to expire on  31  March
    2011. He was subsequently granted leave to remain as  a  Tier  1  (Post
    Study) Migrant until 18 May 2013 and on 21 June  2013  he  was  granted
    leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant until 21 June  2016.
    On that same day, he applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  in  this
    capacity.

2.    This application was refused on 9 August 2016 on  the  basis  that  he
    had not provided any evidence to confirm that  one  of  his  employees,
    KPS, was a settled worker.  The Applicant applied for an administrative
    review of this decision on 18 August 2016. He attached a copy of  KPS's
    Biometric  Residence  Permit  to  this   application.    However,   the
    Respondent maintained her  earlier  decision  in  a  letter,  dated  15
    September 2016.

3.    The Applicant's solicitors sent a pre-action  protocol  letter,  dated
    21 September 2016, on his behalf and the Respondent responded  to  this
    letter on 30  September  2016.  The  Applicant  lodged  his  claim  for
    judicial review on 11 October 2016 challenging the initial decision  to
    refuse him leave and the later decision to maintain this decision after
    an administrative review. The Respondent filed  her  acknowledgment  of
    service and summary grounds of  defence  on  24  November  2016.  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Rintoul granted permission on  5  January  2017  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that the Respondent had acted unlawfully  in
    failing properly to apply paragraph  245AA  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and/or the evidential flexibility policy in  relation  to  the  BRP  (a
    document issued by the Home Office) relating to the employee KPS.

4.     On  23  February  2017  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Jackson  granted  the
    Respondent an extension of time until 16  February  2017  to  file  her
    detailed grounds of defence. These grounds are dated 15 February 2017.

5.    The Respondent lodged her skeleton  argument  on  25  April  2017  and
    Applicant's counsel lodged his skeleton argument on 28 April 2017.

THE SUBSTANTIVE PERMISSION HEARING

6.     Both  the  Appellant  and  the  Respondent  had  filed   bundles   in
    preparation for the hearing. I heard  detailed  submissions  from  both
    counsel based on their  skeleton  arguments.  I  have  addressed  their
    submissions, where relevant, below and, when doing  so,  I  have  given
    detailed consideration to the totality of their submissions even when I
    have not referred to each word of their submissions.

MERITS OF THE CASE
Requirements of the Immigration Rules

7.    Paragraph 245DD of Part 6A of  the  Immigration  Rules  sets  out  the
    requirements for leave to remain as a Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant.
    The Respondent accepts that the Applicant met  the  majority  of  these
    requirements. However, his application for leave was refused because he
    had not met the requirement of paragraph 245DD(b), which provides  that
    "the applicant must have a minimum of 75 points under paragraphs 35  to
    53 of Appendix A".

8.    As the Applicant had  previously  been  granted  leave  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) Migrant, he had to meet the requirements of Table  5  of
    Appendix A and, in particular, he has to demonstrate, for the  purposes
    of proving his investment and business activity, that he had:

    "(a)   Established a new  business  or  businesses  that  has  or  have
         created the equivalent of at least  two  new  full  time  jobs  for
         persons settled in the UK, or
    (b)    Taken over or invested in an existing business or businesses and
         his services or investment have resulted in a net increase  in  the
         employment provided by  the  business  or  businesses  for  persons
         settled in the UK by creating the equivalent of at  least  two  new
         full time jobs".


9.    He also had to show that:

    "Where the applicant's last grant of entry clearance or leave to remain
    was a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) migrant, the jobs must have existed for  at
    least 12 months  of  the  period  for  which  the  previous  leave  was
    granted".


10.   Paragraph 46 of Appendix A also states that:

    "The specified  documents  in  paragraph  46-SD  must  be  provided  as
    evidence of any investment and business activity that took  place  when
    the applicant had leave as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant..."


11    Paragraph 46-SD states that:

    "(h)   if the applicant is required to score points  for  creating  the
    net increase in employment in Table 5..., he must provide the following
    information and specified documents:
         (iv)     documents which show the employee is a settled worker such
             as the biometric data page of a passport containing photograph
             and personal details of the employee, and where the worker  is
             an overseas national, a copy of any  UK  Government  stamp  or
             endorsement within the passport, or the employees  full  birth
             certificate, showing the name of at least one parent"

12.   Paragraph 39B of the Immigration Rules states that:

    "(a)   where the Rules state that specified documents must be provided,
    that means documents  specified  in  these  Rules  as  being  specified
    documents for the route under which the applicant is applying.  If  the
    specified documents are not provided, the applicant will not  meet  the
    requirement  for  which  the  specified  documents  are   required   as
    evidence".

13.   Paragraph 245AA of the Immigration Rules states that:

      "(a) Where Part 6A or appendices referred to in  Part  6A  state  that
    specified documents must be  provided,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
    Immigration Officer or Secretary of State for the Home Department  will
    only consider documents submitted after the application where they  are
    submitted in accordance with subparagraph (b);
    (b)    If the applicant has submitted specified documents in which:
         (i)      Some of the documents in a sequence have been omitted (for
             example, if one bank statement from a series is missing);
         (ii)     A document which is a wrong  format  (for  example,  if  a
             letter is not a letterhead paper as specified); or
         (iii)    A document is a copy and not an original document; or
         (iv)      A  document  does  not  contain  all  of  the   specified
             information;
    the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or Secretary of  State
    may contact the applicant or his representative in writing, and request
    the correct documents.
    (c)    Documents will not be requested where a specified  document  has
    not been submitted (for example  an  English  language  certificate  is
    missing) or where the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration  Officer  or
    Secretary of State does not anticipate that addressing the omission  or
    error referred to in subparagraph (b) will lead to a grant because  the
    application will be refused for other reasons"

The First Ground of Claim

14.   Counsel for the Applicant submitted that the  Applicant  had  complied
    with paragraphs 46-SD(h)(iv) and 39B as he  had  submitted  a  copy  of
    KPS's BRP when he made his application for  further  leave  to  remain.
    Both counsel agreed that when considering whether this was the case,  I
    should consider all the relevant evidence before me and decide  whether
    the BRP had  been  submitted,  as  claimed,  applying  the  balance  of
    probabilities as the standard of proof. It was also agreed that I could
    take into account the Applicant's witness statement, dated  10  October
    2016, even though this post-dated the initial decision under challenge.
    At paragraph 5 of his witness statement, the Applicant submitted that a
    copy of this BRP was included in the  application  pack  to  prove  the
    required job creation in the UK. (The Applicant has not provided a copy
    of this application pack or any copy of any list of contents  for  this
    pack.)

15.   Counsel for the Applicant submitted that the Respondent had failed  to
    establish that she had not merely misplaced KPS's BRP and had failed to
    provide any witness statement to explain the process  of  dealing  with
    applications from the moment they were  received  at  the  Home  Office
    until the  point  at  which  the  application  and  the  evidence  were
    considered by the relevant case worker.


16.   I accept that  there  is  no  such  witness  statement  but  there  is
    evidence of at least a part of  the  application  process.   The  first
    relevant evidence is the copy of the Applicant's application form.  The
    Summary Sheet at Section 7 of the form,  which  was  completed  by  the
    Applicant himself, indicates that he submitted two  passports  and  one
    BRP or travel document with his application. His witness  statement  is
    silent as to which documents he was referring to in this section but it
    is clear from sections C4, C5 and C6 of his application  form  that  he
    also submitted two passports and a BRP in his own name with  the  form.
    Therefore the Summary Sheet may be referring to these documents  or  it
    may refer to the documents relating to three of  the  Applicant's  four
    employees. As there was no clarity on this point I  have  not  accorded
    any weight to the contents of Section 7  when  applying  a  balance  of
    probabilities to the totality of the evidence.

17.   The Respondent relies on a copy of a GCID - Case Record Sheet. Page  3
    states that only two passports and one residence permit were  submitted
    with the application.  Then at pages 5 & 6 it is noted that there was a
    passport for the Applicant's employee, IBH, a BRP for his employee, AA,
    and an identity card for his EEA employee, NZ.

18.   Counsel for the Applicant submitted that the notes at  the  bottom  of
    page 6 of the GCID showed that a BRP was  also  provided  for  KPS  and
    submitted that the notes from the heading "EMPLOYEE 4" to the bottom of
    the page all refer to information about KPS.  In response, counsel  for
    the Respondent submitted that even though the content in this  part  of
    the page formed one continuous  bloc  of  text,  it  was  necessary  to
    compare the first 13 lines under the heading EMPLOYEE 4 with the  first
    13 lines under the headings, EMPLOYEE 1, EMPLOYEE 2, AND EMPLOYEE 3. In
    these lines identical questions were  posed  about  whether  sufficient
    evidence had been submitted in relation to each individual employees to
    indicate that they individually met the requirements  of  the  relevant
    Immigration Rules. He then submitted that the last 8 lines  on  page  6
    represented an assessment whether the evidence  relating  to  all  four
    employees established that the Applicant had created the equivalent  of
    two full-time jobs  lasting  the  equivalent  of  12  months.  He  also
    submitted that it was in this general context that  there  was  further
    reference to KPS and confirmed that there was  no  settlement  evidence
    for her. A plain and ordinary reading of page 6 of  the  GCID  supports
    the argument put forward by counsel for the Respondent and I find  that
    there is nothing in the notes to suggest that there was a BRP  for  KPS
    when the application was being considered.

19.   Counsel for the Applicant  also  submitted  that  the  Respondent  may
    simply have mislaid the  BRP  for  KPS  because  the  manner  in  which
    evidence was recorded by the Respondent was  unreliable.  He  submitted
    that at page 3 of the decision it is noted that a passport  and  a  BRP
    had been received for employee, AA, but at page 5 of the  GCID  only  a
    BRP  is  mentioned.  But  this  does  not   necessarily   suggest   any
    discrepancy. The fact that AA was said to be settled and had a BRP  was
    not inconsistent with her also having a passport as a foreign  national
    and on page 5 of the GCID the question the case worker was  asking  his
    or herself was whether there was evidence of AA being a settled person.
    The evidence of her being settled would be her BRP not any passport she
    may also have. Furthermore, the Applicant has not challenged  the  fact
    that both a passport and a BRP were submitted for AA.

20.   In page 2 of the decision, dated 15  September  2016,  the  Respondent
    also confirmed  that  the  documents  submitted  with  the  Applicant's
    application form had been double-checked and they did not contain a BRP
    for KPS. This is not a determinative piece of evidence but needs to  be
    given some weight at least in the overall balancing exercise.

21.   Counsel for the Applicant relied on  the  fact  that  inter  alia  the
    Applicant  had  previously  complied  with  the  requirements  of   the
    Immigration Rules and had experience of making applications  for  leave
    and that he was able  to  provide  the  BRP  when  he  applied  for  an
    administrative review. However, this does not preclude the  possibility
    that he simply failed to include a BRP for KPS with his application  or
    that he did not have it to hand when he made his initial application.

22.   In his skeleton argument, the Applicant also relies  on  paragraph  24
    of SH (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 426 but the reference to the benefit  of  the  doubt  in  this
    paragraph was made in the context of an analysis of the application  of
    the evidential flexibility policy and not a freestanding assessment  of
    compliance with the Immigration Rules.

23.   Taking all of this evidence into account and  applying  a  balance  of
    probabilities to the totality of the evidence referred to above I  find
    that the Applicant has not established that he submitted a BRP for  KPS
    with his application form. As the BRP was a specified document for  the
    purposes of paragraphs 46SD(h) and 39B of the Application  Rules,  this
    meant that paragraph 245DD could not be met and the Applicant could not
    show that he had created two full-time jobs for settled  workers  which
    had existed for more than twelve months.

The Second ground of claim

24.   It was accepted that the missing BRP was a specified document for  the
    purposes of paragraphs 245DD and 39B of the Immigration Rules.  Counsel
    for the Applicant submitted that it was still the Applicant's case that
    paragraph 245AA required the Respondent to request further evidence  in
    relation to KPS. However, the evidence before me does not indicate that
    a missing specified document, such as a BRP,  amounted  to  a  document
    within a sequence, a document which was in the wrong format, a copy  as
    opposed to an original document or a document which did not contain all
    of the specified information. Furthermore. Paragraph  245AA(c)  clearly
    states that a  document  will  not  be  requested  under  (b)  where  a
    specified document has not been submitted.

25.   The  Applicant  also  submitted  that  the  decision  reached  by  the
    Respondent was unlawful as she had failed to follow her own  policy  on
    evidential flexibility. It is accepted that the Respondent is  required
    to act in accordance with her own published policies and  it  is  noted
    that in R (Lumba) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (JUSTICE
    intervening) [2011] UKSC 12, [2012] 1 AC 245 Lord Dyson found that:

    "35. The individual has a basic public law right to  have  his  or  her
    case considered under whatever policy the executive sees fit  to  adopt
    provided that the adopted policy is a lawful exercise of the discretion
    conferred by the statute."

26.   The policy, in place at  the  time  of  the  decision  to  refuse  the
    Applicant further  leave,  was  the  Points-basesd  system:  evidential
    flexibility guidance, Version 7, which was valid from 12  August  2014.
    As noted by counsel for the Applicant it does state, as does Version 1,
    that it provides guidance "about the use of evidential flexibility when
    an application has missing evidence". The policy also states at page  6
    of 13 that a case worker must only require  additional  information  in
    circumstances that would lead to the application being approved. In the
    current case, if the BRP for KPS had been  submitted  that  Applicant's
    application could have succeeded.

27.   However, the policy continues by stating that "the  case  worker  must
    only request additional evidence if he or  she  has  enough  reason  to
    believe that the information exists". Counsel for the Applicant has not
    taken me to any evidence which could suggest that  this  was  the  case
    apart from the fact that a general box was ticked  on  the  application
    form stating that evidence about  settlement  had  been  submitted.  No
    mention was made about evidence relating to KPS in  particular.  In  my
    view, this does not amount to sufficient reason to believe that the BRP
    existed.

28.   Version  7  also  states  that  the  facility  to  request  additional
    evidence:

      "is limited to cases where:

     - Documents (for example bank statements) are missing from a series
     - Photocopies of the required documentation have been received, or
     - A document is in a wrong format:
       'wrong format' covers documents which contain all of the substantive
       information required by the Immigration Rules but aren't laid out in
       the way described in the  rules.  For  example,  where  a  specified
       document should be submitted on letter headed paper".


29.   It was not submitted by counsel for the  Applicant  that  the  missing
    BRP fell within any of the categories listed in subparagraph (b).

30.   Counsel sought to rely on SH (Pakistan) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 426 and I  accept  that  the  Court  of
    Appeal refers to an extract from Version 7, as opposed to Version 1, of
    the policy in paragraphs 18 and 19 of its judgement. However, paragraph
    2 of the judgment clearly indicates that the Court  of  Appeal  it  was
    Version 1 of the policy which was in force at the relevant  time.  Also
    in paragraph 27 the Court of Appeal  explicitly  refers  to  Version  1
    being the appropriate guidance for the case  under  appeal.  Therefore,
    any mistake made in paragraphs 18 and 19 did not affect  its  essential
    reasoning.

31.   There are also important differences between Version 1  on  which  the
    Court of Appeal based its  judgment  and  Version  7.   In  the  former
    evidential flexibility could be  exercised  in  relation  to  "a  valid
    application".  But in Version  7  the  reference  is  to  "a  specified
    document". Version 7 also made it clear that  its  content  "supersedes
    all previous instructions and guidance on evidential flexibility". As a
    specified document had not been provided it was not possible  to  argue
    that evidential flexibility should have been applied.

32.   The Applicant also seeks to rely on page 3 of  13  which  states  that
    for an application decided on or after 1 October 2013,  caseworkers  do
    not have to write to an applicant about a specified document if it does
    not contain all of the specified information where it  is  possible  to
    get that information from:

     - The website of the appropriate regulatory body


33.   He further submits  that  the  Home  Office  is  such  an  appropriate
      regulatory body as it will have issued KPS with her BRP.

34.   However, the  plain  and  ordinary  reading  of  the  reference  to  a
      "specified document" not containing "all of the specified information"
      indicates that a document must have been submitted in the first  place
      and that the policy does not apply where a document (which is not part
      of a series) is simply missing.

The Third ground of claim

35.   The Applicant submitted that it was a breach of  Common  Law  fairness
    to refuse  the  Applicant's  application.  Counsel  for  the  Applicant
    submitted a copy of the decision in Thakur (PBS decision -  common  law
    fairness) Bangladesh [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC). In that  case  the  Upper
    Tribunal relied on the  well-known  exposition  of  the  principles  of
    common law fairness articulated by Lord Mustill on page 560 of R v Home
    Secretary ex parte Doody [1994]  1  AC  531  and  I  accept  that  what
    fairness demands is dependent on the context of the  decision  and  the
    particular circumstances of the applicant.

36.   In the current case the context was an application  under  the  Points
    Based System within which the evidential requirements for each category
    of leave were laid out in detail and  where  a  detailed  and  up-dated
    policy also explained where evidential flexibility should be applied.

37.   As counsel for the Respondent submitted, the Respondent  had  properly
    applied the  Immigration  Rules  and  Version  7  of  the  Guidance  on
    Evidential Flexibility.  Therefore, in my view the approach adopted  by
    the Respondent was generally fair and lawful in public law terms.

38.   More particularly counsel for the  Applicant  submitted  that  it  was
    unfair that the Respondent had not looked at her  own  records  to  see
    whether KPS was a settled person.   However, he did not identify why it
    was a breach in this individual case to not do so, when the  policy  in
    force did not commit the Respondent  to  doing  so  where  a  specified
    document, such as a BRP, had not been provided with an application.

 39.  The Applicant  has  not  been  able  to  establish  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that the BRP in question was submitted and the  Applicant
    will have been aware that the burden of proof lay on him to provide all
    the necessary supporting documents.

40.   The Applicant also submitted that it was unfair because the  Applicant
    had complied with the relevant Immigration Rules in the  past  and  had
    been an economic asset to the United Kingdom. However, these  arguments
    are more appropriate to a consideration of proportionality and fail  to
    show that the decisions was procedurally unfair. In  contrast,  in  the
    case of Thaker the appellant was able to show the  he  had  not  had  a
    proper opportunity of making representations following the  closure  of
    his college or of finding an alternative course with a licensed college
    before the decision was  made  on  his  application.  Counsel  for  the
    Applicant was not able to point to any similar and comparable  failures
    in the Applicant's case. Parliament has decided that a  person  refused
    leave  under  the  Points  Based  System  is  entitled  to   bring   an
    administrative review and the Applicant did so, albeit  unsuccessfully.
    The  Respondent  has  also  provided  for  an  element  of   evidential
    flexibility but the Applicant was not  able  to  bring  himself  within
    Version 7 of this policy.

41.   As a consequence, I find that the decision reached by  the  Respondent
    was not unlawful or irrational by reasons of a  breach  of  common  law
    fairness.

Order

(1)   The Applicant's application for judicial review is refused.


Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

(2)   I refuse permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal because there  is
      no merit in the grounds in the Applicant's claim form or in  the  oral
      submissions made at the oral hearing on behalf of the Applicant.


Costs

(3)   The Applicant do pay the Respondent's costs in the  sum  of  �5,698.00
      to be assessed in default of agreement.





                  Nadine Finch
       Signed:

                 Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


       Dated:    15 May 2017












Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to the above parties on:.

Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

A party may appeal against such a decision to  the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28  days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission to  appeal
was given (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3(2)).
