
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                               JR/11757/2015

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                 Wednesday 11th January 2017

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                     YO

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Mr R. Khubber, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mr Chapman, Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared
on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                        (HANDED DOWN ON 8th March 2017)


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -




UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS:

Introduction

 1. This is an application for judicial review of a decision  made  by  the
    Secretary of State ("the  Respondent")  on  10th  September  2015:  the
    application  having  been  lodged  on  the  28th  September  2015   and
    permission having been granted  after  a  hearing  by  order  of  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Connor dated 25th May 2016.

 2. I was invited to make an anonymity order to  protect  the  identity  of
    members of the applicant's  family  and  the  victim  of  his  criminal
    offending. Pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269  as  amended)  I  make  an  anonymity
    order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report
    of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify   the
    applicant or his partner. For the avoidance of doubts, this order  also
    applies to both the applicant and to the  Respondent.  The  failure  to
    comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Background:

 3. The applicant is a national of Nigeria born on  16th  June  1993.   The
    exact date his mother and siblings entered the United  Kingdom  is  not
    known however the applicant claims to have entered the  United  Kingdom
    in 2007 using his own Nigerian passport at the age of 13.  Prior to his
    entry in the UK he resided with his grandmother in Nigeria who  is  now
    deceased.

 4. The applicant was granted a residence card on 16th February 2011  as  a
    dependant of an EEA national.  The applicant's mother was married to  a
    Portuguese national who was exercising Treaty Rights and  as  a  result
    the applicant, his mother and twin brothers were all granted  residence
    cards in the UK which expired on 16th February 2016.  The applicant has
    a sister who is a British citizen.

 5. The Applicant has a number of criminal convictions.  They are  set  out
    in the papers and specifically considered in the decision letter of the
    10th September 2015.  On  16th  August  2013  he  appeared  before  the
    Magistrates' Court on two counts relating to  driving  offences  namely
    driving otherwise than in accordance with a licence and using a vehicle
    uninsured.  He received a fine and his licence is endorsed and  ordered
    to pay costs and compensation.

 6. On 24th July 2014 the applicant pleaded guilty to a number of offences;
    one count of sexual activity with a  female  under  16,  one  count  of
    offering payment for sexual services to a  child  and  four  counts  of
    fraud in relation to bank or credit cards and one count  of  possession
    of a computer with credit/banking and personal details.

 7. On 11th September 2014 the applicant  was  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment totalling three years and four  months.  In  the  decision
    letter the remarks of the sentencing judge are set  out.   In  summary,
    the judge observed that the most serious offences  committed  were  the
    sexual offences where it is said the  applicant  took  advantage  of  a
    vulnerable 15 year old girl, that the event had been  planned  and  the
    child had been groomed.  The judge considered  the  applicant's  sexual
    offending to fall within "Category 1" of the sentencing  guidelines  in
    relation to harm (involving penetrative sex) and within "Category  (a)"
    relating to culpability due to the planning and grooming involved.  The
    judge took into account his age and  that  he  had  been  of  effective
    previous good character.  The judge gave him a full  one  third  credit
    and he received a sentence of 40 months imprisonment.  As  regards  the
    fraud offences which used the misuse of approximately two  and  a  half
    thousand pounds, the judge ordered sentences  of  imprisonment  to  run
    concurrently.  Thus the total sentence was one of three years and  four
    months.

 8. There have been two sets of proceedings for judicial review  issued  on
    behalf of the Applicant and the first set is relevant to the background
    of the present claim issued. I will  therefore  summarise  the  salient
    facts.

The first set of judicial review proceedings:

 9. On 26th September 2014 the Secretary of State wrote  to  the  Appellant
    informing him that in view of his offending background that she was  to
    make a deportation order against him and invited the applicant to  make
    representations having given him  20  days  to  respond.  On  the  28th
    November 2014, his solicitors sought an extension of  time  to  provide
    representations. On the 12th February  2015  the  Respondent  served  a
    preliminary decision to make a deportation order against the Applicant.
    As a result of his criminality his deportation  was  considered  to  be
    justified on grounds of public  policy  and/or  public  security.   The
    decision was one made pursuant to the  Immigration  (European  Economic
    Area) Regulations 2006 thus it was considered on the basis that he  was
    a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  and  as  such  qualified  for
    consideration under the 2006 Regulations.

10. The notice went on to state that the Secretary  of  State  proposed  to
    give directions for his removal to Nigeria and if  there  were  reasons
    why he should not be deported the applicant should tell  the  Secretary
    of State in writing within twenty days of service of the  letter.   The
    notice referred to a leaflet being attached to  the  letter  explaining
    what information and evidence could be submitted.   In  the  notice  it
    made reference to Regulation 29 of the 2006 Regulations that an  appeal
    against the decision to deport did not prevent the Secretary  of  State
    from obtaining or executing a deportation order to remove the applicant
    from the United Kingdom.  The letter went on to state that  in  certain
    circumstances the Secretary of State may certify that  the  applicant's
    removal notwithstanding that the appeal process has not  yet  begun  or
    been finally determined would not be unlawful under Section  6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998.  It makes specific reference to Regulation  24AA
    of the 2006 Regulations.  In highlighted type it stated

         "If you have any reasons why you should not be expected to continue
         an appeal after you have left the United Kingdom you must inform us
         within twenty working days of the date of service given at the  end
         of this letter".

11.  On  the  11th  March  2015  representations  were  received  from  the
    applicant's representatives in response to that letter.  The  applicant
    was in custody at that time serving his sentence  (see  ABB68  -  141).
    The representations made reference  to  matters  relevant  to  the  EEA
    Regulations and in particular,  that  the  applicant  was  a  dependent
    family member of an EU national; the applicant's mother having  married
    a Portuguese national who was exercising treaty rights in the  UK.   It
    further made reference to the applicant, his mother and siblings having
    been granted residence cards until February 2016.

12. As  to  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  the  representations  set  out  the
    applicant's factual background making reference to his entry to the  UK
    aged 13 in 2007 and  that  upon  entry  resided  with  his  mother  and
    siblings.  The applicant's sister was a British citizen  and  that  the
    applicant and his siblings resided in the UK under  a  residence  card.
    The  representations  made  reference  to  his  social   and   cultural
    integration relying on his  educational  studies  in  the  UK  and  his
    relationship with his mother and siblings and  made  reference  to  the
    lack of any ties to his country of origin.  Reference was made  to  the
    applicant playing an active role in his siblings' daily life  prior  to
    imprisonment involving the taking and collection of them  from  school.
    The representations included a number of  documents  which  included  a
    number of school certificates and letters of support from his  siblings
    which commented upon the adverse effects upon  them  of  the  applicant
    being deported from the UK.  The letter from one of his siblings (AB120
    - 121) made  reference  to  the  adverse  impact  that  the  threat  of
    deportation had upon his education, the closeness of  the  relationship
    between him and the applicant and the  positive  support  that  he  had
    given to his school and football activities.  A similar letter from his
    other sibling made reference  to  the  adverse  impact  of  deportation
    beyond the adverse impact of separation resulting from imprisonment.

13. Further enquiries were made by the Secretary of  State  concerning  the
    nature of the claim made under  the  EEA  Regulations  (which  are  not
    material for the purposes of this judgment). On the 4th June  2015  the
    Applicant's solicitors provided further evidence to  the  Secretary  of
    State [see AB 42-23] including the  Decree  Absolute  relating  to  the
    Applicant's mother's end of her marriage to her EEA national spouse and
    a tax return to demonstrate  that  her  spouse  was  exercising  Treaty
    Rights up until the date of the divorce. The letter made  reference  to
    the position that if the Applicant could  not  qualify  under  the  EEA
    Regulations that his case should be considered under Article 8  of  the
    ECHR.

14. On the 17th June 2015 a letter was sent to the applicant via the Prison
    Governor in which he was informed of the Secretary of State's  decision
    to deport him to Nigeria.  In that letter the applicant was informed of
    the possibility that his claim might be certified under Section 94B  of
    the 2002 Act and he was invited to provide any reasons  why  he  should
    "not be expected to appeal only after he has left the United Kingdom".

15. In material received by this Tribunal in January 2017, the  applicant's
    solicitors  stated  that  they  were  not  served  with   that   letter
    notwithstanding earlier correspondence as long ago as 2014 stating that
    they were acting for the applicant.  The material served also  included
    a handwritten letter from the applicant in which he stated that he  had
    not been served with such a letter or that he had not seen  the  letter
    of 17th June 2015.  It further confirmed that he had had  no  knowledge
    of the letter and that the first time that he saw the letter was during
    the proceedings for judicial  review.   However  in  response  to  that
    assertion, further material was obtained  by  the  Secretary  of  State
    consisting of the Case Information Database (CID) which documented that
    a confirmation of conveyance was  received  on  23rd  June  2015.   The
    contents of that confirmation of conveyance was set out  in  a  further
    document annexed to the Respondent's  skeleton  argument.  This  was  a
    document whereby the applicant was provided  with  the  opportunity  to
    sign for the letter dated 17th June 2015 which was conveyed to  him  on
    23rd June 2015.  This section is unsigned and below which  is  a  space
    which was entered "Prison use only" where it  was  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant refused to sign or was unable to sign.  No reasons are  given
    for any refusal to sign.

16. On the 17th July 2015 the Secretary of State notified the Applicant  in
    writing of the decision made to deport him which was accompanied  by  a
    letter of the same date [see AB37-41].

17. The Applicant's solicitors sent a pre-action  protocol  letter  ("PAP")
    letter before claim on the 25th July 2015 challenging the lawfulness of
    his removal on the basis that no decision was received  with regard  to
    the representations made on the 11th March 2015 and the 4th June  2015.
    As the removal was imminent the Applicant's solicitors lodged  a  claim
    for judicial review. The basis for that challenge was  the  failure  of
    the Respondent to consider the representations relating to his  Article
    8 and EEA claim prior to making the decision to remove.

18. The grounds of challenge are summarised at [AB13].   It was stated that
    the Secretary of State had failed to make a decision on the applicant's
    outstanding representations which had been made in March 2015 but  also
    decided to make a deportation order against him on 17th July 2015 which
    was made on the mistaken assumption that the applicant had not made any
    representations resisting removal.

19. After the claim had been issued the Respondent agreed to defer  removal
    and to consider the submissions made. The  UT  subsequently  refused  a
    stay and permission to apply for judicial review as the application was
    academic (see decision of UT Judge Southern [AB172]).  The  proceedings
    were therefore concluded with an order being made subsequently that the
    Applicant's costs should be paid by the Respondent(see  order  made  by
    UTJ Taylor 26th November 2015).

The present proceedings:

20. On 10th September 2015  the  Secretary  of  State  responded  to  those
    representations and a decision was made  to  refuse  his  human  rights
    claim and certified the claim under Section 94B NIAA 2002(as amended by
    the Immigration Act 2014).

The Decision Letter:

21. I shall summarise the decision letter relied upon by the  Secretary  of
    State.

22. By a notice of decision dated 10th September 2015,  the  applicant  was
    informed of the Secretary of State's decision  to  make  a  deportation
    order against him.  The decision  was  headed  "Decision  to  Refuse  a
    Protection and Human Rights Claim".    The decision   referred  to  the
    letters  dated 11th March,  21st  and  24th  July  2015   sent  to  the
    Respondent setting out the submissions made and set out his immigration
    and criminal history.  The letter  made  reference  to  representations
    made on 11th March,  21st  and  24th  July  2015  and  in  that  letter
    concluded by rejecting those representations in relation to  Article  8
    of the ECHR, to refuse to revoke the deportation order previously  made
    and to certify his claim under Section 94B of  the  2002  Act  thus  to
    remove him from the UK.

23. The  letter  began  by  considering  the  applicant's  immigration  and
    criminal history and made express reference to the  sentencing  remarks
    to which I have already  referred.   It  made  reference  also  to  the
    previous judicial review proceedings which had become academic  on  the
    basis that she would consider the representations that  had  been  made
    and were set out at the beginning of the decision letter.  The decision
    letter began by considering his claim to reside under EU law under  the
    EEA Regulations on the basis of retention  of  rights  as  a  dependent
    family member of an EEA national exercising treaty rights.  However, it
    was concluded that insufficient evidence had been provided in  relation
    to the applicant's stepfather's right to permanent residence or being a
    qualified person at the time of the divorce (see page 4 of the decision
    letter).

24. In relation to Article 8 the  Secretary  of  State  set  out  that  his
    deportation was conducive to the public good and in the public interest
    because he had been convicted of an  offence  for  which  he  had  been
    sentenced to a period of less than  four  years  but  at  least  twelve
    months and thus in accordance with paragraph  398  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, the public interest required his deportation unless an exception
    to deportation applied.  The Secretary of State went on to apply  those
    exceptions set out in paragraphs 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules.
     As to family life with any relevant children, the decision letter made
    reference to Section 55 of the 2009  Act  but  made  reference  to  the
    applicant's  representations  in  that  it  was  confirmed  he  had  no
    dependants but that he had established family life with three  siblings
    under the age of 18.  Consideration was given to his claim that he  had
    assisted  his  siblings  in  their  daily  life  by  dropping  off  and
    collecting them from school and supporting  them  in  their  day-to-day
    care.  The Secretary of State considered that those  relationships  did
    not constitute family life for the purposes of Article 8. It was stated
    that there was no evidence of further  elements  of  dependency  beyond
    normal emotional ties and that he had failed to provide any evidence of
    the level of dependency the siblings had placed on him or any  evidence
    that should he be removed from the United Kingdom there would be no one
    else who could continue to provide social,  emotional,  financial  care
    for them.  It further made reference to his mother as  the  main  carer
    for those dependants who had also provided the same level of care on  a
    daily basis and thus was able to continue  to  provide  that  upon  his
    removal.  It was therefore not accepted  that  he  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his siblings and  thus  paragraph
    399(a) did not apply.

25.  As to family life with a partner, it made reference to a named partner
    but that there was no evidence to support the view that  he  was  in  a
    subsisting relationship with any partner.

26. As to private life, the Secretary of State applied paragraph  399A  and
    it was not accepted that he had been lawfully resident  in  the  United
    Kingdom for most of his life.  It was accepted that the  applicant  was
    socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United  Kingdom  having
    attended education in the United Kingdom.  However,  the  Secretary  of
    State made reference to his criminal offending and his lack of positive
    contribution to the UK community.  It was not accepted that there  were
    very significant obstacles to his integration into Nigeria having lived
    there  until  the  age  of  13  and  that  he   would   have   retained
    cultural/traditional practices.  The decision  took  into  account  his
    claim that he had no family ties in Nigeria  since  the  death  of  his
    grandmother (in 2011) but that the applicant "might still have extended
    family members that reside there".  The decision letter  places  weight
    on the fact that he was an adult and was single with no dependants  and
    thus was of an age where it was reasonable to  expect  him  to  support
    himself and live independently.  Thus it was not accepted that  he  met
    the requirements of the private life exception to deportation.

27.  As to whether there were very compelling circumstances  the  Secretary
    of State considered the nature and seriousness  of  the  crime  in  the
    context of the public interest in securing his removal.  The  Secretary
    of State set out with particularity the sexual offences  and  also  the
    fraud and kindred offences.  Also having reached those conclusions, the
    Secretary of State considered that the circumstances did  not  outweigh
    the very significant public interest in his deportation.  Consideration
    was given  as  to  whether  it  would  be  appropriate  to  revoke  the
    deportation  order  but  reached  the  conclusion  that  it  should  be
    maintained.  It was  found  that  there  were  no  grounds  upon  which
    revocation of the deportation order was justified.  At page  9  of  the
    decision letter it made reference to paragraph 353 of  the  Immigration
    Rules where it was accepted by the Secretary of State that the  further
    submissions amounted to a fresh human  rights  claim  within  paragraph
    353.

28. There was then a section on certification under Section  94B  in  which
    the following was stated:-

         "    The Secretary of State may certify a human rights claim  under
                Section 94B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
                2002 where she considers that, despite  the  appeal  process
                not having been begun or not having been exhausted,  removal
                of that person to the country or territory to  which  he  is
                proposed to be removed, pending the outcome of an appeal  in
                relation to his claim, would not be unlawful under Section 6
                of the Human Rights Act 1998 (public authority  not  to  act
                contrary to Human  Rights  Convention).   The  grounds  upon
                which the Secretary of State may certify a claim under  sub-
                Section (2) include (in particular) that  the  person  would
                not, before the appeals process is exhausted,  face  a  real
                risk of serious irreversible harm if removed to the  country
                or territory to which he is proposed to be removed.

              Consideration has been given to whether your Article  8  claim
                should be certified under Section 94B  of  the  Nationality,
                Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The Secretary of State has
                considered whether there would be a  real  risk  of  serious
                irreversible harm if you were  to  be  removed  pending  the
                outcome of any appeal you may bring.  The Secretary of State
                does not consider that such a risk exists because  you  have
                failed to provide  any  evidence  that  you  will  face  any
                irreversible harm if you were to be removed  to  Nigeria  to
                which you spent the first 13 years of your life, You are  an
                adult who is  capable  of  re-establishing  himself  in  his
                country of origin, and providing for yourself. You  have  no
                dependants born in the  United  Kingdom  and  you  were  not
                cohabiting akin to marriage with any persons residing  here.
                55.    Therefore,  it  has  been  decided  to  certify  your
                Article 8 claim under Section 94B and  any  appeal  you  may
                bring can only be  heard  once  you  have  left  the  United
                Kingdom."



29. Removal directions were set for removal on the 29th September 2015  and
    on the 23rd September 2015, the  applicant's  solicitors  sent  a  pre-
    action protocol letter to the Secretary of State.

30. On the 28th September 2015, the applicant lodged these proceedings  for
    permission to apply for judicial review, including an  application  for
    interim relief, which was granted by UT Judge Rintoul.

31. On the 13th October 2015 the Court of Appeal handed  down  judgment  in
    the decision of (Kiarie, R (On the application of) v SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 1020).

32.  On the  8th  December  2015  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Southern  refused
    permission to apply for judicial review on the papers.  The  procedural
    history demonstrates that new removal directions were  set  in  January
    2016 and an application was made for interim relief by way of a stay on
    removal which was refused on the papers. At an oral hearing a  stay  on
    removal was granted on the 26th January 2016. Further proceedings  were
    lodged with the First-tier Tribunal relating to the EEA application but
    are not material to this application.

33. A request was made for oral  reconsideration  of  the  application  for
    permission to apply for judicial review and this  was  heard  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge O'Connor on 25 May 2016,  who,  after  hearing  argument
    from both parties, granted permission on grounds(i)(a-(c)  relating  to
    unlawful consideration under Section 94B of the 2002 Act but refused on
    ground (2)  relating  to  a  failure  to  provide  notice  pursuant  to
    Immigration (Notice) Regulations 2003.

    UT Judge O'Connor made the following  observation  in  support  of  the
    limited grant of permission:-

         "During the hearing a dispute arose between the parties as  to  the
         meaning and application of paragraph 44  of  the  judgment  of  the
         Court of Appeal in Kiarie and Byndloss v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 1020.
          This might be an appropriate case for  guidance  to  be  given  in
         relation to such dispute.

34. Since the grant of permission, the Supreme Court is to hear the appeals
    in (Kiarie, R (On the application of) v SSHD [2015] EWCA  Civ  1020  in
    February 2017. No application has been made by either party for a  stay
    in relation to these proceedings to  await  the  decision.  Indeed  the
    submission made by Counsel expressly observes  that  it  is  inevitable
    that the judgment will be reserved and may not be handed down for  some
    time and thus seeks a decision on the application now.

35. There have also been other relevant decisions made by the Supreme Court
    in Ali v Secretary of State for the Home Department[2016]1 WLR 4799 and
    Makhlouf v Secretary of State [2016] UKSC (relevant to  the  issues  of
    deportation of foreign nationals) and a decision of the Court of Appeal
    in Caroopen and Myrie v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 1307.

36. Both  parties  have  provided  skeleton  arguments  setting  out  their
    submissions on the  relevant  issues  and  supplemented  their  written
    arguments with oral submissions.  It is not necessary  to  set  out  in
    detail all of those submissions but the relevant points  made  by  each
    party in advancing their respective cases which I shall  consider  when
    addressing the three grounds advanced on behalf of the applicant.

Discussion:

37. There are three grounds of challenge raised by the applicant.  They are
    as follows.  The decision to use the power to certify  the  applicant's
    Article ECHR claim under Section 94B of the NIAA 2002 was flawed by way
    of:-

        i) Being based on  an  incorrect  understanding  of  the  scope  of
           consideration required under Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act
           1988 (as to when it would be lawful to use the power);

     ii) being based on a flawed understanding of the applicant's Article  8
         ECHR claim (thereby resulting in a breach of Article 8  during  the
         interim period) and

    iii) being based on a failure to give the applicant a  fair  opportunity
         to make representations prior to the use of the power - was  flawed
         by way of a failure of the Secretary  of  State  to  make  adequate
         enquiries prior to the decision to use power.

38. In real terms Grounds 1 and 2 are  considered  together.   The  central
    issue in this application concerns whether the Respondent's decision to
    certify the applicant's human rights claim under  Section  94B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended)  is  unlawful
    and, as set out in the submissions made by Mr Khubber, it  is  asserted
    that the Respondent has not applied  the  correct  test  following  the
    decision of R (Kiarie) v SSHD and R (Byndloss) v SSHD [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    1020 and had adopted a flawed approach to the issue  of  certification.
    It is also asserted that the Secretary of  State  failed  to  give  the
    applicant a fair opportunity to make representations prior to  the  use
    of the power and had failed to make adequate  enquiries  prior  to  the
    decision to certify.

The Legal Framework:

39. Section 94B of the 2002 Act reads as follows:

      "94B. Appeal from within the United Kingdom: certification of human
      rights claims made by persons liable to deportation
      (1) This section applies where a human rights claim has been made by a
      person ('P') who is liable to deportation under -
      (a) Section 3(5)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 (Secretary of State
      deeming deportation conducive to public good) ...
      ...
      (2) The Secretary of State may certify the claim if the Secretary of
      State considers that, despite the appeals process not having been
      begun or not having been exhausted, removal of P to the country or
      territory to which P is proposed to be removed, pending the outcome of
      an appeal in relation to P's claim, would not be unlawful under
      section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (public authority not to act
      contrary to Human Rights Convention).
      (3) The grounds upon which the Secretary of State may certify a claim
      under subsection (2) include (in particular) that P would not, before
      the appeals process is exhausted, face a real risk of serious
      irreversible harm if removed to the country or territory to which P is
      proposed to be removed."
40. That section was brought into force with effect from the 28th July 2014
    and was in force at the date of the decision to which these proceedings
    relate.

41. The effect of certification  under  Section  94B  is  that  any  appeal
    against the decision on the human rights claim  must  be  brought  form
    outside the United Kingdom.

42. The Secretary of State  has  issued  guidance  to  caseworkers  on  the
    application of Section 94B. The version in force at  the  date  of  the
    decision letters under challenge was version 4, dated 29th May 2015 and
    headed "Section 94B certification guidance for  Non  European  Economic
    Area deportation cases.   Mr  Khubber  has  not  pursued  any  separate
    argument relating to the policy guidance in this context.

43. The correct approach in relation to Section 94B has been set out in the
    decision of the Court of Appeal of (R (Kiarie) v SSHD and R  (Byndloss)
    v SSHD [2016] 1 WLR 1961.

44. The decision illustrates that the central provision in Section  94B  is
    sub-Section (2) and that the power to certify arises only:

         "If the Secretary of State considers that... removal of  P  to  the
         country or territory to which P is proposed to be removed,  pending
         the outcome of an appeal in relation to P's  claim,  would  not  be
         unlawful under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998."
45. In other words, the Secretary of State cannot lawfully  certify  unless
    she considers that removal pending the outcome of an appeal  would  not
    be in breach of any of the person's Convention rights  as  set  out  in
    Schedule 1 to the Human Rights Act.

46. By sub-Section (3), a ground for certification is that the person would
    not, before the appeals process is exhausted,  face  "a  real  risk  of
    serious irreversible harm" if removed to the country  or  territory  to
    which he or she is proposed to  be  removed.   That  ground  does  not,
    however, displace the statutory condition in sub-Section (2), nor  does
    it constitute a surrogate for that condition.

47. Even if the Secretary  of  State  is  satisfied  that  removal  pending
    determination of an appeal would not  give  rise  to  a  real  risk  of
    serious  irreversible  harm,  that  is  not  a  sufficient  basis   for
    certification.  She cannot certify in any case unless she considers, in
    accordance with sub-Section (2), that removal pending determination  of
    any appeal would not be unlawful under Section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
    Act.

48. Consideration must  therefore  be  given  to  whether  removal  pending
    determination of an appeal would interfere  with  the  person's  rights
    under Article 8 and if so, whether removal for the interim period would
    meet  the  requirement  of  proportionality  unless  a  decision  maker
    considers  that  there  would  be  such  interference  or   that   such
    interference would be  proportionate,  the  claim  cannot  lawfully  be
    certified under Section 94B (see paragraph [38] of Kiarie).

49. As I have said, there is no dispute that a decision  to  certify  under
    Section 94B is amenable to judicial review.   It  should,  however,  be
    stressed that the issue on such challenge is limited to the Section 94B
    certification and does not extend to the deportation decision itself or
    the related refusal of the person's human rights claim.

50. The scope of the challenge on judicial review is set out at  paragraphs
    31-33 of that decision:

   "Amenability to judicial review
   1. As I have said, there is no dispute that a decision to certify under
      section 94B is amenable to judicial review. It should, however, be
      stressed that the issue on such a challenge is limited to the section
      94B certification and does not extend to the deportation decision
      itself or to the related refusal of the person's human rights claim.
      Section 94B will arise for consideration only in cases where there is
      a right of appeal against the refusal of the human rights claim (see,
      for example, the summary of the Secretary of State's guidance at
      paragraph 8(ii) above). The section is concerned with the distinct
      question whether the person can lawfully be removed pending such an
      appeal. Moreover, there is obviously no right of appeal against the
      section 94B certification itself.
   1. It follows from all this that the line of cases to the effect that,
      where a right of appeal exists against a removal decision, judicial
      review will not lie unless special or exceptional factors are in play
      (see e.g. R (Lim and Siew) v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [2007] EWCA Civ 773, [2008] INLR 60, and RK (Nepal) v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 359, [2010]
      INLR 37) has no direct relevance in this context.
   1. As to the applicable principles on judicial review of a decision under
      section 94B, the terms of the statute require the Secretary of State
      to form her own view on whether removal pending an appeal would breach
      Convention rights (see, further, the next section of this judgment).
      For that purpose, in an article 8 case such as the present, she has to
      make relevant findings of fact and conduct a proportionality balancing
      exercise in relation to the facts so found. In my judgment, her
      findings of fact are open to review on normal Wednesbury principles,
      applied with the anxious scrutiny appropriate to the context: compare
      R (Giri) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ
      784, applying R v Secretary of State for the Home Department, ex p.
      Khawaja [1984] AC 74 and Bugdaycay v Secretary of State for the Home
      Department [1987] AC 514, and distinguishing between cases of
      precedent or jurisdictional fact (where the court has to decide the
      facts for itself) and cases where facts have to be found by the
      decision-maker in the exercise of a discretionary power conferred on
      him or her (and where those findings of fact are open to review on
      Wednesbury principles). But as to the assessment of proportionality,
      the decision of the Supreme Court in R (Lord Carlile of Berriew) v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] UKSC 60, [2015] AC
      945 shows that the court is obliged to form its own view, whilst
      giving appropriate weight (which will depend on context) to any
      balancing exercise carried out by the primary decision-maker. "


51. In the most recent decision of Caroopen and Secretary of State for  the
    Home  Department  and  Myrie  and  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA Civ 1307, the Court  of  Appeal  revisited  this
    issue and at paragraphs 67 to 83 reviewed the authorities  relevant  to
    the correct approach to judicial review in Article 8 cases.  It is  not
    necessary to set out the review that was made of those authorities  but
    the conclusion reached by Underhill LJ is set out at paragraphs  82  to
    83 as follows:-

1. I have for the reasons given reviewed the authorities in some detail,
   but in truth I do not think there is now any doubt about the approach
   which they say should be taken where a challenge is made by way of
   judicial review to the Home Secretary's assessment of the proportionality
   of interfering with a claimant's rights under article 8. The position was
   recently stated succinctly in R (Kiarie) v Secretary of State for the
   Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 1020, [2016] 1 WLR 1961, which post-dated
   the decision in Lord Carlile's case. In that case the appellants had
   brought judicial review challenges against the decision of the Home
   Secretary to certify under section 94B of the 2002 Act their claims that
   their removal pending an appeal against deportation would be in breach of
   their rights under article 8. At para. 33 of his judgment (p. 1973 B-F),
   with which the other members of the Court agreed, Stephen Richards LJ
   said:
      "As to the applicable principles on judicial review of a decision
      under section 94B, the terms of the statute require the Secretary of
      State to form her own view on whether removal pending an appeal would
      breach Convention rights ... . For that purpose, in an article 8 case
      such as the present, she has to make relevant findings of fact and
      conduct a proportionality balancing exercise in relation to the facts
      so found. In my judgment, her findings of fact are open to review on
      normal Wednesbury principles, applied with the anxious scrutiny
      appropriate to the context: ... . But as to the assessment of
      proportionality, the decision of the Supreme Court in R (Lord Carlile
      of Berriew) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] UKSC
      60, [2015] AC 945 shows that the court is obliged to form its own
      view, whilst giving appropriate weight (which will depend on context)
      to any balancing exercise carried out by the primary decision-maker."
1. To say that there that there is no doubt about what the authorities say
   does not mean that what they say is entirely unproblematic. There has
   been considerable discussion both in the academic literature and in the
   case-law about the nature and extent of the difference between a
   proportionality test and "high-intensity" reasonableness review[13]. In
   SA McCloskey J anticipated that this would be the subject of further
   developments in the law: see para. 30 of his judgment. But no such
   developments will be found in this judgment. These conceptual issues were
   not material to the ground on which the appeal was pursued, and we were
   not addressed about them.



52.  I would observe that the relevant point is that this court or court of
    Judicial Review would not be able to carry  out  a  review  of  anxious
    scrutiny, unless the court has a starting point to judge from.   Whilst
    the court in this context forms its own view, it is to equip the  court
    to carry out its review and not  to  substitute  its  decision  on  the
    merits.  Thus the role of the court is not to displace  the  review  of
    the decision maker but to equip the court to carry out the review under
    challenge.

53.  It is submitted on behalf  of  the  applicant  that  the  decision  to
    certify the claim is unlawful as it was made  in  accordance  with  the
    guidance that was the subject of criticism in the  decision  of  Kiarie
    and  Byndloss  and  because  the  Secretary  of  State   confined   her
    consideration to whether the certification  power  should  be  used  by
    asking whether the removal would result in  "a  real  risk  of  serious
    irreversible harm" to the applicant (see 94B(3) and because it did  not
    include an assessment of whether removal pending appeal  would  involve
    an interference with the  applicant's  Article  8  rights  and  if  so,
    whether such breach be disproportionate.

54.  Mr Chapman on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  acknowledged  the
    criticisms made by the Court of Appeal and there is no dispute that the
    decision letter of 10th  September  2015  did  contain  that  error  as
    identified in the Court of Appeal's decision in  Kiarie  and  Byndloss.
    It wrongly framed the Secretary  of  State's  consideration  solely  in
    terms of whether there was a real risk of serious irreversible harm and
    did not address the  statutory  question  of  whether  removal  pending
    determination of an appeal would be in breach of Section 6 of the Human
    Rights Act 1998.  The decision  made  by  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    September 2015 relied upon the existing guidance  which  the  court  in
    Kiarie and Byndloss found to be unlawful and  the decision  was  issued
    prior  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  on  13th  October  2015.
    Consequently there is no dispute that  the  applicant  has  established
    that the decision under challenge contains a public law error  and  the
    terms of that legal misdirection are set out  in  Kiarie  at  paragraph
    73(ii).

55.  However, Mr Chapman  on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  whilst
    accepting that,  submits  that  the  error  is  not  material  and  the
    determinative question is whether the deficiencies in the Secretary  of
    State's decision are so material.  The question in Kiarie  was  whether
    the outcome would have been different if the  Secretary  of  State  had
    considered whether removal pending the appeal would result in a  breach
    of Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1988.  As the  decision  sets  out
    the legal errors identified at [73] and [80]  did  not  result  in  the
    Court of Appeal overturning the decision to certify under Section  94B.
    The Court of Appeal reviewed the circumstances of the Appellants  cases
    and concluded that the errors in the decision letter were immaterial to
    the outcome on the basis that had the decision maker turned her mind to
    the correct question (whether removal pending appeal would be in breach
    of Mr Kiarie's human rights and that of Mr Byndloss), they  would  have
    reached the same conclusion.  However, before making  that  assessment,
    paragraph 33 of Kiarie makes plain and which I have made  reference  to
    earlier, the Secretary of State must first make  relevant  findings  of
    fact and conduct proportionality balancing exercise in relation to  the
    findings so found and secondly, those findings  of  fact  are  open  to
    review on  normal  Wednesbury  principles  with  the  anxious  scrutiny
    appropriate to the context.

56.  In terms of materiality, Mr Chapman submits that this was not  a  case
    in which the applicant  would  suffer  serious  and  irreversible  harm
    relying on paragraph  37  of  Kiarie  and  Byndloss  in  which  it  was
    indicated that there were likely to be relatively few  cases  in  which
    removal would be in breach of  Convention  rights  in  the  absence  of
    serious and irreversible  harm.   Thus  Mr  Chapman  submits  that  the
    evidence demonstrated that interim removal pending the outcome  of  the
    appeal on the facts of this particular case are proportionate.  Thus he
    points to the applicant's characteristics as a fit and healthy 23  year
    old man with no children or family life.  As to  his  connections  with
    Nigeria, the country of destination, he had lived there until  the  age
    of 13 and thus could be taken to be  familiar  with  the  language  and
    culture.  He submitted that the removal period would  be  for  a  brief
    interim period and that in the case of this particular applicant  there
    was a strong public interest in his removal having  been  convicted  of
    serious child sexual offences  and  that  substantial  weight  must  be
    attached  to  the  public  interest  in  the  context  of  Section  94B
    certification.  In  this  context  of  the  public  interest,  he  made
    reference to paragraph 44 of Kiarie.

57. Mr Chapman submitted that when taking into account  the  strong  weight
    attached to the public interest when balanced against the facts in this
    particular appeal and the role that he claimed to have with his younger
    siblings, and that of his length of residence  that  when  taking  into
    account the margin of appreciation, it could not be said  that  removal
    for the interim period pending the applicant's exercising  his  out  of
    country right of appeal would be a disproportionate  interference  with
    Article 8 rights.  Thus he submitted that whilst there were  errors  in
    the decision letter they were not material and the issue of materiality
    is dependent upon the representations made to the Secretary of State on
    11th March 2015.

58.  Thus he submits that the Secretary of State is able  to  rely  on  the
    nature of those representations and that they do not  demonstrate  that
    it would be a disproportionate interference with Article 8  rights  for
    his removal during the interim period.  Whilst  he  accepted  that  the
    Tribunal was required to form its own view as  to  proportionality  the
    task in hand was to assess the materiality  as  to  whether  Article  8
    would be infringed during the interim period and that assessment to  be
    on the basis of the material before the Secretary of State.

59. By way of reply Mr Khubber submits that the decision  is  one  that  is
    significantly flawed in that the Secretary of State did not  apply  the
    correct legal test but also did not appreciate  that  the  decision  to
    certify is  discretionary  (see  paragraph  94B(2)  "may  certify")  as
    referred to Kiarie at paragraph 45).  Thus he submits the mechanism set
    out in Section 94B(2) of the Act is that the power  to  certify  arises
    only once the Respondent is satisfied that removal pending appeal would
    not be contrary to her obligations under Section 6 of the Human  Rights
    Act 1988.  Thus there is a discretion.

60. In this case he submits that whether there is a material impact depends
    on the facts.  When considering that issue,  he  submits  there  are  a
    number of factors which the Secretary of State in the  decision  letter
    failed to properly appreciate and which included the extent and  nature
    of the applicant's family and private life in the UK,  the  failure  to
    consider the correct criteria set out in Uner v The Netherlands  [2007]
    45 EHRR 14 and Maslov v Austria [2009] INLR 47 which included  for  the
    purposes of this case, the  length  of  the  applicant's  stay  in  the
    country from which he would be expelled, the  time  elapsed  since  the
    offence, his conduct and the solidity of social,  cultural  and  family
    ties with the host country and the destination state.  He submits  that
    the flaw in the reasoning in  the  decision  letter  is  a  failure  to
    appreciate the applicant's  non-existent  ties  with  Nigeria  and  the
    extent of his ties and integration in the UK as a result of his  family
    links and his private life.  He seeks to contrast  the  refusal  letter
    where it was said that he  had  "possible  extended  family"  with  the
    reality where none had been identified.  He further  submits  that  the
    extent of the family and private life had not been properly  considered
    including the evidence from his siblings as to the effect upon them and
    the failure to appreciate the materiality of the applicant's  residence
    and integration in the  UK.   This  included  his  entitlement  to  his
    residence in the UK at least in part under EU law as underlined by  the
    provision of a residence card.

61. He further submits  that  there  were  legal  questions  that  required
    consideration when reaching the decision to certify during  the  appeal
    period which included whether the decision to certify during the appeal
    period will breach not only the applicant's Article 8 rights but  those
    of any relevant children, taking into account their best interests.

62. In this context he relies upon the most recent  cases  of  Ali  v  SSHD
    [2016] UKSC 60 and Maklouf [2016] UKSC 59.

63. He further submits that when  comparing  and  analysing  the  cases  of
    Kiarie and Byndloss, the facts of this particular appeal are  different
    to those in Kiarie and thus are relevant to the issue on materiality.

64. In considering the issue of materiality it is common  ground  that  the
    burden rests on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  demonstrate  any  error
    identified is not material.  I remind myself that the Tribunal would be
    entitled to refuse relief if it could be satisfied that  the  Secretary
    of State would inevitably reach the same  decision  (see  R  (Smith)  v
    North East Derbyshire PCT [2006] 1 WLR 3215, paragraph 10) (May LJ) and
    that the Tribunal could not be so satisfied if there  was  a  realistic
    possibility that the decision would be different (see  Ali  and  Anr  v
    Newham LBC [2002] HLR 20 (at paragraph 19) (Latham LJ) and it is  clear
    that the threshold is a high one  and  particularly  where  obligations
    arise on the decision maker under Section 6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
    1988 and also Section 55 of  the  BCIA  2009  (dealing  with  the  best
    interests of children who are involved).

65. As I have set out there is no  dispute  that  the  decision  letter  is
    flawed in law by way of a legal misdirection and it is further plain in
    my judgment that the power to certify is  discretionary  under  Section
    94B(2) as indicated by the words "may certify" as set out in Kiarie  at
    paragraph 45.  The mechanism set out in  Section  94B(2)  is  that  the
    power to certify arises only once the Respondent is satisfied that  the
    removal pending appeal would not be contrary to her  obligations  under
    Section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1988.  There is no recognition within
    the decision letter that the Secretary of State recognized  that  there
    was such a discretion to be exercised.

66. I also observe that it  is  possible  to  reject  a  claimant's  appeal
    against the deportation order on its merits, taking  into  account  all
    the relevant material and matters  under  consideration  but  that  the
    possibility still exists that notwithstanding the substantive decision,
    that there may be circumstances in  which  it  is  not  appropriate  to
    certify the case under Section 94B.  As Mr  Chapman  submitted  it  was
    recognized in the decision of Kiarie that  there  may  in  practice  be
    relatively few cases where removal for an  interim  period  pending  an
    appeal would be in breach of Convention rights in the absence of a risk
    of serious irreversible harm, but it is a  possibility  which  must  be
    focussed on as a necessary part of the  decision  making  process  (see
    paragraph 37 of Kiarie).

67. Furthermore, whilst it can be said that  it  is  often  the  case  that
    aspects of the analysis relating to proportionality  of  a  deportation
    decision may be relevant to the decision to certify under  Section  94B
    and may be carried across in the reasoning to support the certification
    decision (as observed by the Court of Appeal in Kiarie  [76]).  However
    in my judgment, the decision maker must not lose sight of the fact that
    the two exercises are not the same and that some factors placed in  the
    balance may differ as may the weight attached or  attributed  to  those
    differing factors.  It is not sufficient in my judgment to look at  the
    representations made on behalf of the applicant  without  consideration
    of the matters taken into account within the decision letter.

68. Having considered the decision letter it is, in my judgment, flawed  in
    significant respects. I consider that the  matters  I  will  go  on  to
    identify are relevant in making an assessment of the materiality of the
    legal errors in the decision letter which are accepted by the Secretary
    of State.

69. In this context I remind myself that procedural  failings  have  to  be
    viewed with caution and will often invalidate a decision (see Kiarie at
    [74]).  I further observe that whilst Richards LJ  talks  in  terms  of
    "procedural failings" and was  referring  to  the  claimant  not  being
    informed  in  advance  of  the  consideration  of  certification,  that
    procedural failings as referred to by him must also consider the  legal
    errors that have been established here namely,  that  the  decision  to
    certify by focusing on the wrong legal question and failing to  address
    the correct question was wrong and that the Secretary of  State  failed
    to consider or appreciate that the power to certify was a discretionary
    one to which she should apply her mind.  Thus such legal flaws must  be
    viewed with caution in my judgment.

70.  I  find  that  this  is  further  underlined  by  the  decision  in  R
    (Gudanavicinine) v the Director of Legal Aid Casework [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    1622  [2015]  1  WLR  2247.  That  was  a  case  which  concerned   the
    circumstances in which the procedural guarantees inherent in Article  8
    required the grant of legal aid in  an  immigration  case  involving  a
    claim based on  Article  8  grounds.   The  court  concluded  that  for
    relevant purposes the standard set by Article 8 were  in  practice  the
    same as those set by Article 6.  At [46] the court said this:-

         "The general principles established by the European Court of  Human
         Rights are now clear.  Inevitably, they are derived from  cases  in
         which the question was whether there was a breach of Article 6.1 in
         proceedings which had already taken place.  We accept the following
         summary of the relevant case law given by Mr Drabble:

              (i)      The Convention guarantees rights that  are  practical
                      and  effective,  not  theoretical  and  illusory   in
                      relation to the right of access to the courts ...;

               (ii)          the  question  is   whether   the   applicant's
                      appearance before the court or Tribunal  in  question
                      without the assistance of a lawyer was  accepted,  in
                      the sense of whether he or she was  able  to  present
                      the case properly and satisfactorily ...;

              (iii)    it is relevant whether the  proceedings  taken  as  a
                      whole were fair ...;

              (iv)     the importance of the appearance of fairness is  also
                      relevant: simply because an  applicant  can  struggle
                      through 'in the teeth of all the  difficulties'  does
                      not necessarily mean that the procedure was fair ...:
                      and

              (v) equality of arms must be guaranteed  to  the  extent  that
                      each side is afforded  a  reasonable  opportunity  to
                      present his or her case under conditions that do  not
                      place him at  a  substantial  disadvantage  vis--vis
                      their opponent ...".

     The court in that paragraph was  summarising  the  general  principles
    relating to Article 6.  In relation to Article 8 the court said this:-

     "70.     It is true that the test for Article 8 as it is stated in the
             Strasbourg jurisprudence  (whether  those  affected  have  been
             involved in the decision making process, viewed as a whole,  to
             a  degree  sufficient  to  provide  them  with  the   requisite
             protection of  their  interests)  differs  from  the  test  for
             Article 6.1 (whether there has been effective access to court).
              The Article 8 test is broader than the Article 6.1  test,  but
             in practice we doubt  whether  there  is  any  real  difference
             between the two formulations in the context with which  we  are
             concerned.  There is nothing in the Strasbourg jurisprudence to
             which our attention has been  drawn  which  suggests  that  the
             European Court of Human Rights considers that there is any such
             difference.  In practice, the court's analysis of the facts  in
             the case law does not seem to differ as between Article 6.1 and
             Article 8.  This is not surprising.  The focus of  Article  6.1
             is  to  ensure  a  fair  determination  of  civil  rights   and
             obligations by an independent and impartial Tribunal.   Article
             8 does not dictate the form of the decision making process that
             the state must put in place.  But the focus of  the  procedural
             aspect of Article 8 is to ensure the effective protection of an
             individual's Article 8 rights.  To  summarise,  in  determining
             what constitutes effective access to the Tribunal (Article 6.1)
             and what constitutes sufficient  involvement  in  the  decision
             making process  (Article  8),  for  the  present  purposes  the
             standards are in practice the same" and at [71]

     "71.     As Ms Kaufmann submits, the significance of  the  cases  lies
             not in their  particular  facts  but  in  the  principles  they
             establish, vis (1) decision making processes by which Article 8
             rights are determined must be fair, (ii) fairness requires that
             individuals are involved in the decision making process, viewed
             as a whole, to a degree that is sufficient to provide them with
             the requisite protection of their interests:  this  means  that
             procedures  for  asserting  or   defending   rights   must   be
             effectively accessible; and (iii) affective access may  require
             the state to fund legal representation"

    At paragraph [77] the court stated:-

     "Deportation cases are of particular concern.  It will  often  be  the
        case that a decision to deport will engage an individual's  Article
        8 rights.  Where this occurs, the individual will usually  be  able
        to say that the issues at stake for him are  of  great  importance.
        This should not be regarded as a trump card which usually leads  to
        the need of legal aid.  It is no more  than  one  of  the  relevant
        factors to be taken into account.  The fact that this  factor  will
        almost invariably be present in deportation cases is not,  however,
        a justification for giving a reduced weight."

71.  Mr Khubber submits that  in  recognising  the  "great  importance"  of
    deportation appeals to those concerned as set out at paragraph 77  that
    it must follow there is an  enhanced  level  of  procedural  protection
    required in deportation appeals.  The factual basis for the decision in
    Gudanavicine do not have  any relevance  or  bearing  to  this  present
    case.  Furthermore, as  noted  in  Kiarie,  the  case  related  to  the
    application of the EEA Regulations and issues relating to  the  welfare
    of her daughter and that the court held that legal aid was required  as
    she would not be  able  to  prepare  any  appeal  or  present  it  (see
    paragraphs  51  and  52  of  Kiarie).   The  context  in  which  Kiarie
    considered  that  authority  was  in  the  context  of  the  procedural
    arguments advanced on behalf of the  respective  Appellants  concerning
    the fairness of out of country appeals.   Nonetheless  I  would  accept
    that the decision made it plain that deportation cases are a particular
    concern and whilst it is a case relating to the availability  of  legal
    aid in the context of an Article 8 claim, it does  not  detract  in  my
    judgment from an overarching principle of the importance  of  decisions
    to those being deported and that in  such  circumstances  there  is  an
    enhanced level of procedural protection  and  as  such  is  a  relevant
    consideration when considering the issue of materiality.

72. Having made those observations, I now turn to the issue of  materiality
    in the context of the substantive and procedural rights under Article 8
    by way of removal during the interim period.  In  his  submissions,  Mr
    Chapman submitted that it is not useful to consider  the  circumstances
    of the particular Appellant  in  Kiarie  or  to  make  any  comparison.
    However I am not satisfied that that  is  necessarily  correct,  and  I
    accept the submissions made by Mr Khubber that  there  are  differences
    between the Appellants in Kiarie and Byndloss and the present applicant
    and as such must go to the issue of materiality based  as  it  is  upon
    that premise that the court had found that the outcome would  not  have
    been different had the Respondent considered the correct legal test.

73. In this context on 11th March  2015  the  applicant's  solicitors  made
    representations to the Secretary of State relying on  matters  relevant
    to EU law and on Article 8 grounds.  These representations are set  out
    at page [68] of the bundle and included with them a number of documents
    [AB75].  The applicant's factual circumstances were described including
    his method of entry, the date of entry and his age and his residence in
    the UK thereafter along with his  three  siblings.   His  residence  by
    virtue of an  EEA  residence  card  was  described  and  his  level  of
    integration  in  the  UK  was  similarly  evidenced  in  terms  of  his
    education, having completed  his  studies  in  2011  and  that  he  had
    continued to reside with this brother and  siblings  and  being  solely
    dependent upon his mother thereafter.  The  representations  also  made
    reference to his circumstances prior to entry at the age of 13 in which
    he had lived with a relative who had died on 15th  October  2011.   The
    representations made it plain that in those  circumstances  he  had  no
    ties  and  no  one  to  return  to  in  Nigeria.   There  were  further
    submissions relating to the role in which  he  played  as  regards  his
    siblings daily life and annexed to the  representations  included  were
    letters of support from his siblings.

74. It is plain from the  decision  letter  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    concentrated on the issue  of  family  life   in  the  context  of  the
    Appellant having a parental relationship.  Whilst it is correct that he
    provided evidence of some child care responsibility, the  crux  of  the
    representations relied upon the  nature  of  the  relationship  between
    himself and his minor siblings and whether or not that could accurately
    be described as "family life" within its legal  meaning,  it  could  be
    said to be sufficient to constitute elements of his "private life"  and
    thus important to the question of certification.  The evidence in  this
    respect also included letters  directly  from  the  children  concerned
    which  made  reference  to  the  adverse  effects  upon  them  of   the
    Appellant's  departure  including  on  their  education  and  on  their
    relationship.  It is certainly arguable on that evidence that  it  made
    reference to  the  impact  of  the  separation  upon  them  during  his
    custodial sentence and also in the light of the prospect of  a  further
    separation during the interim period.

75. Any decision maker was required or would be required  to  consider  the
    best interests of the children concerned as  a  primary  consideration.
    There is no dispute as to  the  applicable  legal  principles  in  this
    respect  set  out  in  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009.

76. The applicable principles have been summarised by the Supreme Court  in
    R (Zoumbas) v SSHD [2013] 1 WLR 3690 at paragraph 10 (Lord  Hodge  JSC)
    as follows:-

         "The best interests  of  a  child  are  an  integral  part  of  the
         proportionality assessment under Article 8 of the  Convention;  (2)
         in making that assessment, the best interests of a child must be  a
         primary  consideration,  although  not  always  the  only   primary
         consideration; and the child's best interests do not of  themselves
         have the status of the paramount consideration;  (3)  although  the
         best interests of the child can be  outweighed  by  the  cumulative
         effect of other  considerations,  no  other  consideration  can  be
         treated as inherently more significant; (4) while different  judges
         might approach the question of the best interests  of  a  child  in
         different ways, it is important to ask oneself the right  questions
         in an orderly manner in order to  avoid  the  risk  that  the  best
         interests of a child might  be  undervalued  when  other  important
         considerations were in place; (5) it is important to have  a  clear
         idea of the child's circumstances and what is  in  a  child's  best
         interests  if  one  asks  oneself  whether  those   interests   are
         outweighed by the force of other considerations; (6)  to  that  end
         there is no substitute for a careful examination  of  all  relevant
         factors when the interests of a child are involved in an Article  8
         assessment; and (7) a child must not  be  blamed  for  matters  for
         which he or she  is not responsible, such as  the  conduct  of  the
         parent".

77. As set out in the decision of the President of the Upper Tribunal in JO
    and Others (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 517 (IAC)at  paragraph
    12:-

         "I consider that these provisions, considered in  tandem  with  the
         principles enunciated by the  Supreme  Court  and  the  public  law
         duties  rehearsed  above,  envisage  a  process  of   deliberation,
         assessment and final decision of some depth.  The antithesis namely
         something cursory, casual or superficial, would plainly not  be  in
         accordance with the specific duty imposed by Section 55(3)  or  the
         overarching duty to have  regard  to  the  need  to  safeguard  and
         promote the welfare of any children involved in or affected by  the
         relevant factual matrix.  Ditto cases  where  the  decision  making
         process and its product entail little more than giving lip  service
         to the guidance".

78. The most recent decision in Makhlouf v SSHD [2016] UKSC  59  held  that
    where a decision was taken about the deportation of a foreign  criminal
    who had children residing in the  UK,  separate  consideration  of  the
    children's best interests was required, especially if  those  interests
    did not converge with those of the parent facing deportation  and  that
    the child's interests had to rank  as  a  primary  consideration.   The
    court held that the issue was whether the Secretary of State  had  been
    provided with sufficient material on which to make a proper judgment on
    the Article 8 rights of the applicant and his children (paragraphs  40,
    42 and 44) and the duty to treat the best interests of  children  as  a
    primary  consideration  stemmed  from  the  Borders,  Citizenship   and
    Immigration Act 2009 Section 55 and the Human Rights Act  1998  Section
    6(1)which required public authorities to act compatibly with the rights
    contained in the ECHR, including those under Article  8  however,  that
    did not mean that their rights were inevitably a  passport  to  another
    person's rights (per Lady Hale at paragraph 48).

79. Whilst the Secretary of State sought to  apply  this  in  the  decision
    letter, it was  in  the  context  of  family  life  with  the  relevant
    children, in which she  formed the  view  that  there  was  no  genuine
    subsisting parental relationship.   There  does  not  seem  to  be  any
    dispute that the applicant did have a  genuine  relationship  with  his
    minor siblings however their best interests as a primary  consideration
    was not considered on the correct factual basis and  in  light  of  the
    express evidence from them.  This is different  from  the  decision  in
    Kiarie.  There, whilst he did have a relationship with his  mother  and
    siblings, there is no reference in the decision as  to  the  extent  of
    that relationship or whether there was any express evidence from  them.
    Similarly when considering the circumstances of the applicant Byndloss,
    the Court of Appeal found that he had no meaningful  relationship  with
    any children (see paragraphs 86 and 90 of Kiarie).  Thus the  Secretary
    of State did not consider the relationship, the impact  upon  them  and
    their welfare in either the deportation decision but importantly in any
    decision to certify under Section 94B.

80. The second difference from the decision in Kiarie relevant to the issue
    of materiality was that in Kiarie the decision  maker  did  not  accept
    that he was socially and culturally integrated in the UK.  That is  not
    the position in the decision letter in which it was accepted  that  the
    applicant was socially and culturally integrated in the UK (see page 55
    of the bundle).  It is not clear from the decision letter on what basis
    this acceptance was made other than he had spent a  significant  period
    of time in the United  Kingdom  having  arrived  as  a  minor  and  had
    attended school, however, that is accepted in the decision letter.   It
    did go on to make  reference  to  the  circumstances  of  his  criminal
    offending in the context of fraud and also made reference  there  being
    no evidence of any positive contribution to the  UK  and  therefore  it
    seems to me that there was evidence upon which the Secretary  of  State
    could have taken a contrary view as to  whether  he  was  socially  and
    culturally  integrated.   Nonetheless   this   has   materiality   when
    considering the issue of the proportionality of removal for the interim
    period when set in the context of whether he had any ties  in  Nigeria.
    It is accepted by the Secretary of State that his  previous  carer  had
    died in 2011 but the Secretary of State went on to state that he "might
    still have extended family members that reside there".  It was  unclear
    upon what that is based, but in the context of  the  procedural  rights
    protected under Article 8, no consideration was  given  as  to  how  he
    could pursue his appeal in those circumstances, in  the  light  of  the
    acceptance of having been socially and culturally integrated in the  UK
    and having no relatives in Nigeria.

81. The decision in Kiarie did consider the legal question as to whether an
    out of country appeal  would  breach  the  procedural  requirements  of
    Article 8  and  reached  the  conclusion  that  in  the  generality  of
    deportation cases out of country appeals would not  breach  Article  8.
    The submissions made by Mr Khubber in my judgment  do  not  demonstrate
    that the Court of Appeal were in error in reaching that view having had
    the  advantage  of  the  parties'  respective  submissions  and  having
    considered the relevant legal authorities as set out at paragraphs 46 -
    71.  However the court did make it plain that if particular reasons are
    advanced as to why an out of country appeal  would  fail  to  meet  the
    requirements of Article 8 they must be  considered  and  assessed  (see
    paragraph 71 of Kiarie).  There was little put before the Secretary  of
    State concerning the procedural elements of Article 8.  In this context
    I have considered the ground of challenge in which it  is  asserted  on
    behalf of the applicant that there was a failure to make  enquiries  or
    give an opportunity  for  representations  prior  to  the  use  of  the
    certification power under Section 94B (Ground 3).  In this  context  it
    is submitted that  prior  to  making  the  certification  decision  the
    Secretary of State did not write to the applicant to  inform  him  that
    the power was being considered and give him  the  opportunity  to  make
    representations as to why such a discretion should not be applied.

82. By way of reply Mr Chapman submits that the  ground  has  no  merit  as
    firstly in February 2015, the Respondent invited the applicant to  make
    representations as to why he "should not be  expected  to  continue  an
    appeal after you have left the United Kingdom" to which  the  Applicant
    made  representations  in  March  2015.  He  submits  the   fact   that
    certification at that stage was intended on a preliminary basis  to  be
    under Regulation 24AA of the EEA Regulations rather than under  Section
    94B of the 2002 Act, did not deprive him  of  the  invitation  to  make
    representations.  Mr Khubber submits that notification of certification
    under Regulation 24AA can not be  regarded  as  sufficient  for  lawful
    certification under Section 94B.

83. Mr Chapman further submits that even if the letter in February 2015 had
    not have been relied upon, there was no procedural  unfairness  on  the
    Secretary of State's part because a letter of 17th June 2015  expressly
    invited the applicant to make representations as to the  certification.
    It was asserted by the applicant  that  he  had  not  received  such  a
    letter.

84. There is no dispute that the letter of 12th February 2015 was served on
    the Appellant and that included an invitation to  make  representations
    as to why he should not be expected to continue an appeal after he  had
    left the United Kingdom and that that was in the  context  of  the  EEA
    Regulations and in particular Regulation  24AA.   In  my  judgment  the
    substance of the invitation to the Appellant  to  make  representations
    was unaffected by the legal provisions under which it was made.  In any
    event, the letter did result in representations being made on behalf of
    the applicant on 11th March 2015 not only on EEA grounds  but  also  on
    detailed Article 8 grounds (see B43) although it did not expressly deal
    with the issue of certification.

85. Even if I were wrong in that respect, on 17th June 2015  a  letter  was
    sent to the applicant via the Prison Governor.  That  letter  makes  it
    plain that the Secretary of State was considering certification of  the
    claim.  Whilst the Appellant claims in a written witness statement that
    he has  not  seen  that  letter,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  evidence
    demonstrates that that is untrue and that he did  receive  the  letter.
    The Case Information Database (CID) demonstrates that a confirmation of
    conveyance was received on 23rd June  2015  and  the  contents  of  the
    confirmation of conveyance is set out in a further  document  in  which
    the Appellant was required to sign for the letter  sent  on  17th  June
    which had been conveyed to him on  23rd  June  2015.   The  section  is
    unsigned.  Below that  is  a  space  in  which  it  is  said  "prisoner
    refused", where it was confirmed that the applicant had refused to sign
    or was unable to sign for the  papers,  no  reason  was  given  by  the
    applicant for refusing to sign.

86. I can only conclude from that evidence that contrary to the Applicant's
    account that he had no knowledge of  the  letter  that  he  was  indeed
    provided with a copy of the letter  on  23rd  June  2015  and  that  he
    refused to sign to say that he had received it.  It  is  further  plain
    from the evidence that when his instructing solicitors went to see  him
    to take instructions on this issue that he did not  tell  them  of  the
    events of 23rd June 2015 thus I reject any assertion that  he  did  not
    receive the letter.  It is, however, right to observe that despite  the
    Applicant being legally represented from 25th November 2014 (see  AB27)
    the Secretary of State has sent documents  and  served  them  upon  the
    applicant when he has been in custody.  It is  also  right  to  observe
    that when the Secretary  of  State  was  deciding  whether  to  make  a
    deportation order (see page 13 AB39) they had not  taken  into  account
    the representations made by the Applicant's solicitors in March 2015, a
    point which was the basis of the first judicial review proceedings.

87. Whilst there  has  been  little  put  before  the  Secretary  of  State
    concerning the procedural elements  and  certification  there  is  some
    reference in the PAP letter in September 2015 making it plain  that  in
    the light of the Secretary of State's acceptance  (whether  rightly  or
    wrongly) that he was socially and culturally integrated and that he had
    no relatives in  Nigeria,  that  they  were  issues  to  be  considered
    relevant to certification and the exercise of discretion.

88.  In  considering  the  issue  of  materiality  I  accept  Mr  Chapman's
    submissions  that   there   are   other   factors   relevant   to   the
    proportionality balance  in  favour  of  removal  pending  the  appeal,
    including the seriousness of the offences and the sentence imposed  and
    the fact that the Applicant has no children in the United Kingdom.   Mr
    Chapman also submitted that there was great weight to  be  attached  to
    the public interest(see Laws LJ in SS (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ
    at [55] and Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC at paragraph 38.

89. Mr Chapman submitted that the public interest in removing an  applicant
    started from the moment he became a foreign criminal and that cannot be
    reduced by the fact that he might have to bring an appeal  out  of  the
    country.  He therefore submitted that the weight to be attached to  the
    public interest in removing foreign  criminals  is  great  in  whatever
    context.

90. Mr Khubber by way of reply has submitted that the weight to be given to
    the general consideration  of  the  public  interest  is  qualified  by
    general  long  term  considerations  for  deportation  which  can   not
    undermine or eclipse  the  right  to  effective  procedural  protection
    during the  interim  period.   Furthermore,  that  removal  during  the
    interim period would require justification by the  Secretary  of  State
    having accepted that the Applicant's  claim  could  succeed.   In  this
    context he submitted that the decision letter accepted his  case  as  a
    "fresh claim" and thus must have accepted  that  there  were  realistic
    prospects of success.   I  do  not  think  that  it  follows  from  the
    Secretary of  State's  acceptance  of  the  appeal  as  a  fresh  claim
    necessarily means that it is accepted by the Secretary of State that it
    will succeed.  The  Secretary  of  State  has  to  look  at  the  fresh
    submissions and here it was accepted that the Secretary  of  State  had
    not  considered  the  representations  made  on  11th  March  2015  and
    therefore did so.  The next stage sequentially is to make a decision to
    accept it as a fresh claim.  This is the starting point  therefore  and
    as a consequence the Secretary of State then  carries  out  a  detailed
    consideration within the decision and reaches a conclusion that she had
    not reached before when accepting that it was a fresh claim.  Thus  the
    Secretary of  State  therefore  examines  the  material  and  gives  it
    detailed consideration and reaches a conclusion.  In such a case  being
    entitled to certify it if that is the decision reached after a detailed
    consideration.  That conclusion in my judgment is not inconsistent with
    the initial decision of the acceptance of the submissions  as  a  fresh
    claim.

91. In my judgment there is substantial weight to be attached to the public
    interest not only when considering the substantive decision  to  deport
    but also when considering the question of whether a  person  should  be
    allowed  to  remain  in  the  UK  for  the   interim   period   pending
    determination of their appeal.  The reason given in Kiarie  relates  to
    the fact that parliament has chosen to allow removal  for  the  interim
    period provided it does not breach Section 6 of the Human  Rights  Act.
    In other words there is a strong public  interest  in  the  removal  of
    foreign criminals effectively and  speedily  pending  determination  of
    their appeals which is recognised by  parliament  in  enacting  Section
    94B.  However, it must be taken into account that  parliament,  by  not
    making the power mandatory, recognises that  the  legislation  did  not
    intend to remove all foreign criminals during the appeal process.  Thus
    the strong public interest has to be  weighed  against  other  relevant
    matters, such as  whether  there  is  effective  procedural  protection
    during the appeal process  and  the  extent  to  which  an  applicant's
    private and family life would be disrupted particularly where there are
    minor children involved.  I do not have to reach a conclusion  on  this
    issue because for the purposes of this case I have reached the  overall
    conclusion that the relevant  considerations  that  I  have  identified
    could  be  material  to  the  outcome  so  I  conclude  that   in   the
    circumstances caution should be exercised when considering  substantive
    or procedural failings which invalidate a decision.   As  can  be  seen
    from the chronology in this case,  the  decision  under  challenge  was
    issued before the Court of Appeal  decision  in  Kiarie  and  Byndloss.
    However permission to apply for judicial review was granted after  that
    decision was made available.  There has been no supplementary  decision
    issued dealing with the guidance that  was  subsequently  issued  post-
    Kiarie.

92. I have therefore found the decision to  be  legally  flawed  and  apply
    paragraph [47] of Caroopen and  Myrie  that  the  decision  to  certify
    should be quashed.  It should not be drawn from my  decision  to  quash
    the certificate that it would not be open to the Secretary of State  to
    issue a further decision to certify this particular claim applying  the
    correct test and taking into account any material provided.  If she did
    so, it would, of course, be open  to  challenge  by  a  fresh  judicial
    review claim but unless and  until  she  makes  such  a  decision,  the
    Appellant has an in country right of appeal.

                                  ~~~0~~~~






