
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Case Number: JR/1201/2016


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |                              |
|On 17 March 2017                              |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                    the queen (on the application of F P)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Applicant:     Ms C Hulse, instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Stickler, instructed by the Government Legal
Department


                                  JUDGMENT

Judge Grubb:

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  applicant.   This  direction
    applies to both the applicant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The applicant is a citizen of Albania who is 25 years  old.   In  these
    proceedings, she seeks to challenge  by  way  of  judicial  review  the
    Secretary of State's decision taken on  22  July  2015  to  refuse  her
    claims for asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human  rights  and  to
    certify them as clearly unfounded under  s.94(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act 2002") and  the  decision
    taken on 20 August 2015 to maintain the earlier  certification  in  the
    respondent's response to the pre-action protocol letter.

The Applicant's Claim

 3. The applicant came to the United Kingdom in April 2015 when she entered
    clandestinely in a lorry. On  15  April  2015,  the  applicant  claimed
    asylum and on 25 June 2015 she  underwent  a  screening  interview  and
    asylum interview.

 4. The basis of her claim was that her father  had  been  a  policeman  in
    Albania.  In either December 2000 or December 2001 - which is not clear
    - there was an incident in which an explosion (by  a  grenade)  at  the
    family home resulted in her brother losing some fingers.   She  claimed
    that that incident was as a result of  people  threatening  her  father
    although she did not know  on  what  basis.  Her  father  left  Albania
    following that incident.  She, together with her mother  and  siblings,
    remained in Albania but went to live with her grandfather.  Her  father
    claimed asylum in the UK and was granted indefinite leave to remain.

 5. In 2009, whilst she was attending secondary school, she was  threatened
    by unknown individuals whom she suspected had argued  with  her  father
    and carried out the attack which injured her  brother.   There  were  a
    number of such occasions and, she claimed, she received  a  threatening
    text message stating that what had happened to her brother would happen
    to her.  She did not report these incidents to the police.

 6. In October 2014, while she was  walking  home  with  a  friend,  a  car
    stopped and unknown men got out of the car.  She pretended to call  the
    police and one of the men insulted her  and  her  friend  calling  them
    "whores" before getting back in the car and driving away.   These  were
    different men to those that previously followed her home and again  she
    did not report the incident to the police.

 7. On 17  December  2014,  the  applicant  was  travelling  to  visit  her
    grandfather as a result of receiving a message that he  was  ill.    En
    route she was attacked and  abducted.   She  was  held  at  an  unknown
    location.  (Subsequently, the applicant said that she was raped  during
    her detention.)  The applicant heard the men make a telephone  call  to
    an unknown individual and mention her father and asking if she was  his
    daughter.  The applicant had been tied to a chair having been forced to
    take off her clothes.  The men detaining  her  became  drunk  and  took
    drugs and insulted her and physically hit her.  Later, they fell asleep
    and she managed to escape.

 8. The applicant claims that she told her grandfather about  the  incident
    and a week later she received a video showing her kidnap and her  being
    abused.  The kidnappers told her in the message that  they  would  show
    the video to "everyone".  She did not report the incident or threats to
    the police and destroyed the video.

 9. On 21 December 2014, as a result of being afraid to  leave  the  family
    home, the applicant stopped attending university.  In March  2015,  she
    left Albania (with her mother and siblings) and  travelled  via  France
    before arriving in the UK in April 2015.

The Respondent's Decisions

10. In her decision of 25 July  2015,  the  Secretary  of  State  took  the
    applicant's claim at face value.  She noted that  the  individuals  who
    had threatened and kidnapped the applicant were unknown  to  her.   She
    noted that it was purely speculative that the applicant  believed  that
    the individuals were following her because  of  her  father  and  that,
    although the kidnappers made reference to  her  father,  they  did  not
    explain their interest in her father.  The Secretary of State concluded
    that the claimant's fear that  she  would  be  raped  and  forced  into
    prostitution (which was  part  of  her  claim)  was  speculation.   The
    Secretary of State accepted that the source of the applicant's fear was
    non-state agents which had not  been  sanctioned  by  the  state.   The
    Secretary of State went  on  to  conclude  that,  if  she  returned  to
    Albania, the applicant could obtain a sufficiency  of  protection  from
    the  Albanian  authorities,  noting  that  she  had  not  reported  the
    incidents to the police previously.  Further, the  Secretary  of  State
    concluded that the applicant could safely and  without  undue  hardship
    internally relocate within Albania.

11. In the light of those conclusions, the Secretary of State rejected  the
    applicant's claims for asylum and  humanitarian  protection  and  under
    Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

12. The Secretary of State went on to consider the applicant's claim  under
    Art 8 both under the Rules and outside  the  Rules  and  rejected  that
    claim.

13. In addition, the Secretary of State determined that there was no  basis
    for the grant of discretionary leave on medical grounds.

14. Finally, the Secretary of State certified all  the  claims  as  clearly
    unfounded under s.94(1) (with reference to  s.94(3))  of  the  NIA  Act
    2002.

The Proceedings

15. The applicant served a pre-action protocol letter on 13 August 2015 and
    the Secretary of State responded to  that  letter  on  20  August  2015
    confirming her earlier decision.

16. On 10 September  2015,  an  Emergency  Travel  document  interview  was
    completed.  On 16 November 2015, the  applicant  was  offered  Assisted
    Voluntary Return but refused.

17. On 11 January 2016, the applicant was detained whilst reporting.

18. On 14 January 2016, the applicant made further submissions  in  respect
    of her asylum claim.  On  15  January  2016,  the  Secretary  of  State
    rejected those submissions and concluded they did not amount to a fresh
    claim within para 353 of the Immigration Rules  (HC  395  as  amended).
    Removal directions were set for 4 February 2016.

19. On 15 January 2016, the applicant again made further submissions and on
    18 January 2016 these were again rejected by the Secretary of State and
    it was concluded that they did not amount to a fresh claim within  para
    353.

20. On 27 January 2016, removal directions were served on the applicant.

21. On 2 February 2016, the applicant's legal representatives informed  the
    respondent that the applicant intended to seek judicial review  and  an
    application to stay her removal.  On that same day,  the  Secretary  of
    State  responded  indicating  that  there  were  no  barriers  to   the
    applicant's removal.

22. On 3 February 2016 the applicant sought a stay  of  removal  which  was
    granted by HHJ Seys-Llewellyn QC.

23. On 3 February 2016, the applicant issued these proceedings  which  were
    served on the respondent on 10 February 2016.

24. On 29 February 2016, the respondent filed an acknowledgment of  service
    and summary grounds of defence.

25. On 30 March 2016, HHJ Vosper QC granted the  applicant  permission  and
    continued the stay of removal.  As it was clear that the  applicant  no
    longer was contesting her detention,  it  would  appear  she  had  been
    released from detention, the judge allowed the claim to continue in the
    Upper Tribunal.

Some Preliminary Matters

26. Before I turn to the substance of the applicant's challenge, there  are
    a number of preliminary matters that I need to deal with.

27. First, Ms Hulse, who  represented  the  applicant,  accepted  that  the
    applicant's only challenge was to the certification decision of 22 July
    2015 and the  decision  to  maintain  it  in  the  pre-action  protocol
    response of 20 August 2015.  There can be no proper  challenge  to  the
    underlying asylum decision as the applicant has an adequate alternative
    remedy to challenge that either by way of an out of country  appeal  if
    the certification is upheld and, of course, in an in-country appeal  if
    the certification is quashed.

28. Secondly, Ms Hulse did not seek to challenge the Secretary  of  State's
    subsequent decisions rejecting the applicant's further  submissions  as
    not amounting to fresh claims taken on 15 January 2016, 18 January 2016
    and 2 February 2016.  Although Ms Stickler made  passing  reference  to
    these decisions in her submissions, they formed no part of the  pleaded
    case of the applicant or the respondent.

29. Thirdly, Ms Hulse's submissions and skeleton argument only address  the
    certification in relation to the international protection claim and not
    the decision to certify the applicant's Art 8 claim.

30. Finally, Ms Stickler sought permission to adduce  a  witness  statement
    from Mark Rich explaining the background to an issue which  had  arisen
    at the earlier stages of these proceedings.  Both HHJ Seys-Llewellyn QC
    and HHJ Vosper QC made reference to an OSCU  letter  submitted  by  the
    applicant which stated that the Home Office  was  only  enforcing  "the
    return of single adult males" to Albania.   The  witness  statement  of
    Mark Rich explains that this  was  an  error  which  had  been  wrongly
    included from a template relating to Afghanistan and there was no  such
    policy in relation  to  Albania.   Ms  Hulse  did  not  object  to  the
    admission of this evidence which sought to clarify the position.   Both
    counsel acknowledged that, as a result, no issue arose  in  respect  of
    the matter and it formed no part of either counsel's submissions.

The Law

31. The relevant law concerning a challenge by way of judicial review to  a
    "clearly unfounded" certification under s.94 of the NIA  Act  2002  was
    not a matter of contention between the parties.  It has  been  recently
    considered by the Court of Appeal in R (FR) (Albania) and KL (Albania))
    v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 605.  It is helpfully summarised, together  with
    the relevant case law, by Beatson LJ (with whom Davis and Lindblom  LJJ
    agreed) at [48]-[62].

    (1)  The correct question to be addressed by the Secretary of State  in
         certifying a claim as "clearly unfounded" is whether the  claim  is
         bound to fail on appeal to the FtT IAC.  A claim is  only  "clearly
         unfounded" if there is only one rational answer.  If any reasonable
         doubt exists as to whether a claim may  succeed,  then  it  is  not
         clearly unfounded.  In other words, the issue is  not  whether  the
         Secretary of State considers the claim cannot  succeed,  the  issue
         has to be seen through the eyes of a hypothetical judge on  appeal.
         See Beatson LJ at [58]-[60].

    (2)  The claim that the Secretary of State must  assess,  and  reach  a
         view on whether it is "clearly unfounded", is the  claim  which  is
         put forward, including the answers in interview and the contents of
         witness statements, the detail given and  any  supporting  evidence
         submitted.  See Beatson LJ at [77].

    (3)  Whilst in general it will be appropriate to take  an  individual's
         case at its "highest", a claim which  is  incapable  of  belief  or
         inconsistent with objective evidence does not have to  be  accepted
         in reaching the certification decision.  See Beatson LJ at [77].

    (4)  When a court or tribunal is considering  the  judicial  review  of
         certification, the court or tribunal should not substitute its  own
         view but determine whether on normal judicial review principles the
         decision is unlawful.  See Beatson LJ at [56].

    (5)  In reaching that decision, in particular whether the Secretary  of
         State's  conclusion  was  irrational,  if  the  court  or  tribunal
         concludes that a claim has a realistic prospect of success when the
         Secretary of State has  reached  a  contrary  view,  the  court  or
         tribunal will necessarily conclude that the decision is irrational.
          See Beatson LJ at [50].

    (6)  In reviewing the certification of an asylum or human rights claim,
         the court  or  tribunal  must  apply  "anxious  scrutiny"  and  the
         intensity of review, given the nature and gravity  of  what  is  at
         stake, lies at the most intensive end of the  spectrum  of  review.
         However, the court or tribunal must not lose sight of the fact that
         the Secretary of State has a "gate-keeping" or "screening" function
         as to the availability of an in-country appeal by  the  process  of
         certification and the court or tribunal, even applying the required
         intensity of review, must take care not inappropriately to  deprive
         the Secretary of State of that function.  See Beatson LJ  at  [49],
         [56] and [62].

Discussion

32. The applicant's claim was put  forward  in  her  screening  and  asylum
    interviews.  Her claim, in particular as  articulated  in  the  latter,
    contained a number of threads.

33. First, she explained that her father had worked as a policeman for  ten
    years in Albania before he left when there was an incident where  there
    was an explosion and her brother lost his fingers.  She explained  that
    "they" were threatening  her  father  but  "we  did  not  ask  who  was
    threatening him ... we did not know what the problem was".  She did not
    know who was threatening him; she never asked.   He just told them that
    there was a problem at work.  See answers to questions 30-33.

34. Secondly, the applicant confirmed that her father was in the  UK.   She
    stated that he had a British passport - although this does  not  appear
    to be the case (see Q115).  The applicant confirmed  that  she  had  no
    evidence of his status but he had claimed asylum (see  Q116  and  117).
    When asked what was his asylum claim, the applicant said "he  told  the
    incident that had happened" (Q118).

35. Thirdly, the applicant explained what had happened to  her  in  Albania
    and what had led her, her mother and siblings to come to the  UK.   She
    explained that in 2009, whilst attending secondary school, she had been
    threatened by unknown individuals  and  that  she  suspected  that  the
    individuals were the ones who had argued with her  father  and  carried
    out the attack that injured her brother.  The threat  occurred  over  a
    period of time by unknown males following her in  cars  while  she  was
    walking from school and she received a threatening text message stating
    that what had happened to her brother would happen to her (see Q48, 52-
    56).

36. Fourthly, in October 2014 when she was walking home with a friend a car
    stopped in front of her and unknown men got out and called her and  her
    friend "whores" but got back in the  car  and  drove  away  whilst  the
    applicant pretended to call the police (see Q57-63).

37. Fifthly, on 17 December 2014, she received a message that she should go
    to her grandfather who was dying.  On the way, she was attacked by some
    men who hit her on the head, knocking her unconscious.  When she  awoke
    she was in a car with two men who took her to a  house  at  an  unknown
    place.  She was forced to take her clothes off and tied to a chair  and
    subjected to ill-treatment although,  she  said,  she  was  not  raped.
    While she was held, she overhead one of the men making a telephone call
    to an unknown person and  she  "overhead  them  asking  if  I  was  the
    daughter of [her father's name]."  (See Q74-75).  Later, when  the  men
    fell asleep having  been  drinking  and  taking  drugs,  the  applicant
    escaped.  She only told her grandfather about the incident as  she  did
    not want to worry her mother (Q78-79).  A week later,  she  received  a
    video showing her being kidnapped and abused with a  message  that  the
    video would be shown to "everyone who comes close to [her]" (Q88).  The
    applicant did not report the incident to the police and  destroyed  the
    video (see Q83-84 and 92-93).

38. Sixthly, in December 2014, the applicant stopped  attending  university
    and was afraid to leave her family  home.   In  March  2015,  she  left
    Albania and travelled to the UK (see Q99-100).

39. The applicant accepts that she did not report the matters to the police
    and, in relation to the incident in December 2014, she did  not  do  so
    because she knew that they would "laugh at" her (Q84).

40. In refusing the applicant's international protection claim (for asylum,
    humanitarian protection and under Art 3 of the ECHR), the Secretary  of
    State,  having  set  out  the  claim  made  by  the  applicant  in  her
    interviews, in respect of the incidents involving unknown men (prior to
    the abduction) concluded that the  applicant's  belief  that  this  was
    connected to her father  was  speculative.   Further,  as  regards  the
    conversation overheard  when  she  was  abducted  and  detained  on  17
    December 2014, the Secretary of State observed that  the  men  had  not
    explained why they were interested in her father (see para  18  of  the
    refusal letter).  The Secretary of State concluded that the applicant's
    fear that she would be raped or forced into prostitution  if  she  were
    returned to Albania was pure speculation.  In her asylum interview, she
    had not said she was raped (indeed she said she had not been) and  they
    had not discussed prostitution (see para 19  of  the  refusal  letter).
    The Secretary of State also concluded that, as the  applicant  had  not
    reported the matters to the police, it was pure speculation  that  they
    would not assist her especially given that  her  father  was  a  police
    officer (see para 20 of the refusal decision).  Taking into account the
    background evidence the Secretary of State concluded (at  paras  22-38)
    that the applicant would, on return to Albania, obtain a sufficiency of
    protection from any persecution  or  ill-treatment  from  the  Albanian
    authorities and (at paras 39-48) concluded  that  the  applicant  could
    safely and reasonably without undue hardship internally relocate within
    Albania. As a result, the Secretary of State  refused  the  applicant's
    international protection claims.  At  paras  79-80,  the  Secretary  of
    State went on to conclude that having rejected each of the  applicant's
    claims she was satisfied that they were clearly unfounded.

41. Ms Hulse submitted that the Secretary of  State  had  failed  to  apply
    "anxious scrutiny" to the applicant's claim.  She  submitted  that  the
    applicant had set out in her asylum  interviews  the  circumstances  in
    which she would be at risk on return to  Albania.   In  particular,  Ms
    Hulse relied upon the circumstances in which the applicant's father had
    been granted indefinite leave to remain under Art 3 of the  ECHR.   She
    relied upon an Adjudicator's decision promulgated on 28 October 2002 in
    which he had accepted that the applicant's father was at  risk  from  a
    family whom he  had  been  instrumental  in  arresting  and  which  had
    resulted in their imprisonment.  Further, her father had been  targeted
    firstly by being shot at and secondly  by  a  hand  grenade  which  was
    thrown into the home injuring the applicant's  brother.   The  relevant
    passage is in para 9 of the Adjudicator's determination as follows:

         "I have no hesitation in accepting that the appellant  entered  the
         police service in 1922 and ended up a captain working in the police
         commissariat of [H] in Northern Albania.  The  background  evidence
         put in as part of the RLC's  submissions  of  14  August  2002  and
         enclosures convince me that the [H] family exist and are  powerful.
         I therefore have reason to accept  the  appellant's  statement  his
         police chief [G] blocked any  move  to  curb  [H].   I  accept  the
         appellant's account of being targeted by [H], one of the  four  men
         arrested by the appellant and later sent to prison.  The  targeting
         was firstly being shot at and secondly by  having  a  hand  grenade
         thrown in his house and his son killed.  However I am not satisfied
         that the appellant was targeted because of any  actual  or  imputed
         political reason.  So far as the  [H]  family  were  concerned  the
         appellant was a policeman who had done his duty in the past.  I  am
         therefore not satisfied a Convention reason is involved  but  I  do
         find that there is a real risk that the appellant if returned faces
         treatment in breach of Article 3 and because of the  corruption  in
         high places and the influence of organised crime,  the  appellant's
         own police department will not offer a sufficiency  of  protection.
         The department will not issue the  process  to  bring  [H]  to  the
         process of law."

42. Ms Hulse  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  had,  in  effect,
    knowledge of this and once the applicant had raised  in  her  interview
    that her father had made a claim in the UK and was here - she said  now
    as a British citizen - the Secretary of  State  in  order  lawfully  to
    determine the applicant's claim should have connected the father's case
    with the appellant's claim that she was being targeted because she  was
    her father's daughter.  Ms Hulse submitted that in those circumstances,
    if the applicant's claim was a continuation of the revenge being sought
    by members of the gang her father had been  responsible  for  arresting
    and which resulted in twenty year prison sentences for a gang which had
    close ties with members of the government, the Secretary of State could
    not rationally conclude that the applicant's claim was  bound  to  fail
    and that there would be a sufficiency of  protection  afforded  by  the
    Albanian authorities, in particular the police.

43. Ms Stickler, on behalf of the Secretary of  State  submitted  that  the
    Secretary of State was only required  to  consider  the  claim  as  put
    forward by the applicant in her interviews.  She had not made  a  claim
    that she had been sexually assaulted indeed she had  specifically  said
    that had not happened.  Ms Stickler submitted that at no point had  the
    applicant said that she faced a risk from a gang or family  because  of
    what had happened to her father in 2002.  Even if she had, Ms  Stickler
    submitted that there was no basis for linking what had happened to  the
    applicant to  her  father.   In  particular,  she  submitted  that  the
    overheard conversation did not identify any link with the 2002 event.

44. Ms Stickler submitted that the Secretary of State had no duty to expand
    upon or fill out the claim made by the applicant in her interviews  and
    search for a connection with what  had  happened  to  her  father.   Ms
    Stickler  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  entitled  to
    determine the applicant's claim as put forward, namely that she was  at
    risk from  unidentified  state  agents.   In  those  circumstances,  Ms
    Stickler submitted there was nothing  irrational  or  unlawful  in  the
    Secretary of State concluding that the Albanian state would  provide  a
    sufficiency of protection and that she could, in any event,  internally
    relocate within Albania and her claim was properly certified as clearly
    unfounded.

45. The applicant's challenge in this case  turns,  in  my  judgment,  upon
    whether or not the  Secretary  of  State  should  have  considered  the
    applicant's claim in the light of the basis  upon  which  her  father's
    international protection claim was resolved  in  his  favour  in  2002.
    Taking only what was said by the applicant in her asylum interview,  it
    is clear to me that the Secretary of State's decision  to  certify  her
    claim as 'clearly unfounded' was one within  the  range  of  reasonable
    decisions that the Secretary of State could make.  Given the absence of
    such matters that  the  applicant's  father  had  been  targeted  by  a
    family/gang whom he had been instrumental in arresting and who had been
    subsequently imprisoned and that he could not obtain a  sufficiency  of
    protection because of their  influence,  the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to conclude that the applicant's claim was bound to fail.   Ms
    Hulse did not pursue a claim simply based upon the  applicant's  return
    to  Albania  as  a  young  woman.   Without  the   injection   of   the
    circumstances of her father, I accept that her claim could not  succeed
    on any legitimate basis.

46. However, if the Secretary of State had, in effect, a duty  to  consider
    her claim having regard to the basis of her father's earlier claim  and
    its outcome, the Secretary of State's decision would, in  my  judgment,
    be clearly  unlawful  as  she  would  have  failed  to  apply  'anxious
    scrutiny' and, in  any  event,  a  claim  injected  with  the  father's
    circumstances could not rationally be said to be one which was bound to
    fail.  Taking the applicant's account at face value,  and  it  was  not
    inherently incredible or implausible, together with  the  circumstances
    in which the  applicant's  father  was  forced  to  leave  Albania  and
    succeeded under Art 3 (as set  out  in  para  9  of  the  Adjudicator's
    decision), even though some time has passed it  is  at  least  arguable
    that a judge would conclude that the applicant  would  be  at  risk  on
    return and the police authorities  would  be  unable  or  unwilling  to
    protect her.  Internal relocation  would  also,  arguably,  not  be  an
    available option.

47. Was, therefore, the Secretary of State required to go behind  the  bare
    facts put forward by the applicant and, in the  circumstances  of  this
    case, expose the substance of her father's claim and,  therefore,  take
    that into account in assessing her claim and whether to certify it?

48. The starting point is undoubtedly, as Ms Stickler submitted, set out by
    Beatson LJ at [77] of FR and KL where he said:

         "What must be assessed is the claim which  has  in  fact  been  put
         forward, including the answers in interview and the contents of the
         witness statements, the detail given and  the  supporting  evidence
         submitted." (my emphasis)

49. Ms Stickler submitted that that is  precisely  what  the  Secretary  of
    State did in this case.

50.  I  accept  that  it  is  for  the  individual  claiming   asylum   (or
    international protection more generally) to  substantiate  his  or  her
    claim by  evidence.   That  is  made  explicit  in  para  339I  of  the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) which is as follows:

         "339I.   When the Secretary of State considers  a  person's  asylum
                claim, eligibility for a grant of  humanitarian  protection
                or human rights claim it is  the  duty  of  the  person  to
                submit to the Secretary of State as soon  as  possible  all
                material factors needed to substantiate the asylum claim or
                establish that he is a  person  eligible  for  humanitarian
                protection or substantiate the human  rights  claim,  which
                the Secretary of State shall assess in cooperation with the
                person.

                The material factors include:

                (i)   the person's statement on the reasons for  making  an
                     asylum  claim  or  on  eligibility  for  a   grant   of
                     humanitarian protection or for making  a  human  rights
                     claim;

                (ii)  all documentation at the person's disposal  regarding
                     the  person's  age,  background  (including  background
                     details    of    relevant     relatives),     identity,
                     nationality(ies), country(ies) and place(s) of previous
                     residence, previous asylum applications, travel routes;
                     and

                (iii)      identity and travel documents." (emphasis added)

51. The Rules also set out the Secretary of State's obligation to assess  a
    claim "on an individual, objective and  impartial  basis"  taking  into
    account in particular certain information.  Paragraph 339J provides  as
    follows:

         "339J.   The assessment by the Secretary  of  State  of  an  asylum
                claim, eligibility for a grant of  humanitarian  protection
                or  a  human  rights  claim  will  be  carried  out  on  an
                individual,  objective  and  impartial  basis.   This  will
                include taking into account in particular:

                (i)   all relevant facts as they relate to the  country  of
                     origin or country of return at the  time  of  taking  a
                     decision on the grant; including laws  and  regulations
                     of the country of origin or country of return  and  the
                     manner in which they are applied;

                (ii)  relevant statements and  documentation  presented  by
                     the person including information on whether the  person
                     has been or may be subject to  persecution  or  serious
                     harm;

                (iii)        the   individual   position    and    personal
                     circumstances of the person, including factors such  as
                     background, gender and age, so as to assess whether, on
                     the basis of the person's personal  circumstances,  the
                     acts to which the person has been or could  be  exposed
                     would amount to persecution or serious harm;

                (iv)  whether the person's  activities  since  leaving  the
                     country of origin or country of return were engaged  in
                     for the sole or main purpose of creating the  necessary
                     conditions for making an asylum claim  or  establishing
                     that  he  is  a  person   eligible   for   humanitarian
                     protection or a human rights claim,  so  as  to  assess
                     whether these activities  will  expose  the  person  to
                     persecution or serious harm  if  he  returned  to  that
                     country; and

                (v)   whether the person could reasonably  be  expected  to
                     avail himself of  the  protection  of  another  country
                     where he could assert citizenship."

52. Further para 339HA requires those who consider international protection
    applications to have relevant knowledge in  the  field  of  asylum  and
    refugee law.  Paragraph 339HA provides as follows:

         "339HA.  The Secretary of State shall  ensure  that  the  personnel
                examining applications for asylum and taking  decisions  on
                his behalf have the  knowledge  with  respect  to  relevant
                standards applicable in the field  of  asylum  and  refugee
                law."

    Primarily, therefore, the Secretary of State is required  to  determine
    an individual's international  protection  claim  in  response  to  the
    evidence (documentary or otherwise) presented by that individual.  That
    said, the Secretary of State must determine such claims in the light of
    country background information which may, of course, not be provided by
    an individual but must nevertheless be taken  into  account  (see  para
    339J(i)).

53. The UNHCR Handbook (Handbook and Guidelines on Procedures and  Criteria
    for Determining Refugee Status, 1979) recognises that  it  is  for  the
    individual to substantiate their claim but  also  recognises  that  the
    "duty to ascertain and evaluate all relevant facts" is "shared  between
    the applicant and the examiner".  Paragraphs 195-196 are as follows:

         "195.    The relevant facts of the individual case will have to  be
                furnished in the first place by the applicant himself.   It
                will then be up to the person charged with determining  his
                status  (the  examiner)  to  assess  the  validity  of  any
                evidence and the credibility of the applicant's statements.

         196.     It is a general legal principle that the burden  of  proof
                lies on the person submitting a claim.  Often, however,  an
                applicant may not be able  to  support  his  statements  by
                documentary or other proof, and cases in which an applicant
                can provide evidence of all  his  statements  will  be  the
                exception rather than the rule.  In  most  cases  a  person
                fleeing from persecution will have arrived with the  barest
                necessities  and  very  frequently  even  without  personal
                documents.  Thus, while the burden of  proof  in  principle
                rests on the applicant, the duty to ascertain and  evaluate
                all the relevant facts is shared between the applicant  and
                the examiner.  Indeed, in some cases, it  may  be  for  the
                examiner to use all the means at his  disposal  to  produce
                the necessary evidence in support of the application.  Even
                such independent  research  may  not,  however,  always  be
                successful and there may also be statements  that  are  not
                susceptible of proof.  In such cases,  if  the  applicant's
                account appears credible, he should, unless there are  good
                reasons to the  contrary,  be  given  the  benefit  of  the
                doubt."

54. Of course, much of the Handbook is aspirational  and  does  not  always
    reflect  the  legal  obligations  upon  the   examining   state.    It,
    nevertheless, reflects a sensible and commonsense position that in some
    circumstances some obligation may be placed upon a state to "ascertain"
    the relevant facts.  Such an obligation would not be  onerous  if,  for
    example, as would be required in this case, it required  the  state  to
    interrogate internal files relating to family members of a claimant.

55. There are visible manifestations of this shared obligation for  example
    in requiring the Home Office to consider an individual's claim  in  the
    light of country background material.  Another example would be, albeit
    arising only in exceptional circumstances, that the Secretary of  State
    should seek to verify a document submitted by a claimant (see, Singh  v
    Belgium (Application No. 33210/11) [2012] ECHR  362).   While  such  an
    obligation may only arise exceptionally (see  PJ  (Sri  Lanka)  v  SSHD
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1011), rather than  gainsaying  the  existence  of  any
    obligation to enquire,  it  is  rather  entirely  consistent  with  its
    existence in principle.  In PJ (Sri Lanka)  Fulford  LJ  said  this  at
    [29]:

         "...  [the  case  law]  does  no  more  than  indicate   that   the
         circumstances of particular cases may exceptionally necessitate  an
         element of investigation by the national authorities, in  order  to
         provide effective protection against mistreatment under  article  3
         ECHR.  It is important to stress,  however,  that  this  step  will
         frequently  not  be  feasible  or  it   may   be   unjustified   or
         disproportionate."

56. At [30], Fulford LJ continued:

         "Therefore, simply  because  a  relevant  document  is  potentially
         capable  of  being  verified  does  not  mean  that  the   national
         authorities have an obligation to take this step.  Instead, it  may
         be necessary to make an enquiry in order to verify the authenticity
         and reliability with document - depending always on the  particular
         facts of the case - when it is at the centre  of  the  request  for
         protection, and when a simple process of enquiry will  conclusively
         resolve its authenticity and reliability".

57. That obligation, derived from Art 3 by Fulford LJ (at  [29]),  finds  a
    solid base in asylum claims,  in  my  judgment,  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's duty to apply anxious scrutiny to an  international  protection
    claim  whether  based  under  the  Refugee   Convention,   humanitarian
    protection provisions or the ECHR.

58. The scope of the obligation will be  fact-sensitive  and  will  require
    careful crafting in any given case so as not to impose  an  unrealistic
    or impractical burden upon the Secretary of State.  In this  case,  the
    Secretary of State's obligation went, in my judgment, no  further  than
    interrogating her  own  records  concerning  the  prior  claim  of  the
    applicant's father.  As I understand it, it was the Secretary of  State
    who provided the applicant  with  the  Adjudicator's  decision  in  his
    favour.  In this case, the Secretary of State had the essential  pieces
    of the applicant's claim provided to her by the applicant in her asylum
    interview.  All that was required of the Secretary of State was,  as  I
    put it in argument, to 'join up the  dots'  so  as  to  understand  the
    substance of the applicant's claim to be at risk because  of  what  had
    happened to her father and which had been recognised by the Adjudicator
    as established.   This  was  information  within  the  control  of  the
    Secretary of State.  The applicant said, and it is not  disputed,  that
    she did not know the substance of her father's claim but she knew  that
    he had claimed asylum.  She also linked what had happened to her  -  at
    least in relation to her abduction and detention - to something  to  do
    with her father.

59. It is not necessary for me to consider whether the Secretary  of  State
    has a wider obligation of enquiry than that  which  I  have  identified
    above and nothing I have said should be taken to imply there exists, or
    I accept, any wider obligation.  Here, the elements of the  claim  were
    given by the applicant  and,  in  part,  that  claim  relied  upon  the
    circumstances of a family member whose claim in the UK  has  previously
    been presented to the Secretary of State and, in this  case  at  least,
    been accepted in judicial proceedings.  That was information  to  which
    the applicant was not privy or aware.  In those limited  circumstances,
    in my judgment, the Secretary of State in this case had  an  obligation
    in applying 'anxious scrutiny' to the applicant's claim  to  carry  out
    that limited investigation which would have revealed the  circumstances
    of her father's claim and its outcome.

60. As I have already indicated, had the Secretary of State done so, on the
    basis  of  what  was  put  forward  by  the  applicant  read  with  the
    circumstances of her father, it would  not  be  properly  open  to  the
    Secretary of State to conclude that her claim was bound to fail on  any
    legitimate view on appeal to the FtT IAC.

61. For these reasons,  the  challenged  decisions  of  the  respondent  to
    certify the applicant's claim as clearly unfounded on 22 July 2015  and
    to maintain it on 20 August 2015 were unlawful.

Decision

62. Thus, the applicant's claim  succeeds  and  the  certification  of  her
    international protection claims is quashed.



                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date

