

































                                                                JR/1256/2018

                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice



                       The Queen on the application of

                                     FTH


                                                         Applicant
                                      v


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                     Respondent


                                  Before


                                 Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


                                 Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


                                     heard on 9 - 11 May 2018





      Having considered all documents lodged and having heard Ms  C.  Kilroy
      and Ms M. Knorr of counsel, instructed by Bhatt Murphy Solicitors,  on
      behalf of the Applicant, and Mr. R. Kellar of Counsel,  instructed  by
      the Government Legal Department, on behalf of  the  Respondent,  at  a
      hearing at Field House, London on 9 - 11 May 2018.

Decision: The application is granted




                          ANONYMITY ORDER

      Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI/2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or  any  form
    of publication thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  that
    Appellant. This prohibition applies to, amongst others, both parties.

THE HISTORY OF THE APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

1.    The Applicant, who was born on  10  August  1999,  is  a  national  of
    Eritrea. He is a  Pentecostal  Christian,  who  also  fears  indefinite
    conscription in Eritrea. He is seeking family  reunification  with  his
    brother, YH, who has  been  recognised  as  a  refugee  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The Applicant's age is not in dispute, as on 2 January 2017 La
    Cour d'Appel de Rouen accepted that he was a child at that time.  Helen
    O'Keefe, a mental health social worker, met with the  Applicant  on  23
    January 2018 and 27 April 2018 and concluded that he was suffering from
    moderate to severe post-traumatic  stress  disorder  arising  from  his
    experiences in Libya, during the sea crossing to Europe, in the  Calais
    "jungle" and since making his application to enter the United  Kingdom.
    She also found that his condition was  exacerbated  by  his  separation
    from his brother and the failure on the part of the Respondent to  give
    reasons for refusing to grant him entry to the United Kingdom.

2.    It is the Applicant's case that he  fled  from  Eritrea  in  2015.  He
    travelled through Sudan to Libya, where he was detained and  forced  to
    do building work before his uncle paid a ransom  for  his  release.  He
    then managed to  cross  the  Mediterranean  Sea  and  enter  Italy  and
    eventually arrived in Calais in July  2016  and  took  shelter  in  the
    Calais "jungle".

3.    His entitlements were not considered within  the  accelerated  process
    established early in October 2016 and after  the  Calais  "Jungle"  was
    demolished between 24 and 26 October 2016, the Applicant was placed  in
    the  Centre  D'Accueil  Provisionere  ("the  CAP"  Temporary  Reception
    Centre) but was not interviewed whilst he was there. The CAP was closed
    on 27 October 2016 and the Applicant was transferred a Centre d'Accueil
    et d'Orientation pour Mineurs Isoles (a "CAOMI") in Le Havre  in  order
    for a decision to  be  made  as  to  whether  he  was  eligible  to  be
    transferred to the United Kingdom. This consideration took place  under
    a process designated as Operation Purnia Phase 2.

4.    He was asked questions over the telephone in  or  around  24  November
    2016. He was not provided an interpreter in his  mother  tongue,  Saho.
    Instead, the interpreter  at  the  other  end  of  telephone  call  was
    speaking to him in Tigrinya and spoke very quickly. As  a  consequence,
    he found it difficult to understand some of the questions put to him.

5.    YH was interviewed over the telephone without  an  interpreter  on  30
    November 2016 and on the same day a Home  Office  case  worker  decided
    that the Applicant did not qualify to  be  transferred  to  the  United
    Kingdom. In a spreadsheet sent to the French authorities on 14 December
    2016, they were told that  his  family  link  had  not  been  accepted.
    Towards the end of December 2016 the Applicant was part of a  group  of
    children at the CAOMI in Le  Havre  who  was  simply  told  that  their
    applications had been  rejected.  He  was  not  given  any  written  or
    detailed reasons for the decision.

5.    On 30 December 2016 the Public Prosecutor at Le Havre  District  Court
    made a protection order in relation to the  Applicant,  as  he  was  an
    unaccompanied child, and he was entrusted to  the  care  of  the  Seine
    Maritime child and youth social care services.

6.    In his witness statement the Applicant said that he  was  subsequently
    taken to a French government office or court where he explained that he
    had a brother in the United Kingdom and wished to  join  him.  This  is
    confirmed by an untranslated questionnaire  which  indicates  that  the
    Applicant was  interviewed  at  a  Centre  D'Accueil  et  D'Orientation
    ("CAO") sometime after 3 January 2017.  The Applicant's  name  appeared
    on a spread-sheet sent by the French authorities to the UK  authorities
    on 28 February 2017 containing  the  names  of  unaccompanied  children
    whose cases the French authorities thought should  be  reviewed.  On  8
    March 2017 the UK Authorities informed the French  authorities  that  a
    take charge request could be progressed if  contact  details  [for  FH]
    were located.  It does not appear that the French authorities took  any
    further action.

7.    The Applicant believed that he was not going to be transferred to  the
    United Kingdom and left the CAOMI in Le Havre  on  16  April  2017.  He
    travelled to Paris where he lived on the streets and then  returned  to
    Northern  France  and  again  lived  rough  near  a  port   and   tried
    unsuccessfully to cross the Channel.  On 11  August  2017  the  Refugee
    Youth Service in Calais referred the Applicant to Safe Passage,  a  not
    for  profit  organisation  established  to  help  unaccompanied   child
    refugees and vulnerable adults find safe and legal routes to protection
    through advocacy, community organisation and legal work. By this  time,
    he had become 18 on 10 August 2017. On 24 October 2017 he was  provided
    with a place at adult Centre d'Accueil et d'Exanen  des  Situations  (a
    "CEAS") in Belval. Safe Passage also arranged for him  to  be  provided
    with legal advice and assistance. He was initially advised by  Ashursts
    Solicitors on a pro bono basis and they tried unsuccessfully to  obtain
    disclosure  from  the  Respondent.  He  then  instructed  Bhatt  Murphy
    Solicitors and they obtained a full legal aid certificate to  represent
    him on 24 January 2018.

8.    Meanwhile, Bhatt Murphy had sent a pre-action protocol letter  to  the
    Respondent on 22 December 2017 and had  also  requested  disclosure  of
    documents relating to the expedited process in which the Applicant  had
    been involved and the decision to reject  his  claim.   The  Respondent
    sought more time to respond on 5 January 2018 and sent a partial  reply
    on 24 January 2018.  This dealt with  procedural  issues  and,  as  the
    letter from Bhatt Murphy Solicitors, dated 25 January 2018, pointed out
    did not respond to the substance of the proposed claim or  provide  the
    necessary disclosure.

9.    The Applicant lodged his claim for  judicial  review  on  16  February
    2018, challenging the on-going failure by  the  Respondent  to  make  a
    lawful decision in relation to his application and/or to admit  him  to
    the  United  Kingdom.  He  also  made  an  application  for  an  urgent
    consideration of his application for expedition.

10.    On  16  February  2018,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Rintoul  listed  the
    application for expedition for an oral hearing. This was listed for  23
    February 2018. The day before this hearing the Respondent  disclosed  a
    copy of the Applicant's Op Purina Phase  2  interview  and  some  other
    related documents.

12.    In compliance with the directions made by Upper Tribunal Judge  King,
    the Respondent filed and  served  her  acknowledgment  of  service  and
    summary grounds of defence on 9 March 2018. The Judge had also directed
    that there should be full disclosure within 14 days of notification  of
    his decision.  There was some but not complete disclosure  in  response
    to this order.

13.   On 26 March 2018, Upper Tribunal Judge Finch refused the  Respondent's
    application for a stay pending appeals set down in the Court of  Appeal
    between 12 - 14 June 2018 and  granted  him  permission  to  apply  for
    judicial review at an oral  permission  hearing.  On  3  May  2018  the
    Respondent applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal
    against Upper Tribunal Judge Finch's decision to refuse him a stay.  No
    decision had been reached on this decision by  the  time  of  the  full
    judicial review hearing.

14.   Meanwhile, on or around 19 March 2018, the Applicant  was  transferred
    to another CEAS, where he was the only Eritrean, which had no wi-fi and
    was two or three hours walk from the nearest town. He was distressed at
    not being able to keep in touch with his  brother  and,  therefore,  he
    left the CEAS on or around 1 April 2018 and returned to  Calais,  where
    he had some friends, and resumed living rough. On 19 April 2018 he  was
    admitted to the Centre Hospitalier de Calais after  being  hit  on  the
    head by a truncheon. His forehead was sutured at 34 points and  it  was
    believed that he had lost consciousness  for  a  few  minutes.  He  was
    prescribed painkillers and discharged to  return  in  five  days.  Safe
    Passage then arranged for him  to  be  accommodated  by  one  of  their
    volunteers, Brother Johannes, and he remains there.

15.   By this time, on 19 and 21 March 2018, the Applicant's solicitors  had
    written to the French authorities, enclosing supporting evidence of his
    relationship with  YH,  and  on  4  May  2018  the  French  authorities
    confirmed that they were willing to send a take  charge  request  under
    article 17.2 of Dublin III, if the Applicant lodged a claim for  asylum
    in France. The Respondent sent a draft consent order to  the  Applicant
    on 4 May  2018.  The  terms  of  this  proposed  order  were  that  the
    Respondent would give favourable consideration to a take charge request
    under Article 17.2 subject to (a) undertaking further  identity  checks
    to verify that YH was the Applicant's brother as  stated  and  (b)  the
    Respondent performing standard security checks prior to any transfer to
    the United Kingdom.

16.   On 25 May 2018, when we were close  to  finalising  our  decision,  we
    received further disclosure  from  the  Respondent.  As  the  documents
    appeared to be of central relevance to some of the  issues  before  us,
    the parties were contacted by  telephone  after  the  intervening  Bank
    Holiday and on  30  May  2018  the  Applicant's  legal  representatives
    indicated that they wished us to take these documents into account. The
    Government Legal Department did not object to us doing so.

THE ORAL HEARING

17.   At the start of the hearing,  counsel  for  the  Respondent  confirmed
    that he was no longer seeking to pursue his application for  permission
    to appeal to the Court of Appeal against the decision by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Finch to refuse him a stay.

18.   There was also discussion of the draft consent order, which  had  been
    sent to the Applicant by the Respondent on 4 May 2018,  and  which  had
    subsequently been amended in response to clarification being sought  by
    the Applicant. Such clarification was not provided until  10  May  2018
    when the Respondent wrote to the Applicant's  solicitors  enclosing  an
    amended draft consent order stating that the Secretary of State for the
    Home Department was prepared to confirm that he  would  accept  a  take
    charge request in respect of the Applicant subject to security  checks.
    These checks were said to include ones to ensure that there was nothing
    in his or his brother's history which gave rise  to  national  security
    issues. He also indicated that there would be  additional  safeguarding
    checks as, although the Applicant was now over 18, there were  apparent
    health issues. In addition, he confirmed that he now accepted that  the
    Applicant was YH's brother and, therefore, would not  require  any  DNA
    evidence. In addition, he said that if there were no security issues he
    would be able to accept a take charge request on the same or  the  next
    working day after receipt of such a request.

19.    The  fact  that  this  clarification  came  part  way   through   the
    substantive judicial review hearing and that the Applicant's solicitors
    needed to explain any offers to the Applicant in person  and  with  the
    assistance of an appropriate interpreter meant that the  Applicant  was
    not in a position to give or refuse consent to the offer being made  by
    the Respondent. Therefore, we continued to hear full  submissions  from
    counsel for the Applicant and  counsel  for  the  Respondent.  We  have
    referred to the content of their submissions, where necessary,  in  our
    findings below.  It was also our view that the potential opportunity to
    enter the United Kingdom under the provisions of Article 17.2 of Dublin
    III did not amount to an alternative remedy to the current application,
    coming as it did too late for proper instructions to be taken.

DECISION

THE DUBLIN III REGULATION

20.   The Dublin  III  Regulation  (Regulation  (EU)  No.  604/2013  of  the
    European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 establishing the
    criteria and mechanisms for determining the  Member  State  responsible
    for examining an application for international protection lodged in one
    of the Member States by a third-country national or a stateless  person
    (recast)) forms the background to this application, whether or not,  it
    was being applied in its totality to the  Applicant.  It  contains  the
    following articles:

      Article 2 of Dublin III contains the following relevant definitions:

      'Application for international protection' is defined by reference to
      the Qualification Directive which (in the relevant version) is 'a
      request made by a third country national or a stateless person for
      protection from a Member State, who can be understood to seek refugee
      status or subsidiary protection status...'(Reg.2(g)).


      'Applicant' means a third-country national or a stateless person who
      has made an application for international protection in respect of
      which a final decision has not yet been taken.


      Article 3 provides:


      '1. Member States shall examine an application for international
      protection by a third-country national or a stateless person who
      applies on the territory of any one of them, including at the border
      or in the transit zones. The application shall be examined by a single
      Member State, which shall be the one which the criteria set out in
      Chapter III indicate is responsible.


      2. Where no Member State responsible can be designated on the basis of
      the criteria listed in the Regulation, the first Member State in which
      the application was lodged shall be responsible for examining it...'


      Article 4 provides:


      '1. As soon as an application for international protection is lodged
      within the meaning of article 20(2) in a Member State, its competent
      authorities shall inform the applicant of the application of this
      Regulation, and in particular of:...(b) the criteria for determining
      the Member State responsible... (c) the personal interview pursuant to
      Article 5 and the possibility of submitting information regarding the
      presence of family members, relatives or any other family relations in
      the Member States, including the means by which the applicant can
      submit such information...


      2. The information referred to in paragraph 1 shall be provided in
      writing in a language that the applicant understands or is reasonably
      supposed to understand...'


      Article 5 provides:


      '1. In order to facilitate the process of determining the Member State
      responsible, the determining Member State shall conduct a personal
      interview with the applicant. The interview shall also allow the
      proper understanding of the information supplied to the applicant in
      accordance with Article 4


      ...4. The personal interview shall be conducted in a language that the
      applicant understands or is reasonably supposed to understand and in
      which he or she is able to communicate. Where necessary, Member States
      shall have recourse to an interpreter who is able to ensure
      appropriate communication between the applicant and the person
      conducting the personal interview


      ....5. The personal interview shall take place under conditions which
      ensure appropriate confidentiality. It shall be conducted by a
      qualified person under national law.


      6. The Member State conducting the personal interview shall make a
      written summary thereof which shall contain at least the main
      information supplied by the applicant at the interview. The summary
      may either take the form of a report or a standard form. The Member
      State shall ensure that the applicant and/or the legal advisor or
      other counsellor who is representing the applicant have timely access
      to the summary.'


      Article 6 provides:


      '1. The best interests of the child shall be a primary consideration
      for Member States with respect to all procedures provided for in this
      Regulation.


      2. Member States shall ensure that a representative represents and/or
      assists and unaccompanied minor with respect to all procedures
      provided for in this Regulation. The representative shall have the
      qualifications and expertise to ensure that the best interests of the
      minor are taken into consideration during the procedures carried out
      under this Regulation. Such representative shall have access to the
      content of the relevant documents in the applicant's file including
      the specific leaflet for unaccompanied minors...


      3. In assessing the best interests of the child, Member States shall
      closely cooperate with each other and shall, in particular, take due
      account of the following factors:


      (a) family reunification possibilities;


      (b) the minor's well-being and social development;


      (c) safety and security considerations, in particular where there is a
      risk of the minor being a victim of human trafficking;


      (d) the views of the minor, in accordance with his or her age and
      maturity...


      4. For the purpose of applying Article 8, the Member State where the
      unaccompanied minor lodged an application for international protection
      shall, as soon as possible, take appropriate action to identify the
      family members, siblings or relatives of the unaccompanied minor on
      the territory of Member States, whilst protecting the best interests
      of the child...'


      Under Chapter III ('Criteria for determining the Member State
      responsible)', Article 8 provides:


      '1. Where the applicant is an unaccompanied minor, the Member State
      responsible shall be that where a family member or a sibling of the
      unaccompanied minor is legally present, provided that it is in the
      best interests of the minor...'


      2. Where the applicant is an unaccompanied minor who has a relative
      who is legally present in another Member State and where it is
      established, based on an individual examination, that the relative can
      take care of him or her, that Member State shall unite the minor with
      his or her relative and shall be the Member State responsible,
      provided that it is in the best interests of the minor...'


      Article 17 ('Discretionary clauses') provides:


      '1. By way of derogation from Article 3(1), each Member State may
      decide to examine an application for international protection lodged
      with it by a third-country national or a stateless person, even if
      such examination is not its responsibility under the criteria laid
      down in this Regulation...


      2. The Member State in which an application for international
      protection is made and which is carrying out the process of
      determining the Member State responsible, or the Member State
      responsible, may, at any time before a first decision regarding the
      substance is taken, request another Member State to take charge of an
      applicant in order to bring together any family relations, on
      humanitarian grounds based in particular on family or cultural
      considerations, even where that other Member State is not responsible
      under the criteria laid down in Articles 8 to 11 and 16. The persons
      concerned must express their consent in writing.'


      The 'take charge' procedure is set out in Chapter VI.


      Article 20 provides:


      '1. The process of determining the Member State responsible shall
      start as soon as an application for international protection is first
      lodged with a Member State. 2. An application for international
      protection shall be deemed to have been lodged once a form submitted
      by the applicant or a report prepared by the authorities has reached
      the competent authorities of the Member State concerned. Where an
      application is not made in writing, the time elapsing between the
      statement of intention and the preparation of a report should be as
      short as possible.


      ...4. Where an application for international protection is lodged with
      the competent authorities of a Member State by an applicant who is on
      the territory of another Member State, the determination of the Member
      State responsible shall be made by the Member State in whose territory
      the applicant is present. The latter Member State shall be informed
      without delay by the Member State which received the application and
      shall then, for the purposes of this Regulation, be regarded as the
      Member State with which the application for international protection
      was lodged.'


      Article 21 provides:


      1. Where a Member State with which an application for international
      protection has been lodged considers that another Member State is
      responsible for examining the application, it may, as quickly as
      possible and in any event with three months of the date on which the
      application was lodged within the meaning of Article 20(2), request
      that other Member State to take charge of the applicant...'

THE EXPEDITED PROCESS

21.   A few unaccompanied  children  had  been  transferred  to  the  United
    Kingdom from the Calais camp under Article 8 of Dublin III  during  the
    period leading up to October 2016. Then, as Julia Farman, the  Head  of
    the European Intake Unit, explained in her witness statement,  dated  5
    April 2017, in early October 2016 an "accelerated"  process  under  the
    Dublin III Regulation was drawn up between the UK  and  French  "Dublin
    Units" in co-operation with the staff at the Sous Prefecture in  Calais
    and France Terre d'Aisle ("FTDA"). However,  she  went  on  to  explain
    that, on  7  October  2016,  the  French  authorities  announced  their
    intention to clear the Calais camp by 17 October  2016.  This  deadline
    was subsequently extended until 24 October  2016.  She  also  explained
    that, on 12 October 2016, she met with the  Sous  Prefecture  staff  in
    Calais 'to discuss how we were going to consider and  process  children
    who may be eligible to transfer to the UK under Dublin in an  expedited
    manner. It was agreed that the accelerated process we had  [previously]
    developed would be applied to unaccompanied minors present in the  camp
    but would need to be modified'.

22.   She also explained that "on 13 October 2016, we further developed,  in
    conjunction with the French Dublin Unit, Sous Prefecture Calais and the
    FTDA, how an expedited process  for  transferring  minors  with  family
    links from the camp would work. This  primarily  meant  condensing  the
    process of registering the asylum claim into one registration form, and
    at the same time ascertaining any family details that could lead to  an
    acceptance for transfer to the UK under the family reunion criteria  of
    the Dublin Regulation. French and UK  officials  would  work  alongside
    each other to record bio-data details of the child,  map  their  family
    tree, ascertain contacts about the family member in the  UK,  and  note
    any health or medical issues".  She added that "every  interview  would
    be taken with the presence of  an  interpreter  to  translate  for  the
    child".

23.   She added that "the French officials would  communicate  decisions  to
    the children. It was decided this should be done by the  French  rather
    than the Home Office officials because this was ultimately a French-led
    operation, with the UK providing support". Some interviews  took  place
    for male children at the Calais camp between 14  and  23  October  2016
    under Operation Purnia Phase 1 but there was not time to interview  all
    of them.

24.   The camp was cleared between 24 and 26  October  2016  and  interviews
    commenced again in the CAP - Temporary Reception Centre, which provided
    1,500 places for unaccompanied children in  heated  containers,  on  27
    October 2016. Again, not all of the  children  were  provided  with  an
    interview and on 2 November 2016 the CAP area was cleared and the  boys
    remaining in the area dispersed  to  CAOMIs  in  different  departments
    within France. Julia Farman later  confirmed  that  the  children  were
    looked after and cared for by the CAO  directors,  social  workers  and
    Prefectures who ran the CAOMIs but they were not their legal guardians.



25.    Two  hundred  Home  Office  officers  were  deployed  to  France  and
    interviewed children at these CAOMIs between 7  and  25  November  2016
    under Operation Purnia Phase 2. The children were assessed against  the
    eligibility criteria contained in both section 67  of  the  Immigration
    Act 2016 and Article 8 of Dublin III. These officials had  left  France
    by 9 December 2016.

26.   The witness statement by Mike Gallagher, dated 5  April  2017,  stated
    that, in the CAOMIs in the area of south-east France to  which  he  was
    deployed, each interview  lasted  about  20  minutes  and  involved  an
    interviewing officer from the Home Office, an interpreter and a  social
    worker and sometimes  a  French  official.  He  also  stated  that  "we
    specifically asked in each location for three interview stations to  be
    set up in the same room and this request was always agreed to.  We  did
    this so that the interpreters could more easily  support  one  another,
    and move to a new interview when needed without  having  to  be  called
    from a different room". At the end of each day the completed  interview
    forms were emailed to decision-makers based at Lunar  House  in  London
    who decided whether an individual child was eligible.

27.   Julia Farman  also  stated  that  "in  relation  to  cases  where  the
    children were claiming to have family links in the UK which would  make
    them eligible under the Dublin III, Home Office officials  carried  out
    the same process in  relation  to  security  checks  and  locating  and
    checking UK based relatives as they had  in  relation  to  Phase  1  of
    Operation Purnia. Earlier in her statement, she had explained that this
    meant "contacting the UK based  family  and  checking  to  see  if  the
    information they gave about the claimed family link matched  with  what
    the child had told us". She  also  added  that  "during  the  expedited
    process...we only accepted cases where they  had  a  qualifying  family
    relationship as set out in Article 8 of the Dublin Regulation".

28.   From on or around 9 December 2016 it is  clear  from  the  emails  now
    disclosed that the French authorities, supported by Cameron Bryson, the
    Assistant Director of the UK Border  Force  who  had  been  temporarily
    seconded to the Dublin Unit of the Asylum  Directorate  at  the  French
    Ministry of Interior in  Paris,  were  asking  the  UK  authorities  to
    provide sufficient reasons  for  rejecting  children  who  had  applied
    through the expedited process. This  was  because  it  was  the  French
    authorities who were responsible for  telling  the  children  of  these
    decisions and there was a serious concern of unrest at the  CAOMIs  and
    of children leaving and returning to live rough in Calais if they  were
    not given sufficient reasons.

29.   On 14 December 2016 the UK Authorities gave the French  authorities  a
    spreadsheet which listed the children who  had  been  assessed  in  the
    expedited process. There was a column headed "status"  which  indicated
    whether they had been "transferred" or "not accepted". There  was  then
    another column headed "Assessment" which gave a  brief  explanation  of
    the reasons for the assessment. For the children who had been  assessed
    under the criteria contained in Article 8 of Dublin III, these included
    "cousin", "no family in UK" and "family link not accepted".

30.   Florian Valet, then the Deputy Director of Asylum in  France  made  it
    clear that this list was of no use to them  as  it  did  not  tell  the
    children  why  they  had  been  rejected  and  may  lead  to  meritless
    applications through the Dublin III process.

31.   The emails now disclosed indicate that  the  UK  Authorities  did  not
    agree to providing any further  reasons  as  they  had  received  legal
    advice that this would leave them open to potential  legal  challenges.
    It was as the result of on-going pressure from the  French  authorities
    and discussion between very senior French and UK officials that the  UK
    authorities subsequently agreed to the establishment  of  a  filtration
    process.

THE FILTRATION PROCESS

32.    This process was finally agreed to on 6 January  2017.  The  relevant
    prefecture was responsible for the first "review" of evidence and  then
    the DGEF undertook a second stage review. The UK authorities  were  not
    involved in this review of evidence and  initially  insisted  that  the
    process should be completed by 17 February 2017. It also said  that  it
    reserved the right to reject a request even where  the  initial  filter
    suggested that a child may qualify.       On  9  January  2017  Cameron
    Bryson was still reporting that  the  French  authorities  needed  more
    information on the "family link not established" rejection in order  to
    have a base line on which to judge new information provided by a child.



33.   A total of 530 cases were referred into  the  filtration  process  and
    from late January 2017 through to March 2017 French officials  provided
    three different spreadsheets of cases they wanted the UK authorities to
    review. There was a column in these spreadsheets  headed  "assessment".
    This column contained simple comments, such as "cousin" or "family link
    not accepted" of "No contact details". There was  also  another  headed
    "Retour Region" or  which  contained  slightly  more  detail,  such  as
    "brother in UK". Sometimes there was a  longer  entry  indicating  that
    there was on-going discussion with relatives in the UK. The Applicant's
    name appeared  on  the  third  list,  which  was  received  by  the  UK
    authorities on 28 February 2017.

34.   The Respondent's role was to review any available  evidence  and  then
    indicate to the French authorities whether, if they made a take  charge
    request under Dublin III, it was  likely  that  the  request  would  be
    accepted.  When the UK authorities responded to the French  authorities
    they colour-coded the lists, with green indicating that a  take  charge
    request was likely to be successful. Its final response was sent  on  8
    March 2017.

35.   The number of cases colour coded green does  not  correlate  with  the
    very small number of cases eventually transferred under the  filtration
    process and it was unclear what active part the UK authorities  played,
    if any, in evidence gathering.

SUBSTANCE OF THE CLAIM

36.   It is the Applicant's case that the manner in  which  his  application
    was considered in the expedited and in the related  filtration  process
    was procedurally unfair and breached the basic  tenets  of  common  law
    fairness  and  natural  justice  and  also  the  procedural  safeguards
    contained in Dublin III and Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  He  relies  in  part  on  the  decision  of  R  (on  the
    application of AM (a child by  his  litigation  friend  OA  and  OA)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department - Unaccompanied  Children  -
    Procedural Safeguards) [2017] UKUT 00262 (IAC).

37.   Counsel for the Respondent did not address us on this case at  all  at
    the hearing but relied on the decision of Mr. Justice Soole in Citizens
    UK v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2017]  EWHC  2301
    (Admin). This was a surprising approach as the Court of Appeal  is  due
    to consider these contrasting cases in a hearing set down for 12  -  14
    June 2018; the fact that permission has been  granted  in  all  of  the
    cases suggesting that the law is far from settled in this area.

38.   It also appeared to us that there was a significant distinction to  be
    drawn between the nature of the decision in AM and that in Citizens UK.
     In the former the Upper Tribunal was considering whether the manner in
    which individual cases were dealt with under the expedited process  was
    fair. In the latter, the challenge was to the  process  itself  and  in
    paragraph 274 of his judgment, Mr. Justice Soole went no  further  than
    finding that:

      "In the generality of [the expedited]  system  which  was  instituted,
    there was a proper inquiry in which Home  Office  officials  asked  the
    right question (i.e. as  against  the  Article  8  criteria)  and  took
    reasonable steps to acquaint themselves with the  relevant  information
    to enable them to answer them correctly".

39.   Furthermore, in Citizens UK, Mr. Justice Soole  was  reliant  on  more
    limited evidence provided by the Respondent as  to  how  the  expedited
    process was designed to function. In the current case, there was a  far
    wider range of evidence in relation to how the process was designed  to
    function in general and how  it  actually  worked  in  the  Applicant's
    individual case. There was also evidence about the filtration  process,
    which was not before him, or before the Upper Tribunal in AM, and which
    suggests that in many ways it  was  a  continuation  of  the  expedited
    process and also gave rise to  a  number  of  instances  of  procedural
    unfairness.

40.   Both counsel addressed  us  on  whether  the  Applicant's  experiences
    amounted to a breach of the standards of fairness explicitly  contained
    in the Dublin III Regulation, or  a  breach  of  common  law  fairness,
    sometimes referred to as breaches of natural justice,  or  whether  his
    substantive or procedural  rights  under  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights had been breached.

41.   We considered the second and third potential  breaches  first  on  the
    basis that it would only be necessary to consider the Dublin III aspect
    of this case if no breaches appeared to have occurred at common law  or
    under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights.   In  this
    way we were able to give appropriate weight to the fact that the  Court
    of Appeal will be addressing the application of Dublin III between 12 -
    14 June 2018  and  yet  also  ensure  that  there  is  no  further  and
    unnecessary delay in the case of an 18 year-old who  has  already  been
    unaccompanied and at risk for nearly two years  and  who  is  suffering
    from moderate to severe post-traumatic stress disorder.

COMMON LAW FAIRNESS

42.   The case for the Applicant  has  remained  constant  throughout  these
    proceedings. In contrast, the case relied on by the Respondent  in  his
    written  statements  was  significantly  expanded  in  counsel's   oral
    submissions. This created an anomaly  as  he  was  both  placing  heavy
    reliance on the case of Citizens UK and also seeking to argue that  the
    conventional approach to natural justice and common  law  fairness  did
    not apply at all to the Applicant.

43.   In paragraph 201 of Citizens  UK,  Mr.  Justice  Soole  recorded  that
    counsel for the Respondent "accepted that common  law  applies  to  the
    expedited process and that the process has to be fair and  rational  in
    accordance with the requirements of public law".

44.   Counsel for the Respondent then submitted that "the  content  of  that
    requirement depended on the circumstances: citing  Wiseman  v  Borneman
    [1971] AC 297". This was  the  approach  adopted  in  the  Respondent's
    written case. In Wiseman v Borneman, Lord Morris held at 308 H to 309 C
    "that the conception of natural justice  should  at  all  stages  guide
    those who discharge judicial functions is not merely an acceptable  but
    is an essential part of the philosophy of the law. But there is nothing
    rigid or mechanical about them. What they comprehend has been  analysed
    and described in many authorities. But any  analysis  must  bring  into
    relief rather their spirit and their inspiration than any precision  of
    definition or precision as to  application...Natural  justice,  it  has
    been said, is only "fair play in action".

| |                                                                      |
|45. In the same case, at 314 Lord Donovan adopted the words of Lord    | |
|Tucker in Russell v. Duke of Norfolk [1949] 1 All E.R. 109, where he   | |
|said, at p. 118:                                                       | |

|     |"There are, in my view, no words which are of universal           | |
|     |application to every kind of inquiry and every kind of domestic   | |
|     |tribunal. The requirements of natural justice must depend on the  | |
|     |circumstances of the case, the nature of the inquiry, the rules   | |
|     |under which the tribunal is acting, the subject-matter which is   | |
|     |being dealt with and so forth. Accordingly, I do not derive much  | |
|     |assistance from the definitions of natural justice which have been| |
|     |from time to time used but, whatever standard is adopted, one     | |
|     |essential is that the person concerned should have a reasonable   | |
|     |opportunity of presenting his case".                              | |

46.   It appears  to  us  that  the  last  sentence  in  paragraph  314  has
    particular application  in  the  current  case  where  the  fundamental
    submission made by the Applicant is that he did not have  a  reasonable
    opportunity of presenting his case  in  either  the  expedited  or  the
    filtration process and that, whatever,  the  circumstances  surrounding
    the  expedited  and  filtration  processes,  this  aspect  of   natural
    justice/procedural fairness had to be applied.

47.   Counsel for the Applicant did not dispute  that  the  requirements  of
    natural justice, or procedural fairness, as it is commonly referred  to
    now, must depend on  the  circumstance  of  an  individual  case.  This
    principle was clearly articulated by the House of  Lords  in  the  more
    recent case of R v Secretary of State for the Home Department ex  parte
    Doody [1993] UKHL 8.  Counsel for the Respondent was  correct  to  note
    that this was a case which addressed the rights of  prisoners  who  had
    been given a mandatory life sentence but it is clear from the substance
    of the judgment and the extract referred to below  that  the  House  of
    Lords accepted that certain principles of fairness had been established
    over time by the higher courts.

48.   In particular, at page 14 Lord Mustill found that:

      "What does fairness require in the present case? My Lords, I think  it
    unnecessary to refer by name or to quote from,  any  of  the  oft-cited
    authorities in which the courts have explained what is  essentially  an
    intuitive judgment. They are far too well-known. From  them,  I  derive
    that 1. Where an Act of Parliament  confers  an  administrative  power,
    there is a presumption that it will be exercised in a manner  which  is
    fair in all the circumstances. 2. The standards  of  fairness  are  not
    immutable. They may change with the passage of time,  both  in  general
    and in their application to decisions of  a  particular  type.  3.  The
    principles of fairness are not to be applied  by  rote  identically  in
    every situation. What fairness demands is dependent on the  context  of
    the decision, and this is to be taken into account in all its  aspects.
    4. An essential feature of the context is the statute which creates the
    discretion, as regards both its language and the shape of the legal and
    administrative system within which the decision is taken.  5.  Fairness
    will often require that a person who may be adversely affected  by  the
    decision will have an opportunity to make representations  on  his  own
    behalf either before the decision is taken with a view to  producing  a
    favourable result; or after it is taken, with a view to  procuring  its
    modification; or both. 6. Since the person affected usually cannot make
    worthwhile representations  without  knowing  what  factors  may  weigh
    against his interests fairness will  very  often  require  that  he  is
    informed of the gist of the case which he has to answer".

49.   In relation to (1) above, the statute underpinning the power to  admit
    the Applicant to the United Kingdom,  if  he  was  found  to  meet  the
    criteria in Article 8 of Dublin III for the purposes of  the  expedited
    process and the subsequent filtration process, was the Immigration  Act
    1971.

50.   Section 3 of the Immigration Act 1971 states that:

    "(1) Except as otherwise provided by of under this Act, where a  person
    is not a British citizen-

      (a) he shall not enter the United Kingdom unless given leave to do so
    in accordance with      the provisions of, or made under, this Act".


      (b) he may be given leave to enter the United Kingdom...either for a
      limited or for an indefinite period".

51.   Section 33(5) of the Immigration Act 1971 also states that  "This  Act
    shall not be taken to supersede or impair any power exercisable by  Her
    Majesty in relation to aliens by  virtue  of  Her  prerogative".  As  a
    consequence, the Respondent, who exercises  this  prerogative,  retains
    the power to permit an individual to enter the United Kingdom even when
    he is not granted formal leave to do so.

52.   In relation to (2) and (3) there were a number of factors to be  taken
    into account in relation to the Applicant's  individual  case.  One  of
    these was, as noted by Mr. Justice Soole in paragraph 270  of  Citizens
    UK was that the expedited process "was an ad hoc process, the  fairness
    of which fell to be considered under the real constraints  of  a  fast-
    moving humanitarian crisis in another state".  But  he  also  noted  at
    paragraph 268 of his judgment that:

      "The first part of the context is the desperate plight of  these  most
    vulnerable  young  people  in  the  most  wretched  conditions  and  in
    desperate need. It is no part of this judgment to understate the horror
    of their position which the evidence vividly depicts".

53.   It was the tension between these two  factors  which  underpinned  the
    dispute between the parties in  the  current  case  as  to  the  proper
    application of the common law standards of  procedural  fairness.  When
    considering these standards, we take into account points 5. and  6.  at
    page [14] of Ex parte Doody which go to the core of the  breaches  said
    to have occurred in the current case. We also rely on the fact that  at
    page 564 E to F., Lord Mustill also said:

       "I  accept  without  hesitation,  and  mention  it  only   to   avoid
    misunderstanding, that the law does not at present recognise a  general
    duty to give reasons for an administrative decision.  Nevertheless,  it
    is equally  beyond  question  that  such  a  duty  may  in  appropriate
    circumstances be implied, and I agree with the analyses by the Court of
    Appeal in Reg. v Civil Service Appeal Board, Ex parte Cunningham [1994]
    2 All E.R. 310 of the factors which will often be material to  such  an
    implication".

54.   It is our view that such a duty is to be  implied  where  a  child  is
    unaccompanied in a foreign country, is suffering  from  what,  even  at
    that time, is likely to be have been moderate to severe  post-traumatic
    stress disorder and does not have a legal guardian. (We note that it is
    the Respondent's evidence that merely placing a child in  a  CAOMI  did
    not amount to providing him or her with a legal guardian and  that  the
    Applicant was not formally referred into the legal care of  the  French
    state until 30 December 2016 after the expedited process  was  said  to
    have been completed.)

55.   Counsel for the Respondent submitted that cases  involving  prisoners'
    rights, disputes in social clubs and cases before other tribunals,  did
    not apply to the particular  circumstances  of  the  Applicant's  case.
    However, these cases were examined in detail by the House of Lords  and
    clearly underpinned its conclusions in the leading decision in Ex parte
    Doody.

56.   Furthermore, counsel for the Applicant referred to a number  of  cases
    where the duty to inform an applicant of the gist of the case  that  he
    has to  answer  and  to  provide  him  with  the  opportunity  to  make
    appropriate representations on his own behalf was said to occur in  the
    immigration and asylum context. For example, in R v London  Borough  of
    Hackney ex parte Decordova (1994) 27 HLR 108 Laws J, as  he  then  was,
    found that:

      "The decision of July 29, 1993 falls, in my  judgment,  to  be  struck
    down as erroneous in law on the footing that  no  reasonable  authority
    could have concluded that the letter which generated the decision, that
    of June 28, contained no new information. Not only that, however. In my
    judgment where an  authority  lock,  stock  and  barrel  is  minded  to
    disbelieve an account given by  an  applicant  for  housing  where  the
    circumstances described in  the  account  are  critical  to  the  issue
    whether the authority ought to offer her accommodation in a  particular
    area, they are bound to put to the applicant in  an  interview,  or  by
    some appropriate means, the matters that concern them.  This  must  now
    surely be elementary law in relation to the function of decision-makers
    in relation to subject matters of this kind. It applied in the  law  of
    immigration, and  generally  where  public  authorities  have  to  make
    decisions which  affect  the  rights  of  individual  persons.  If  the
    authority is minded to make an adverse decision  because  it  does  not
    believe the account  given  by  the  applicant,  it  has  to  give  the
    applicant an opportunity to deal with it".

57.   The procedural standards of fairness to be applied when conducting  an
    interview relating to a protection claim were also analysed in the case
    of R (Q) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] QB 36  and
    are referred to below.

58.   In contrast, counsel for the Respondent placed significant  weight  on
    the constraints under which the Respondent  was  operating  during  the
    expedited and the  filtration  processes.  However,  we  note  that  at
    paragraph 8 of R (Refugee Legal Centre v Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2005] 1 WLR 2219 Sedley LJ held that:

      "The choice of an acceptable system is in the first instance a  matter
    for the executive, and in making its choice it  is  entitled  to  taken
    into account the perceived political and other imperatives for a speedy
    turn-around of asylum applications. But it is not entitled to sacrifice
    fairness  on  the  altar  of  speed  and  convenience,  much  less   of
    expediency; and whether it has to do so is a question of  law  for  the
    courts...administrative convenience cannot justify unfairness. In other
    words, there  has  to  be  in  asylum  procedures,  as  in  many  other
    procedures, an irreducible minimum of due process".

59.   In his oral submissions counsel for the  Respondent  did  not  address
    this judgment or the need for "an irreducible minimum of due  process".
    Instead,  he  submitted  that  it  was  not  necessary  to  apply   the
    conventional procedural standards of fairness as the Secretary of State
    had been under no legal obligation to establish and  operate  Operation
    Purina and could just have left the children in question in Calais.  He
    added that, if the children had just been left in  Calais,  they  would
    have had no legal redress against the UK authorities.

60.   This was not an approach which was followed by Mr.  Justice  McCloskey
    in paragraph 77 of AM where he found that:

      "Even if it were appropriate to hold that the  Dublin  Regulation  did
    not apply, in whole  or  in  part,  to  the  expedited  process  it  is
    difficult to identify any principled basis  for  concluding  that  this
    process was in some way immune from the orthodox duty of  every  United
    Kingdom public authority to comply with the common law  principles  and
    standards..."

61.   The Respondent sought to rely on paragraph 157 of  Help  Refugees  but
    this judgment related to the very particular statutory process  adopted
    in section 67 of the Immigration Act 2016 as explained by Lord  Justice
    Treacy:

       "In  our  judgment,  the  process  adopted  involved  no   procedural
    unfairness essentially for the reasons given by  Mr.  Manknell.  First,
    although  the  transfers   take   place   pursuant   to   a   statutory
    authorisation, the Act contains no provision for  a  written  decision,
    reasons or formal challenge. The Act contains no link to any  statutory
    immigration provisions for  those  purposes.  Yet  it  must  have  been
    evident to Parliament that decisions on vulnerable individuals  were  a
    necessary part of the operation of the Act. It must have  been  evident
    that not all those who are eligible would be transferred because  their
    number was capped to that specified. It was also the clear  purpose  of
    the  Act  that  it  should  be  operated  swiftly,  and   without   the
    bureaucratic or legal  processes  that  attend  so  much  else  in  the
    immigration field".

62.   In our view, this was a decision which was confined to cases  assessed
    for the purposes of section 67 of the Immigration Act  2016  and  there
    was no basis upon which it could be read across to  apply  to  children
    not assessed for this purpose, which  was  clearly  the  case  for  the
    Applicant. Counsel did not take us to any other  cases  which  departed
    from the general acceptance in Citizens UK that appropriate common  law
    standards of procedural fairness should be applied.

63.   Counsel for the Respondent also relied on paragraph  280  of  Citizens
    UK in which Mr. Justice Soole found that:

      "...I consider that the expedited process  must  be  considered  as  a
    whole; and in the context of the reluctance to  make  applications  for
    asylum in France and of the severe constraints of the operation. Having
    undertaken that assessment, my conclusion  is  that  it  was  fair  and
    reasonable and that there was no systematic failure".

64.   It was the case that the Applicant was  reluctant  to  make  a  formal
    application for asylum in France but he did fully co-operate  with  the
    expedited process. This is significant as Mr. Justice  Soole  found  in
    paragraph 232 of Citizens UK, after a hearing  on  18  September  2017,
    that:

      "The evidence demonstrates that,  until  sometime  between  the  GLD's
    letter of 13.1.17 and the Minister's statement to the House of  Commons
    on 8.2.17, the SSHD and her officials regarded  and  so  described  the
    expedited process as falling within the ambit of Dublin  III  (and  the
    Dubs amendment). Thus there was no suggestion until that statement that
    the process fell outside Dublin III".

65.   The Applicant's interview form within  Operation  Purnia  2  has  also
    been disclosed and shows that  at  the  top  of  the  Interview  Record
    someone has handwritten "REJECT - Dublin 8.1" and on the second page of
    the form, the decision maker has also ticked the box entitled "Dublin".
     Therefore, it was reasonable  for  the  Applicant,  who  was  a  child
    without the benefit of a legal guardian or a legal  representative,  to
    presume that his potential application for asylum was being  considered
    under Dublin III for a transfer to the United Kingdom.

66.   It was not until judgment was handed down  in  Citizens  UK  that  any
    court or tribunal decided that the expedited process was  not  part  of
    Dublin III and, even then, this has to be contrasted with the  decision
    in AM where the Honourable Mr. Justice McCloskey found it was "not open
    to the Secretary of State  to  unilaterally  and  selectively  disapply
    certain provisions of the Dublin Regulation and its sister implementing
    Commission Regulation as this [was] contrary to EU law".

67.   As we stated above, it is not necessary for us to resolve any  dispute
    as to whether the expedited process was part of the  wider  Dublin  III
    process or separate from it. However, as  the  Applicant  said  in  his
    witness statement, dated 5 February 2018,  when  the  Calais  camp  was
    demolished he was told that unaccompanied minors with family members in
    the UK would be considered for transfer to the UK. It is our view  that
    this was relevant  to  his  subsequent  actions  after  his  claim  was
    rejected and his failure at that point to make a formal application for
    asylum. In particular, the fact that even  the  Respondent's  officials
    regarded the expedited process as part of Dublin III until  8  February
    2017, explains why the Applicant did not make a formal application  for
    asylum in France when he was interviewed at a  CAO  sometime  in  early
    January 2017.

68.   It is also clear from paragraph 282 of Citizens UK  that,  if  he  had
    made such a formal asylum application with a view to being  transferred
    under Dublin  III,  the  adverse  findings  made  against  him  in  the
    expedited process were likely to have prejudiced such  an  application.
    If this was not the case, Mr. Justice Soole would not  needed  to  have
    said "my conclusion is subject to one  important  qualification.  Since
    the expedited process was without prejudice to Dublin III applications,
    I consider that it must follow that no account should be taken  in  any
    such future applications of material obtained in  the  course  of  this
    expedited process, e.g. of inconsistencies of information received".

69.   Therefore, even if the Applicant had made an  application  for  asylum
    with a view to being transferred to the United Kingdom under Article  8
    of Dublin III before he became 18 on 11 August 2016, it is likely  that
    the adverse findings made against him under the expedited process would
    have led to a refusal under this Article. As a  consequence,  the  fact
    that the Applicant had not made a formal application for asylum was not
    a factor which can be held against him when considering the  procedural
    fairness of the expedited and/or filtration process.

70.   In addition, when the Applicant was  still  a  child,  he  would  have
    needed assistance to make an application for asylum  and  there  is  no
    evidence to show that such assistance was provided.  As  was  noted  in
    paragraph 45 of ZT (Syria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
    [2016} 1 WLR 4894 "it is necessary to obtain  the  authorisation  of  a
    juvenile judge to take certain steps, such as applying for asylum,  but
    the guardian  can  apply  to  a  family  court  and  become  the  legal
    representative. At this stage, there is a person empowered to undertake
    measures in the name of the child and to access the procedure".

THE CONSTRAINTS OF THE PROCESS

71.   Counsel for the Respondent did not refer us  to  any  case  law  which
    provided a justification for reducing  accepted  procedural  safeguards
    protected by common law to not even the bare  minimum  in  a  situation
    where the Respondent was acting  under  constraints  of  time.  In  any
    event, for the reasons given below it appears to us that  the  evidence
    disclosed in the Applicant's individual case indicates  that  any  time
    constraints were restricted to one part only of the  expedited  process
    and that the filtration process provided additional time  in  which  to
    ensure that procedural safeguards were put in place to ensure that  the
    common law standards outlined in Ex parte Doody  and  the  other  cases
    referred to above were maintained.

72.    Whilst  it  is  true  that  the  Respondent  had  only  deployed  his
    immigration officers to interview children  in  the  CAOMIs  in  France
    between 7 November 2016 and 9 December 2016, these interviews were only
    part of the expedited process and the actual decisions to  admit  these
    children were taken by case workers based on a permanent basis at Lunar
    House in London.  Therefore, no time constraints applied to that  later
    part of the process. We also note that YH  was  contacted  by  officers
    based in the United Kingdom and no explanation has  been  provided  for
    why he had to be interviewed over the telephone without an interpreter,
    as opposed to have been asked to attend an interview at Lunar House  or
    elsewhere, where he could be provided with an appropriate  interpreter.
    The initial time constraint relied upon appeared  to  be  the  time  in
    which Home Office officials would have organised access to the children
    dispersed to the CAOMIs and did not concern the actions of officials in
    London.

73.   Furthermore, we note that, as the decision making actually took  place
    in London, the Respondent would have had easy access to his own records
    when deciding on a claimed family relationship and could have called up
    these files before either FTH or YH was  interviewed.  In  the  current
    case the Respondent had  issued  YH  with  a  residence  permit,  as  a
    refugee, as recently as 21 November 2016. Therefore,  his  file  should
    have been readily to hand and would have shown that FH had provided the
    same names, as the Applicant, for their mother, sister and brother  and
    had also given the same town of origin and stated  that  he  too  spoke
    Saho as a first language.

74.   It is also the case that the evidence now discloses  that  the  French
    authorities were not putting pressure on the UK  authorities  to  bring
    the totality of the process to a close. In contrast, as outlined above,
    the emails now disclosed indicate that from 9 December 2016, the French
    authorities were asking the Home Office to  provide  them  with  better
    reasons for the decisions to reject individual children's  applications
    within the expedited process.      For example, Florian  Valat,  stated
    that:

      "In order to be able to provide  answers  to  young  people  and  thus
      reduce the pressure in CAOMI - but also to  avoid  judicial  remedies,
      which we have no interest, or a multiplication  of  referrals  in  the
      "classic" context of the Dublin procedure - it would be very desirable
      for you to be able to re-examine these files as quickly  as  possible,
      and that agreements could be made for those cases where the  necessary
      clarifications were made.
      The objective is obviously  not  that  you  review  all  the  negative
      decisions, and that is why we will make sure that you only look at the
      cases that seem obviously to justify it. The aim is that  the  minors,
      in any case, can be  certain  that  their  files  have  been  properly
      studied".

75.   Emails and spreadsheets were also being exchanged between  the  French
    and UK authorities up until at least 8 March 2017.   The content of the
    emails from the French authorities and from  Cameron  Bryson  indicates
    that the French authorities were very concerned about  the  welfare  of
    the children remaining in the CAOMIs and were asking for better reasons
    so that the children did not leave the CAOMIs and return  to  the  risk
    they would be exposed to in Calais and other port areas. There  was  no
    indication that they wished for any limitation on the period  in  which
    the  process  could  be  extended.  In  contrast,  the  UK  Authorities
    initially said that they would only consider new information within the
    filtration process up until 17 February 2017.

76.   It is also clear that by refusing to provide  the  necessary  detailed
    reasons for deciding that the Applicant's family links with YH were not
    accepted, the totality of the process involving the Applicant has  been
    extended for more than a further two years. It is also now  clear  that
    the Respondent was acting on legal advice when he continued  to  refuse
    to disclose any further details of the reasons that these family  links
    were not accepted up until 9 March 2018. It is also the case  that  the
    Respondent is still making piece meal disclosure of evidence  which  is
    relevant to the Applicant's claim two weeks after the last day  of  the
    substantive judicial review hearing.

77.   As a consequence, although we must give weight  to  what  Mr.  Justice
    Soole referred to as "the severe and  exceptional  constraints  of  the
    operation" in paragraph 280 of Citizens UK, at the same time we do give
    significant weight to a number of breaches of  procedural  fairness  in
    the  manner  in  which  the  Applicant's  case  was  assessed  by   the
    Respondent.

PROCEDURAL SAFEGUARDS

78.   In relation to the procedural  safeguards  put  in  place  within  the
    expedited process, counsel for the Respondent relied on the judgment in
    Citizens UK. However, Mr.  Justice  Soole's  findings  related  to  the
    generality of the experience of the children  in  Calais.  It  did  not
    concern the  particularities  of  individual  cases.  For  example,  in
    paragraph 274 of his judgment, Mr. Justice Soole accepted on the  basis
    of  witness  statements  made  by  Home  Office  Officials  that   "the
    interviews in the CAOMIs were conducted with interpreters and, in  some
    instances, social workers".

79    In his  witness  statement,  dated  5  February  2018,  the  Applicant
    accepted that there was a white woman present  in  the  room  when  his
    interview was conducted. However, the Respondent has not been  able  to
    identify her or confirm that she was one of the social workers who  had
    accompanied the Home Office teams to France.  The note at  the  top  of
    his Section 67 1A form implies that there was no  interpreter  actually
    present in  the  room  when  he  was  interviewed.  This  confirms  the
    assertion made by the Applicant  in  his  witness  statement,  dated  6
    February 2018, that the interpreter was on the other end of a phone.

80.   We have also taken into account the second email  from  Julia  Farman,
    dated 20 April 2018, which had been annotated to show the replies given
    to certain questions by Nii  Krotei,  an  immigration  officer  in  the
    Asylum Intake Team, and who was part  of  the  Home  Office  team  that
    conducted interviews at the CAO in Seine Maritime. He confirmed that in
    some interviews the interpreter was not present in the room but was  on
    the end of a phone. It was said that this happened when there were  not
    enough interpreters with the team or where the child spoke  a  language
    which required an interpreter who was not with the team.

81.   In his statement, the Applicant also  said  that  his  interview  took
    place in a large room and there were interviews with other young people
    living at the centre taking place at the same time, some in person with
    British Home Office  Officials  and  some  by  telephone.  It  was  the
    Applicant's case that  he  was  interviewed  over  the  telephone.  The
    Respondent has not provided any evidence from the person said  to  have
    interviewed the Applicant in France.

82.   The Applicant also said that the interpreter he  was  speaking  to  on
    the telephone was speaking Tigrinya,  despite  the  fact  that  he  and
    others had  asked  for  a  Saho  interpreter.  He  added  that  he  had
    difficulty understanding the interpreter as his mother tongue was  Saho
    and he only understood Tigrinya if it was spoken slowly and clearly and
    the interpreter on the call seemed impatient  and  spoke  quickly.  The
    entries on his S67  1A  form  are  contradictory  in  relation  to  the
    language which any interpreter should speak. In  response  to  question
    1.10, "What is your main language and dialect?",  the  interviewer  has
    noted Tigrinya and Saho. However, at the top of the  previous  page  of
    the interview record there is a note which  states  "please  note  that
    applicant has hearing pro[blem] he can lip rid so needs a face to  face
    interpreter in Saho". This entry suggests that the Applicant  had  been
    interviewed using an interpreter who did not speak his first  language,
    Saho, that there had been problems with the interpretation and that  he
    needed a face-to-face interview. There was no evidence that any attempt
    was made to arrange such an interview with  a  Saho  interpreter  being
    present or that the case worker in Lunar House gave any weight  to  the
    adverse effect interviewing him over the telephone in a  language  that
    was not his first language may have had on the quality of his answers.

83.   These were all serious omissions which had the potential to  undermine
    the quality of the evidence he could  provide  during  his  very  brief
    interview. We also note that it has  been  recognised  that  errors  in
    interpretation may undermine the  effectiveness  of  interviews  in  an
    asylum or immigration context, even where  an  interview  is  conducted
    face-to-face and with the correct  interpreter.  In  particular,  in  R
    (Dirshe) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2005]  1  WLR
    2685, Latham LJ relied on the judgment by Pitchford J in  R  (Mapah)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2003]  EWHC  306  (Admin)
    where he held at paragraph 62 that:

      "...The Claimant has demonstrated that:

      (1) Problems of interpretation can and do occur;
    (2) Questions, translated into the  applicant's  language  and  replies
    given in that language, are not recorded as such  but  in  the  English
    translation;
    (3) Records cannot always, despite exhortation, be literally verbatim;
    (4) The reversal of the requirement for read back removed a measure  of
    protection against unremarked mistakes in recording by the interviewer;
    (5)  An  applicant  does  not   necessarily   have   the   benefit   of
    representation or his own interpreter;
    (6) Immigration officials and  Tribunals  of  Appeal  frequently  judge
    credibility against a criterion of consistency;
    (7) Tape recording of an interview by the applicant or by the Secretary
    of State would do much to alleviate these problems  if  and  when  they
    occur."

84.   The Respondent relied on the rubric said to  have  been  contained  at
    the beginning of the interview form. In fact, this did  not  appear  on
    the S67 1A form but only at the top of the form used when  interviewing
    YH. 92. However, in his witness statement, dated 1  February  2018,  YH
    said that he was interviewed over the telephone without the aid  of  an
    interpreter. He added that his English was quite limited and  was  even
    more limited then and, therefore, he was only able to  understand  some
    of what the Home Office person said to him. He also said that he  asked
    for an interpreter but the official just kept asking questions. He  did
    not mention being  assisted  by  a  friend  but  later  instructed  his
    solicitors that this was the case but said that  his  friend's  English
    was not much better than his. Neither is it confirmed that, even  if  a
    friend was present, he or she spoke English to an appropriate level.

85.   The failure to provide appropriate interpreters means that  we  cannot
    be sure that either the Applicant or YH understood the  questions  they
    were  being  asked.  Furthermore,  the  importance  of  an  interviewee
    understanding the purpose of an interview was stressed by Lord  Philips
    in paragraph 83 of ex parte R  (Q)  where  he  held,  when  criticising
    interviews carried out in that case, that:

      "As  already  explained,  on  claiming  asylum,  whether  or  not  any
    application for benefit is made, the claimant is interviewed as part of
    a general screening process. It appears to us  that  the  interview  is
    carried out without  any  clear  statement  that  one  purpose  of  the
    interview is to determine [whether the application was made as soon  as
    reasonably practicable]. In our view fairness requires that the purpose
    of the interview should be more clearly explained to the claimant".

86.   The language used in both the interview with  the  Applicant  and  the
    interview with YH suggested that they were going to be reunited and did
    not suggest that they needed to argue for  reunification  by  providing
    additional details  or  ensuring  that  their  answers  were  correctly
    transcribed.

87.   The latter was important as the answers recorded  as  being  given  to
    some of the questions in the Applicant's interview suggest that  either
    the questions were  not  being  interpreted  effectively  or  that  the
    interviewer    was    not     recording     appropriate     information
    contemporaneously. For example, at  question  1.20  of  the  form,  the
    prompt to the interviewer reads "Is there any evidence to suggest  that
    the individual has arrived at the Calais camp after 24 October" but the
    handwritten response reads "Yes - was there since June 2016".

88.   The prompt for question 1.22 reads "based on the information  provided
    about family members in the UK, should the  minor  be  processed  as  a
    Dublin III case?"  The response is recorded  as  "No,  as  his  brother
    hasn't yet been granted any status". This was factually  incorrect,  as
    the requirement in Article 8 of Dublin III  is  that  the  relative  in
    question is "legally present" in  the  relevant  state.  As  an  asylum
    seeker, the Applicant's brother would have been legally present  as  he
    would have been granted temporary admission pending the result  of  his
    asylum claim. (The recorded answer also indicates that the Home  Office
    interviewer had not been provided with up to date information about  YH
    from the Respondent's own files.)

89.   The appropriateness and quality of the interpretation was  of  central
    importance to the issue of procedural fairness as the Applicant's claim
    was rejected on the basis of what were said to be discrepancies between
    the answers he and YH gave about the name of their maternal grandmother
    and whether their grandfathers were still alive.

90.   In our view, the expedited  process  was  also  rendered  additionally
    unfair by the fact that the decision on the Applicant's eligibility was
    not taken by the immigration officer who had conducted the interview in
    France but by a case worker based in Lunar House in London on the basis
    of a  note  of  the  interview,  which  was  not  contemporaneous.  The
    difficulties that can arise when the decision-maker has not had  direct
    contact with an applicant was stressed by Lord Phillips at paragraph 98
    of R (Q) where he held that:

      "This has highlighted what, in our opinion, are  two  further  serious
    defects in the system adopted by the Secretary of State,  at  any  rate
    until now. The first is that the decision-maker is not in the  ordinary
    course of events the same person as the interviewer. This means that  a
    view has to be formed as to the credibility of the applicant's  account
    by a person who has not seen the applicant but only  read  the  answers
    noted on the screening form by someone else".

91.   The extract from the GCID -  Case  Record  Sheet  for  the  Applicant,
    which has now been disclosed, indicates that on 30 November 2016 a case
    worker, called Andrew Jones, recommended that the Applicant's  case  be
    rejected under articles 8(1) and 8(2) of Dublin III on the  basis  that
    he had no qualifying family or relatives. No witness statement has been
    provided from Mr. Jones so it is not possible to assess what,  if  any,
    weight he gave to the fact that the form indicates that  the  Applicant
    had hearing problems and needed a Saho  interpreter.  It  is  also  not
    clear whether he interviewed YH over the telephone and failed  to  note
    that he needed an interpreter or whether he was relying on a  telephone
    interview conducted by yet another person.

92.   Most crucially, it is also clear that the decision maker did not  give
    the Applicant or YH any opportunity to review the notes made  of  their
    replies. In particular, the S67 1A form indicates  that  the  Applicant
    was not given the opportunity to answer question 2.5 which read,  "Have
    you understood all the questions asked?" or question 2.6 which read,"Is
    there anything you would like to add or change in your  response?"   We
    have also noted that in his witness statement the Applicant  said  that
    he was not even sure how what he had said was translated  to  the  Home
    Office officials.

93.   This was a fundamental procedural breach of common  law  fairness,  as
    confirmed in Ex parte Doody. At paragraph  99of  R  (Q)  Lord  Phillips
    found that:

      "The  second  defect  is  not  unconnected  with  the  first  and  was
    identified by [Collins J in the Administrative Court  where]  where  he
    stressed that it was important that the applicant  should  be  given  a
    reasonable opportunity to deal with and explain any matter which was to
    be relied upon against him".

94.    In Q at first instance, Mr. Justice Collins addressed  the  issue  of
    the need to be given the opportunity to address the case made against a
    claimant and found:

      "20 ... Steps  must  be  taken  to  ensure  that  the  decision-making
    process is fair; so much will always be implied. In the  circumstances,
    it is the more important that the Claimant  should  have  a  reasonable
    opportunity to deal with and to explain any  matter,  which  is  to  be
    relied on against him. I recognise that Mr Garnham has stated that  the
    Secretary of State will always be prepared  to  reconsider  an  adverse
    decision if further representations are made or evidence produced. That
    is to be welcomed. But it is not  a  substitute  for  proper  and  fair
    primary decision-making...At the very least, the Claimant must be given
    the chance to rebut  a  suggestion  of  incredibility  and  to  explain
    himself if he can..."

      21. It is accepted  that  reasons  should  be  given  for  an  adverse
    decision...Suffice to say that [the reasons] need not be at all lengthy
    but they must enable the claimant  to  know  why  his  claim  has  been
    refused."

95.   This was mirrored at paragraph 92 of Q in the Court  of  Appeal  where
    Lord Philips found that:

      "Once a reasonably full picture is available so that  a  decision  can
    be properly informed, the decision maker may of course accept the facts
    stated by the applicant and, having correctly directed  himself  as  to
    the appropriate test, reach a conclusion as to whether he is  satisfied
    that the applicant applied for asylum as soon as reasonably practicable
    after arrival. If he concludes that he is not, he must of course notify
    the applicant to  that  effect  and  give  appropriate  (albeit  short)
    reasons".

96.   In Citizens UK Mr.  Justice  Soole  found  that  "in  the  CAOMIs  the
    applicants had the opportunity to return with further information, e.g.
    as held by them on mobile phones". However, this opportunity  was  only
    meaningful in practice if an applicant knew why the  family  links  had
    not been accepted and had been provided with a copy  of  any  interview
    and decision.

97.   This clearly did not happen in the Applicant's case  as  the  decision
    was made on the same day as YH was interviewed over the  telephone  and
    without the Applicant having any sight of the entries on his Section 67
    1A form or the "family tree" which was attached to it. (The latter  was
    particularly important as there was no  other  record  of  any  answers
    given by the Applicant about the composition of his family.)

98.   The failure to provide the Applicant with  any  reasons  or  even  the
    gist of why his  application  was  rejected  continued  throughout  the
    filtration process. As the Applicant explained in his witness statement
    "a centre worker informed all the young people in  the  centre  of  the
    decisions taken by the British Government. There were  about  50  young
    people in the centre and about 15 were accepted and the rest of us were
    rejected. Those of us who were rejected were not given any  explanation
    for why we have been rejected; we were just told that it was no".

99.   There is nothing in the Respondent's case to  suggest  that  this  was
    not the case. In fact, the emails now disclosed confirm that a decision
    was made not to provide reasons and that  this  decision  was  made  on
    legal advice provided  to  the  Respondent  in  order  to  avoid  legal
    challenges.

100.  The manner in which  the  Applicant's  case  was  dealt  with  in  the
    filtration process is further complicated by the contradictory evidence
    disclosed to us by the Respondent over the course of these proceedings.
    For example, on 16 March 2018 the Respondent disclosed an extract  from
    a spread sheet giving the Applicant's reference  number  as  47728  and
    stating that he was at CAO 51 which was in Le Havre in  Seine-Maritime.
    It said that his claim had been rejected under "Dublin" as  his  family
    link to FH had not been accepted. It was not clear what  documents  had
    been received but the last column said that the decision to reject  his
    claim had been maintained.

101.  However, Julia Farman's witness statement, dated 20 April  2018,  said
    that the UK authorities coded the Applicant's case  "green"  in  its  8
    March 2017 response to indicate that there was potential for  a  future
    take charge request provided contact details could be provided for  FH.
    She attached a further spread sheet at Exhibit  JF  8  which  confirmed
    that this was the case. She  went  on  to  assert  that  the  disclosed
    extract from a spread sheet provided on 16 March 2018 had been from  an
    internal spreadsheet used by the Respondent and  was  not  a  document,
    which had been shared with the French  authorities.   She  also  argued
    that the use of the phrase "decision maintained" was colloquial and did
    not actually mean that a take charge request  would  not  be  accepted.
    This does not indicate that the manner in which  the  Applicant's  case
    was "reviewed" during the filtration process was procedurally  fair  or
    that it could remedy any of the procedural errors made earlier  in  the
    expedited process.

102.  We were particularly  concerned  about  the  lack  of  detail  in  the
    spreadsheets provided by the UK Authorities in the Appellant's case  in
    the circumstances of YH having been interviewed and granted  asylum  by
    them and the concerns showed by the French authorities  in  the  emails
    now disclosed about the lack of detail in these spreadsheets.

103.  Julia Farman also stated that the UK authorities had responded to  the
    French authorities on 8 March 2017 and then on 15 March 2017  a  member
    of the Unit contacted the French Liaison  Officer  to  ask  the  French
    authorities if there was anything further they  wanted  to  produce  to
    support the Applicant's case. The implication being  that  it  was  the
    French authorities who had failed to provide any  further  information.
    However, the French authorities  had  explained  all  along  that  they
    needed to understand the  basis  upon  which  the  UK  authorities  had
    concluded that they could not  accept  the  link  between  YH  and  the
    Applicant before they could provide any meaningful additional evidence.



104.  On 14 March 2017, Charles Kapantais, a team  leader  in  the  European
    Intake Team, also sent an email to Julia Farman which read "possible to
    chase up the following cases on the Filter list for the documents  that
    are due to be sent. Unable to trace  new  relatives  with  the  current
    information we have".  There is then an extract  from  a  spread  sheet
    referring to the Applicant, which named his brother and said  that  the
    family link was not accepted. There is also an extract for 7 April 2017
    by Charles Kapantais on the ISCID, now disclosed  with  Julia  Farman's
    second  witness  statement,  which  just  states  that  "the  case  was
    reconsidered alongside any new evidence that may have been provided. In
      reconsidering the case it was concluded that  the  original  decision
    was maintained". There  is  no  other  evidence  to  suggest  that  the
    Applicant has or has ever had another relative in  the  United  Kingdom
    and this evidence merely serves to further undermine the  integrity  of
    the filtration process in his case.

105.  In paragraph 281 of his judgment in  Citizens  UK  Mr.  Justice  Soole
    stated that:

      "the non-communication of adverse decisions  and  the  sparse  reasons
    provided to the French authorities have given me particular  pause  for
    thought. However, I am satisfied that this did not vitiate the  process
    or otherwise constitute unfairness in the particular circumstances. The
    non-communication was a requirement of the French authorities; and  the
    terse spreadsheet information was a consequence of that requirement and
    of the pressures of the operation".

106.  It is clear from the evidence before us that  Mr.  Justice  Soole  was
    not provided with a  full  picture  of  the  communications  which  had
    occurred between the French and the UK authorities or the  real  reason
    for the failure to provide detailed reasons which arose from the  legal
    advice provided to the UK authorities.

107.  We do not place any weight on any failure by the Applicant  to  remain
    in the CAOMI in Le Havre  or  his  reluctance  to  engage  with  asylum
    procedures in France. One role of robust procedural  safeguards  is  to
    encourage an applicant to engage with a system and place his  trust  in
    it. This was stressed by Lord Reed SC in  R  (Osborn)  v  Parole  Board
    [2014] AC 1115 where he held that:

      "67.  There is no doubt that one of the virtues of  procedurally  fair
    decision-making is that it is liable to result in better decisions,  by
    ensuring that the decision-maker receives all relevant information  and
    that it is  properly  tested.  As  Lord  Hoffman  observed  however  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v AF (no 3) [2010] 2 AC 269,
    para 72, the purpose of a fair hearing is not  merely  to  improve  the
    chances of the tribunal reaching the right decision. At least two other
    important values are also engaged.

      68. The first was described by Lord Hoffman (ibid)  as  the  avoidance
    of the sense of injustice which the person who is the  subject  of  the
    decision will otherwise feel. I would  prefer  to  consider  first  the
    reason for that sense of injustice, namely that justice is  intuitively
    understood to require a procedure which pays  due  respect  to  persons
    whose rights are significantly  affected  by  decisions  taken  in  the
    exercise of administrative or judicial functions. Respect entails  that
    such persons ought to be able to participate in the procedures by which
    the decision is made, provided they have  something  to  say  which  is
    relevant to the decision to be taken".
| |                                                                      |

THE BEST INTERESTS OF THE CHILD

108.  At paragraph 273 of Citizens UK Mr. Justice Soole found, on the  basis
    of the statements submitted  as  to  the  operation  of  the  expedited
    process as opposed to evidence arising from individual cases, that:

      "In my  judgment  the  evidence  shows  a  process  which  involved  a
    conscientious assessment of the  individual  applications  against  the
    clear criteria contained in Dublin III Article 8 and which included the
    best interests of the child".

109.  However, in her witness statement, dated 20 April 2018,  Julia  Farman
    said that "in terms of  the  best  interests  assessment,  we  did  not
    routinely carry them out on children being assessed in relation to  the
    criteria under Article 8 of Dublin III. The best interests part of  the
    form was only used when a child was being considered for transfer under
    section 67 of the Immigration Act 2016.  It is true that Part 2 of  the
    form used when interviewing children in the CAOMIs took the form  of  a
    Best Interests Assessment with a section on his family and  his  health
    and any special needs. However, it is now the  Respondent's  case  that
    this part of the form  was  only  completed  when  a  child  was  being
    considered for transfer under section 67 of the Immigration  Act  2016.
    This was also in  contradiction  to  the  contents  of  Julia  Farman's
    witness statement, dated 5 April 2017  which  was  before  Mr.  Justice
    Soole where she said that the interviews in the expedited hearing would
    consider any health or medical issues a child may  have.  This  clearly
    did not happen in the Applicant's case as these sections  of  the  form
    were left empty.

110.  Counsel for the Respondent submitted that  it  was  not  necessary  to
    undertake a best interests assessment, as it was in  the  interests  of
    the children to be re-united with family members. However, he could not
    explain why it was necessary for a  best  interests  assessment  to  be
    undertaken in relation to section 67 cases but not  for  children  like
    the Applicant, when they were all unaccompanied children who were to be
    moved across an international border.

111.  Counsel for the Respondent submitted that  it  was  not  in  the  best
    interests of the totality of the group of  children  at  Calais,  as  a
    class, for their transfer to be  delayed  by  more  complex  procedures
    under the expedited process and, therefore, the applications had to  be
    dealt  with  expeditiously.  However,  we  are  considering  the   best
    interests of the Applicant as an individual and  the  medical  evidence
    indicates that the delay in resolving his application  has  exacerbated
    his moderate to severe post-traumatic stress disorder. In any event, it
    is our view that the bulk of the delay experienced by the Applicant has
    arisen from the fact that  the  expedited  and  filter  procedures,  as
    applied to him, did not meet the correct procedural standards which led
    to him being wrongfully deprived of the opportunity to join his brother
    in the United Kingdom in 2016 or early in 2017.

112.  The Respondent also submitted that, as the basis for the  process  had
      been humanitarian, delay could also have placed the children at  risk.
      We find that this may well have been the case when the  children  were
      still living in the  "jungle"  but  the  Applicant's  case  under  the
      expedited process was not dealt with at that time. It  was  considered
      when he had already been transferred to a CAOMI  in  Le  Havre  on  27
      November 2016, where the physical risks, at least,  had  been  reduced
      and his basic day-to-day needs were met.

113.  Any attempt to  extend  this  submission  to  include  the  filtration
      process is bound to fail in the light of the evidence now disclosed of
      the very real fears expressed by the French authorities that if proper
      reasons were not given children would  place  themselves  at  risk  by
      leaving the CAOMIs, which was exactly what happened to the Applicant.

| |                                                                      |
| |                                                                      |
| |                                                                      |
| |                                                                      |


ARTICLE 8: PROCEDURAL FAIRNESS

114.  It is now accepted by  the  Respondent  that  YH  is  the  Applicant's
    brother and that YH has been recognised as  a  refugee  in  the  United
    Kingdom. He has also not disputed that YH has been in contact with  the
    Applicant on a regular basis, whilst he has been living in  France  and
    trying to join him in the United Kingdom. Therefore, for  the  purposes
    of Article 8(1) of the European Convention on  Human  Rights,  we  find
    that a family life exists between the Applicant and YH.

115.   But  this  family  relationship  was  disputed  by   the   Respondent
    throughout  the  expedited  process  and  the  attitude  taken  by  the
    Respondent to this  relationship  during  the  filtration  process  was
    somewhat confused and  opaque.  As  the  basis  of  the  expedited  and
    filtration process was family reunion, we find that the  provisions  of
    Article 8 applied throughout these
    processes. We  also  remind  ourselves  that  in  Tuquabo-Tekle  v  The
    Netherlands (Application No. 60665/00)  the  European  Court  of  Human
    Rights held that:

      "The Court reiterates that the essential object of  Article  8  is  to
    protect  the  individual  against  arbitrary  action  by   the   public
    authorities. There may in addition be positive obligations inherent  in
    effective 'respect' for family life. However,  the  boundaries  between
    the State's positive and negative obligations under this  provision  do
    not lend themselves to precise definition.  The  applicable  principles
    are, nonetheless, similar. In both contexts regard must be had  to  the
    fair balance that has to be struck between the competing  interests  of
    the individual and of the community as a whole; and  in  both  contexts
    the State enjoys a certain margin of appreciation".

116.  In the current case the margin of appreciation had  been  narrowed  by
    the establishment of an expedited process  to  bring  certain  children
    into the United Kingdom and the fact that Respondent now accepts  that,
    subject to standard security checks, the Applicant is entitled to enter
    the United Kingdom in order to make an  application  for  asylum  here;
    albeit because of the passage of time that he will  be  entering  under
    Article 17.2, and not Article 8, of Dublin III.

117.  Therefore, the Respondent had to consider whether the manner in  which
    the expedited and filtration process were operated  was  sufficient  to
    protect the Applicant from arbitrary actions.

118.  We rely on Mr. Justice McCloskey's  judgment  in  AM  where  he  found
    that:

    "(59)   It  is  well  established  that  Article  8   ECHR's   positive
           obligations  can  include  a  right  to   procedural   fairness,
           particularly in decisions that have  a  serious  impact  on  the
           Article 8 rights of children: McMichael v United Kingdom  (1995)
           20 EHRR 2015  at  [102];  R  (Gudanaviciene  &  Others)  v  Lord
           Chancellor [2015] 1 WLR at [62], [65], [69] and [71]. The effect
           of this is that the child and their affected family members must
           be involved in the decision-making process, viewed as  a  whole,
           to a degree  sufficient  to  provide  them  with  the  requisite
           protection of their interests. It has been held that  a  failure
           to ensure this can give rise to a  breach  of  their  rights  to
           respect for family life which is disproportionate. McMichael  at
           [87] - [92] and W v UK at [70] - [71].


     (60)  The test is to be distilled from the Strasbourg jurisprudence is
           whether those affected by the decision under scrutiny have  been
           involved in the decision-making process, viewed as a whole, to a
           degree sufficient to provide them with the requisite  protection
           of their interests. This  procedural  aspect  of  Article  8  is
           designed to  ensure  the  effective  protection  of  a  person's
           substantive Article 8 rights...".


119.  Applying this test and for the reasons given above in relation to  our
    analysis of the Applicant's right to common law procedural fairness, we
    find that the procedural aspects of his rights under Article 8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights were also breached.

120.  The Respondent submitted that the procedural aspects of Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights  did  not  apply   because  the
    circumstances in which the Applicant found himself  did  not  meet  the
    high threshold established in ZT (Syria) v Secretary of State  for  the
    Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 10, where Beatson LJ held at  paragraph
    95 that "applications such as the ones made by these  claimants  should
    only be made in very exceptional circumstances where they can show that
    the system of the member state that they do not wish to  use,  in  this
    case the French system, is not  capable  of  responding  adequately  to
    their needs".

121.  However, the Applicant's case can clearly be distinguished  from  that
    of the Applicants in ZY (Syria). They had been living in  the  "jungle"
    in Calais in  2015;  many  months  before  the  expedited  process  was
    established by the UK and French authorities. They had not applied  for
    asylum in France but had asked the UK authorities to make a take charge
    request under Dublin III without any asylum application being made.  To
    that extent, they were  seeking  to  bypass  part  of  the  Dublin  III
    process. The factual matrix in the current case was very different.  It
    was the UK and French authorities  who  had  established  an  expedited
    process, which was solely focused on the criteria of Article 8  of  the
    Dublin III and explicitly "by-passed" other elements of Dublin  III  in
    an effort to deal with the large  number  of  children  in  Calais  who
    asserted that they had relatives in the United Kingdom  as  quickly  as
    possible.

122.   In  our  view  the  Applicant's  involvement  in  the  expedited  and
    filtration processes cannot be characterised as an attempt to "by-pass"
    the totality of the Dublin  III  process.  When  the  Calais  camp  was
    cleared he was placed by the authorities in the CAP temporary reception
    centre sometime between  24  and  26  October  2016  and  he  was  then
    transferred to a CAOMI in Le Havre on 27 October 2016. Once  there,  he
    was assessed as part of Operation Purnia Phase 2. During  this  process
    it was reasonable for the reasons given above for him to  believe  that
    he was being assessed for transfer to the United Kingdom  under  Dublin
    III.

123.  We have also noted that in paragraph 95 of ZT (Syria) Beatson LJ  also
      found that  the  cases  of  children  who  had  been  at  Calais  were
      "intensely fact-specific" and we find that the Applicant's  case  must
      be considered on its own very particular facts.
| |                                                                      |
| |                                                                      |

| |                                                                      |
| |                                                                      |

124.  As a consequence, we find that the manner in which the  expedited  and
    the filtration process was  applied  to  the  Applicant  gave  rise  to
    breaches of natural justice/common law fairness and  also  amounted  to
    procedural unfairness for the purposes of Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human  Rights  and  the  Applicant  has  been  wrongfully
    deprived of the opportunity to join YH in the United Kingdom  since  30
    November 2016.

125.  We have not found it necessary to consider whether it also  gave  rise
    to procedural breaches of Dublin III.

Order

    (1)    An Order quashing the Respondent's decision, dated  30  November
         2016, to reject the Applicant's application  for  transfer  to  the
         United Kingdom under the expedited process.


    (2)    An order quashing the Respondent's decision  in  the  filtration
         process that the Applicant was not related to YH as claimed.


    (3)     A  declaration  that  these  decisions  and  the   Respondent's
         continuing refusal to admit FTH the United  Kingdom  were  and  are
         unlawful being  in  breach  of  natural  justice,  the  common  law
         standards of procedural fairness and the procedural  dimensions  of
         Article 8 European Convention on Human Rights.


    (4)    The parties do provide  written  submissions  as  to  costs  and
         damages within 14 days of receipt of this decision.


    (5)    There shall be liberty to apply.


Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

      Permission to appeal will be considered after judgment is handed  down
      and if an appropriate application for permission is made.




                  Nadine Finch
       Signed:

                 Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


       Dated:    12 June 2018





























                                    ANNEX



































                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber

                       Judicial Review Decision Notice






                       The Queen on the application of

                                     FTH

                                                         Applicant
                                      V

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                  Respondent





                                                         FURTHER       ORDER





      UPON  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  King  having  refused  the  Respondent's
      application for a stay of proceedings on 1 March 2018


      AND UPON Upper Tribunal  Judge  Finch  having  refused  to  grant  the
      Respondent a stay of the oral permission hearing at the start of  that
      hearing on 26 March 2018


      AND UPON Upper Tribunal Judge Finch providing detailed written reasons
      for refusing the Respondent a stay of proceedings on 29 March 2018


      AND UPON the Respondent lodging an application  notice,  dated  4  May
      2018, requesting that the Tribunal urgently considers his  application
      for permission to appeal the refusal of a stay to the Court of Appeal


      AND UPON THE Applicant filing a written response to  this  application
      on 4 May 2018


      AND UPON the Upper Tribunal  refusing  the  Respondent  permission  to
      appeal to the Court of Appeal on  14  May  2018  in  relation  to  the
      application for a stay on the basis that:


      (1)   The Applicant's application was  primarily  concerned  with  how
           procedures were applied in the context of his  individual  case,
           as opposed to any procedural and generic irregularities  in  the
           system itself. Therefore, it was  not  necessary  to  await  the
           outcome of the hearing in the Court of Appeal in   The Queen (on
           the application of Citizens UK) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
           Home Department and Secretary of State for the Home Department v
           The Queen (on the application of AM & Others),  which  were  set
           down for 12 - 14 June 2018.


      (2)   The remedy sought by the Applicant  is  different  to  one  that
           would be sought by a child.


      (3)   Counsel for  the  Respondent  indicated  at  the  start  of  the
           substantive hearing of the Applicant's claim on 9 May 2018  that
           he  was  no  longer  seeking  to  pursue  his  application   for
           permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal against the decision
           by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch to refuse to grant the  Respondent
           a stay




      AND UPON the Upper Tribunal's order, dated 12 June 2018, stating;


      "Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal


            Permission to appeal will be considered after judgment is handed
           down and if an appropriate application for permission is made"


      UPON the Applicant having filed and served his  submissions  on  costs
      and damages on 13 September 2018


      AND UPON the Respondent having filed and  served  his  submissions  on
      disposal on 2 October 2018


      AND UPON the Upper Tribunal having reminded itself  of  the  decisions
      previously given in this claim and considered the case law referred to
      by both counsel.

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

      PERMISSION TO APPEAL TO THE COURT OF APPEAL

1.    (a)   The Upper Tribunal's order, dated 12  June  2018,  provided  the
      appropriate     party with an opportunity to seek permission to appeal
      to the Court of Appeal after the written decision was handed down.


     (b)   The Upper Tribunal indicated that permission would be considered
           only if an appropriate application for permission was made.


      (c)   Paragraph 44(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
           2008 states that "subject to paragraphs (4A) and (4B), a  person
           seeking permission to appeal must make a written application  to
           the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal".


      (d)   The Respondent made a written application to appeal  within  his
           Submissions on Disposal, dated 4 July 2018.


      (e)   On 19 October 2018, the Applicant's  solicitors  confirmed  that
           they relied on the arguments contained in paragraphs 19 - 20  of
           their Submissions on Costs and Damages in relation to the matter
           of whether the Respondent should be granted permission to appeal
           to the Court of Appeal.


2.    Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal against the  decision  to
      grant the Applicant's substantive claim for judicial review is refused
      on the basis that:


     (a)   In paragraph 19 of the  Respondent's  Submissions  on  Disposal,
           dated 29 September 2018, the Respondent submitted that, in light
           of the findings of the Court  of  Appeal  in  AM  and  Ors,  the
           Tribunal was wrong to declare that the Respondent's  refusal  to
           admit the Applicant gave rise to  a  breach  of  the  procedural
           dimensions of Article 8 ECHR.


     (b)   In paragraph 95 of R (ZT (Syria)  and  others)  v  Secretary  of
           State of the Home Department [2016] I WLR 4894, Beatson LJ found
           that the cases concerning children who had been  in  the  Calais
           camps were intensely fact-specific. At paragraph 88 of Secretary
           of State for the Home Department v The Queen on the  application
           of AM & Others [2018] EWCA Civ 1815 Singh LJ relied on the  fact
           that the Upper Tribunal in  AM  had  reached  a  view  that  was
           inconsistent with the decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  ZT
           (Syria). However, as can be seen from paragraph  95  of  Beatson
           LJ's judgment in ZT (Syria) his decision had been  made  in  the
           context of applications made under Article 8  of  the  EHCR  and
           outside of the Dublin III process. It was in that  context  that
           the Court of Appeal found that applications of this kind  should
           only be made in very exceptional circumstances.


     (c)   The circumstances of the  current  Applicant's  case  were  very
           different. He had not  applied  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom,
           relying on his Article 8 rights. Instead he  had  been  part  of
           Operation Purina Phase 2,  which  was  established  many  months
           after ZT had been living in the "jungle" in Calais. The  present
           Applicant had brought a challenge to the manner in which he  was
           treated in the expedited and filtration process operating in  in
           2016/2017.  It was these processes, not any application made  by
           him under Article 8 of the ECHR,  which  would  have  determined
           whether he was entitled to enter the United Kingdom.


     (d)   Furthermore, in FTH, the Upper Tribunal made no mandatory  order
           requiring him to be granted leave to enter. It restricted itself
           to making a declaration that the manner in which  the  expedited
           and filtration processes  had  been  applied  to  the  Applicant
           amounted to a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR, in so far as  one
           of  the  essential  objects  of  Article  8  is  to  protect  an
           individual  against  arbitrary  actions  taken   by   a   public
           authority; as  confirmed  in  Tuquabo-Tekle  v  The  Netherlands
           (Application No. 60665/00.


     (e)   The Secretary  of  State  was  exercising  his  discretion  when
           operating the expedited and filtration processes.  In  paragraph
           85 of ZT (Syria) Beatson LJ found  that  "the  exercise  by  the
           Secretary of State of her discretion is subject to the  ordinary
           public law principles of  propriety  of  purpose,  relevancy  of
           considerations  and  the  longstop  Wednesbury  unreasonableness
           category".


     (f)   The Applicant would not be able to apply for damages in a French
           court for actions taken by the Secretary of State for  the  Home
           Department.


     (g)   The manner in which the Respondent  applied  the  expedited  and
           filtration processes give rise to the basis for damages  on  the
           basis of the need  for  just  satisfaction  of  the  Applicant's
           Article 8 rights.



DAMAGES

UPON the Upper Tribunal exercising its powers under  section  16(6)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007

AND UPON the Applicant having made a claim for damages  for  the  breach  of
his rights under Article 8 of the European Convention  on  Human  Rights  at
paragraph (5) of Section 6 of his Claim Form, lodged on 16 February 2018

AND UPON the Upper Tribunal being satisfied that such an  award  would  have
been made by the High Court if the claim had been made in  an  action  begun
in the High Court by the Applicant at the time of making the application

AND UPON the Upper Tribunal finding, for the purposes  of  section  (2A)  of
the Senior Courts Act 1981, that it was not highly likely that  the  outcome
for the Applicant  would  not  have  been  substantially  different  if  the
conduct complained of had not occurred, as the damages  he  is  entitled  to
arose from his individual treatment within   the  expedited  and  filtration
processes

AND UPON the Upper Tribunal taking into  account  section  8  of  the  Human
Rights Act 1998 and

AND UPON the declaration made by the Upper Tribunal in its order,  dated  12
June  2018,  that  the  Respondent's  decision  to  reject  the  Applicant's
application for transfer to the United Kingdom under the  expedited  process
and his decision in the  filtration  process  that  the  Applicant  was  not
related to YH, as claimed, amounted to an unlawful breach of the  procedural
dimensions of Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

AND UPON the Applicant submitting  that  an  award  of  damages  of  between
15,000 and 18,000 would be appropriate

AND UPON the Respondent submitting that in the light of the decision  in  AM
and Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  EWCA  Civ  1815
it would not be lawful or just and appropriate to make an award  of  damages
or that, if damages were appropriate, they should amount  to  no  more  than
2,000.

1.    As found in paragraph 114 of the Upper Tribunal's decision,  dated  12
      June 2018, family life existed, and exists, between the Applicant  and
      his brother, YH. In addition, as found in paragraph 124 of  the  Upper
      Tribunal's decision, the Applicant had wrongly been  deprived  of  the
      opportunity to join YH in the United Kingdom  from  30  November  2016
      until 27 July 2018 when he was transferred to the United Kingdom to be
      reunited with YH.  Therefore, the period of separation amounted  to  1
      year and seven months and for eight months and ten days of that period
      he was still a child.

2.    In paragraph 93 of AM & Ors Singh LJ  found  that  Article  8  had  no
      applicability in the cases before him. This was based on  his  finding
      in paragraph 88 that "as this Court made clear in ZT (Syria),  Article
      8 will only have a role to play in very exceptional circumstances.  In
      particular, it  must  be  shown  that  the  French  legal  system  had
      systematic  deficiencies  in  it,  which  rendered  it  incapable   of
      providing an effective remedy to the Respondent children".

3.    However, as found above in relation to  the  Respondent's  application
      for permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal against the  substance
      of our decision, in paragraph 95  of  R  (ZT  (Syria)  and  others)  v
      Secretary of State of the Home Department [2016] I WLR  4894,  Beatson
      LJ found that the cases concerning children who had been in the Calais
      camps were intensely fact-specific. At paragraph 88  of  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department v The Queen on the application of  AM  &
      Others [2018] EWCA Civ 1815 Singh LJ relied on the fact that the Upper
      Tribunal in AM had reached a  view  that  was  inconsistent  with  the
      decision of the Court of Appeal in ZT (Syria). However, as can be seen
      from paragraph 95 of Beatson LJ's judgment in ZT (Syria) his  decision
      had been made in the context of applications made under Article  8  of
      the EHCR and outside of the Dublin III process. It was in that context
      that the Court of Appeal found that applications of this  kind  should
      only be made in very exceptional circumstances.

4.     The  circumstances  of  the  current  Applicant's  case   were   very
      different. He had not applied to enter the United Kingdom, relying  on
      his Article 8 rights. Instead he had been  part  of  Operation  Purina
      Phase 2, which was established many months after ZT had been living in
      the "jungle" in Calais. The present Applicant had brought a  challenge
      to the manner in which he was treated in the expedited and  filtration
      process operating in in 2016/2017.  It was these  processes,  not  any
      free-standing application made by him under Article  8  of  the  ECHR,
      which would have determined whether  he  was  entitled  to  enter  the
      United Kingdom.

5.    In paragraph 66 of AM & Ors Singh LJ noted that the Respondent  relied
      on the fact that the Upper Tribunal,  when  giving  judgment  in  that
      case, had given no consideration to the fact that France bore  primary
      responsibility for processing [the children's] claims in  the  context
      of the application of Dublin III; that  France  itself  was  bound  to
      ensure no breach of Article 8 of  the  ECHR  occurred.   However,  the
      evidence which was gradually disclosed over the course of the  current
      claim, indicated that it  was  the  Respondent,  and  not  the  French
      authorities,  who  had  taken  the  decisions  which  were   primarily
      responsible for the Applicant not being reunited with YH in  a  timely
      manner. In addition, the Applicant was not under the  jurisdiction  of
      the French care system for much of the period for  which  damages  are
      claimed. The Applicant left the CAOMI in Le Havre on 16 April 2017 and
      then became 18 on 10 August 2017.

6.    Furthermore, in paragraph 85 of ZT (Syria) Beatson LJ held  that  "the
      exercise by the Secretary of State of her discretion is subject to the
      ordinary public law principles of propriety of purpose,  relevancy  of
      considerations, and the longstop Wednesbury unreasonableness  category
      and, because of the engagement of ECHR Article  8,  the  intensity  of
      review which is appropriate in the assessment of  the  proportionality
      of any interference with Article 8 rights".

7.    In addition, the Applicant is not able  to  claim  damages  under  the
      Human Rights Act 1998 in  the  French  courts  for  a  breach  by  the
      Respondent of his Article 8 rights

8.    In relation to the quantum  of  any  damages  to  be  awarded  to  the
      Applicant, the Supreme Court indicated in its guidance in R (Sturnham)
      v Parole Board (No 2) [2013] 2 AC 254, that courts  should  be  guided
      primarily by any clear and consistent practice of the European Court.

9.    In W v United Kingdom (Application No. 9749/82) the European Court  of
      Human Rights held, in paragraph 62 of its decision, that:

      "It is true that Article 8 (art. 8) contains  no  explicit  procedural
      requirements, but this is not conclusive  of  the  matter.  The  local
      authority's  decision-making  process  clearly  cannot  be  devoid  of
      influence on the substance of the decision, notably by  ensuring  that
      it is based on the relevant considerations and is not  one-sided  and,
      hence, neither is nor appears to be arbitrary. Accordingly, the  Court
      is entitled to have regard to that process to determine whether it has
      been conducted in a manner that, in all the circumstances, is fair and
      affords due respect to the interests protected by Article 8 (art.  8).
      Moreover, the Court observes that the English courts can  examine,  on
      an application for judicial review of a decision of a local authority,
      the question whether it has acted fairly...".

9.     In D v Commissioner or Police for the Metropolis [2015]  1  WLR  1833
      the Court of Appeal distilled certain relevant general principles. The
      first was that awards for non-pecuniary harm should be equitable.  The
      second is that where a declaration has also  been  made,  as  in  this
      case, there needs to be a causal link between the breach of Article  8
      and  the  harm  caused.  The  Court  of  Appeal  did  acknowledge  the
      importance of the remedy of declaratory relief but did not  find  that
      it may not also be appropriate to award damages.

10.   In relation to  the  need  for  damages  to  be  equitable  we  remind
      ourselves of paragraph 114 of Al-Jedda v United Kingdom (2011) 53 EHRR
      789 where it was held that "The court recalls that it is not its  role
      under article 41 to function akin to a domestic tort  mechanism  court
      in apportioning fault and compensatory damages between civil  parties.
      Its guiding principle is what is just, fair and reasonable in all  the
      circumstances of the case, including not  only  the  position  of  the
      applicant but the overall context in which the breach occurred".

11.   Therefore, we have taken into account the following features:

      (a)   Due to the expedited and filtration processes not being  applied
           to the Applicant in a proper manner, he was  separated  from  YH
           for 1 year and 7 months and for 8 months and ten  days  of  this
           period he was an unaccompanied migrant child.
      (b)   On 1 June 2018 the Respondent agreed to transfer  the  Applicant
           to the United Kingdom but his transfer did not  occur  until  27
           July 2018 due to the delay on the  part  of  the  Respondent  in
           giving approval to his travel arrangements.
      (c)   The evidence provided by Helen Cusack O'Keefe indicates that the
           Applicant was suffering from moderate to  severe  post-traumatic
           stress disorder throughout this period of time.
      (d)   He was also at  times  street  homeless  and  he  became  street
           homeless when he was a child and could not be expected  to  make
           an informed choice about the options open to him.
      (e)   Whilst he was homeless, the Applicant was also assaulted by  the
           French authorities, who took no steps to assist him to apply for
           asylum, and the assault led to him being hospitalised.
      (f)   The disclosure finally made in  this  claim  indicate  that  the
           Respondent imposed time constraints on himself  and  that  these
           were not supported by the French authorities.
      (g)   There is no evidence to suggest that,  when  the  Applicant  was
           told that his application within the expedited process had  been
           refused, he was aware that  there  was  a  separate  Dublin  III
           process, which he could have entered.
      (h)   Throughout the proceedings the Respondent continued to deny that
           the Applicant was related to YH, as claimed, and applied  for  a
           stay on a number of occasions in order to delay a final  hearing
           of his claim.
      (i)   The Respondent failed to provide full disclosure in relation  to
           the manner  in  which  the  Applicant  was  treated  during  the
           expedited  and  filtration  processes   and   most   significant
           disclosure was only provided during the substantive hearing.
      (j)   Section 8(1) of the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  states  that  the
           appropriate court or tribunal may  grant  any  remedy  which  it
           finds to be just and appropriate.


12.   In relation to the causal link between the breach  of  Article  8  and
      the harm caused. In her Mental  Health  Assessment  Update,  dated  29
      April 2018, Helen Cusack O'Keefe  confirmed  that  it  was  still  her
      opinion that the most likely initial cause  of  the  Applicant's  PTSD
      symptoms were the traumatic events that  occurred  when  he  was  very
      young in Eritrea, followed by the  violence  and  traumatic  hardships
      that occurred during his journey from Eritrea to Europe, and  then  in
      France. She then added that the  hostile  and  unsafe  environment  he
      experienced in France and the delay in joining  his  UK-based  brother
      were both precipitating and perpetuating symptoms of  the  Applicant's
      PTSD symptoms.

13.   When considering the quantum of damages  which  would  represent  just
      satisfaction, we have reminded ourselves that it would not be possible
      to put the Applicant back into the position in  which  he  was  on  30
      November 2016 or for the Respondent to simply re-make his decisions.

14.   We have considered the cases referred  to  by  the  Applicant  in  his
      Submissions on Costs and Damages and note that in none of those  cases
      was there psychiatric evidence to confirm a diagnosis of  moderate  to
      severe post-traumatic stress disorder and that  non-pecuniary  damages
      were being awarded for distress and unspecified  medical  problems  or
      anxiety. The difference that this can make to an award is  exemplified
      by the different sums awarded in the JC Guidelines (14th Edition)  for
      moderate as opposed to less severe psychiatric damage.

15.   The delay in family reunion was longer in these cases but  the  damage
      suffered was far less and we  find  that  the  appropriate  range  for
      damages begins at around 10,000. However, it was  then  necessary  to
      make a discount of around 2,000 to take into account the fact that it
      was likely that he was suffering from post-traumatic  stress  disorder
      prior to 30 November 2016.

16.   However, we also remind ourselves that the case law referred to  above
      recognises the need for equity and the making of  an  award  which  is
      just, fair and reasonable in all the circumstances of the  Applicant's
      individual case. We find that he was an unaccompanied foreign national
      child,  and  latterly  a  young  person,  whose  application  was  not
      adjudicated in a proper manner, who became street homeless, suffered a
      serious  assault  and  whose  post-traumatic   stress   disorder   was
      exacerbated by the failure to  apply  appropriate  procedures  to  his
      individual case in the expedited  and  filtration  processes.   Having
      taken these factors into account, we find that it would  be  just  and
      equitable to increase the total damages to be awarded to the Applicant
      by 4,000 to take into account the particular individual circumstances
      in which he had to live due to the failure by the Respondent to  apply
      appropriate procedural safeguards to his case  in  the  expedited  and
      filtration processes.

Having taken into account the law and the facts referred to above,  we  find
that it would be just and  appropriate  to  make  an  award  of  12,000  in
damages to the Applicant.

COSTS

IT IS ORDERED THAT:

1.    The Respondent do pay the Applicant's reasonable costs in relation  to
      the applications  and  hearings,  other  than  the  Applicant's  costs
      arising from the Respondent's  application  to  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Finch for a stay of proceedings at the hearing on 26 March  2018,  the
      Respondent's application for permission to appeal the refusal  of  the
      stay to the Court of Appeal, dated 4 May 2018,  and  the  Respondent's
      reliance up until the first day of  the  substantive  judicial  review
      hearing on his continuing application for permission to appeal to  the
      Court of Appeal in relation to the decision to refuse him a stay.

2.    The Respondent do pay the Applicant costs on  an  indemnity  basis  in
      relation to his costs arising from his application to  Upper  Tribunal
      Judge Finch for a stay of proceedings at the hearing on 26 March 2018,
      his application for permission to appeal the refusal of  the  stay  to
      the Court of Appeal, dated 4 May 2018, and his reliance up  until  the
      first day of the substantive judicial review hearing on his continuing
      application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
      relation to the decision to refuse him a stay.

3.    An order that costs are paid on an  indemnity  basis  in  relation  to
      these parts of the overall case is  reasonble.  As  May  LJ  found  at
      paragraph 28 in Reid Minty (a firm) v Taylor  [2001]  EWCA  Civ  1723:
      "What is, however, relevant to the present appeal is  that  litigation
      can readily be conducted in a way  which  is  unreasonable  and  which
      justifies an award of costs on an indemnity basis, where  the  conduct
      could not properly be regarded as lacking moral probity  or  deserving
      moral condemnation".

4.    The Respondent's action was unreasonable as he continued to apply  for
      a stay when the Upper Tribunal had made it very clear that it believed
      that the case of FTH could be distinguished on its  facts  from  those
      being appealed to the Court  of  Appeal.  The  medical  evidence  also
      indicated that  the  adverse  effect  of  any  further  delay  on  the
      Applicant's  poor  mental  health  would  not  be  proportionate.  The
      Respondent was already well aware of  the  evidence  relating  to  the
      Applicant's claim and was relying on this evidence  in  other  similar
      cases before  the  courts.  The  further  evidence  disclosed  by  the
      Respondent in the course of this case would also not have  emerged  if
      such a stay had been granted.

5.    The Respondent also failed to take into account the decision in R  (AM
      &  AO)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  (stay  of
      proceedings - principles) [2017] UKUT 168.

6.    In addition, no new and/or significant  reasons  were  given  for  the
      renewed applications for a stay.

7.    At the same time, when stays were refused new and unseen material  and
      evidence emerged which brought into question the  Respondent's  proper
      compliance with his duty  of  candour  and  co-operation  in  judicial
      review proceedings.

8.    Such costs to be subject to a  detailed  assessment  on  the  standard
      basis, if not agreed.

9.    There be a  detailed  assessment  of  the  Appellant's  legally  aided
      costs.

10.   Pursuant to rule 10(10) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
      Rules 2006, within 21 days of service of this  Order,  the  Respondent
      shall pay a reasonable  sum  of  costs  on  account  pending  detailed
      assessment.

11.   Liberty to both parties to apply.

Non-compliance


Any failure to comply with any of the above directions may result in:


(a)   an order for costs under rule 10  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008 against a party or that  party's  representative;
      and/or

(b)   the striking out of the proceedings or any part thereof under rule 8.




                  Nadine Finch
       Signed:

                 Upper Tribunal Judge Finch




_____________________________________________

                 Upper Tribunal Judge Allen


       Dated:    October 2018







