
[pic]

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                       IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                               JR/12123/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR

                                                          10 - 12 April 2016


                       The QUEEN ON The application OF

                                     FA
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and


                          LONDON BOROUGH OF EALING
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE Pitt


Ms Christie, instructed by Simpson Millar Solicitors appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mr H Harrop-Griffiths, instructed by the London Borough of Ealing appeared
on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE Pitt: 1. This decision resolves the disputed  age  of  FA,  an  Afghan
    national. FA maintains that he was born on 24 June 1999 and at the time
    of an age assessment decision made by the  respondent  on  9  September
    2016 he was 17 years and 3 months old.  The respondent  maintains  that
    as of the date of the age assessment  decision  the  applicant  was  at
    least 18 years' old.

Background


 2. The applicant maintains that he is from a middle-class,  well-connected
    family, his grandfather having worked for the government at a very high
    level.  He maintains that he left Afghanistan in 2015 with  his  family
    but was separated from them on the Iran/Turkey border.  He was taken by
    an agent through Europe  and  accepts  that  he  was  fingerprinted  in
    Hungary although he does not think he  claimed  asylum  there.   It  is
    common ground that he arrived in  the  UK  on  30  September  2015  and
    claimed asylum.  The appellant maintains that he was 16  at  that  time
    and that, when asked, this was the age he gave to Immigration  Officers
    on arrival.

 3. The applicant was initially accommodated by the Home  Office  in  adult
    National Asylum Support System  (NASS)  accommodation.   He  left  that
    accommodation on 30 October 2015 and began living with  his  aunt,  AA,
    and her family in Camden.  In approximately November 2015 he  maintains
    that AA  obtained  his  taskera,  an  Afghan  identity  document,  from
    Afghanistan.  On 24 April 2016, the applicant was accommodated in adult
    NASS accommodation in Southall, having left his aunt's accommodation.

 4. On 11  January  2016  the  applicant  had  a  further  initial  contact
    interview with the Home Office which recorded that at the time  of  his
    arrival in Dover his account had  been  that  he  was  16  years'  old.
    Thereafter the applicant applied to the London Borough of Ealing to  be
    accommodated as a minor.  This led to a first age assessment  interview
    on 12 July 2016 after which the Local Authority agreed to  support  and
    accommodate the applicant under Section 20 of the Children Act 1989. On
    4 August 2016 the applicant had an initial  health  assessment  with  a
    doctor.

 5. On 30 August 2016 a second age assessment interview took place.  At the
    end of that interview the applicant was given six reasons why the Local
    Authority did not accept his claimed age. On 9 September 2016 a  formal
    decision was provided in which the Local Authority concluded  that  the
    applicant was "older than 18 years of age".  On  11  October  2016  the
    respondent stopped accommodating the applicant as a child and  he  went
    to live with his aunt again.

 6. Also on 11 October 2016 the applicant lodged a judicial review  of  the
    refusal  to  accept  his  claimed  age.  On   14   October   2016   the
    Administrative Court granted permission to judicially  review  the  age
    assessment decision of 9 September 2016. The Administrative Court  also
    ordered the Local Authority to treat  the  applicant  as  a  child  and
    accommodate him under Section 20  of  the  Children  Act  1989  in  the
    interim.  The claim was then transferred to the Upper Tribunal for this
    age assessment decision to be made.

The Age Assessment Decision dated 9 September 2016

 7. The Local Authority's age assessment decision dated 9 September 2016 is
    at D118 to D120 of the bundle of  materials.   It  states  as  follows,
    verbatim:

         "Re Assistance under children Act 1989

         I write to inform you that we have now completed our age assessment
         and we the assessors are of the opinion that  you  are  older  than
         your given date of birth.   We  have  based  our  decision  on  our
         experience  of  working  with   children,   evidence   from   other
         professionals, external agencies documents  and  finally  observing
         your behaviour, mannerisms and body  language,  inconsistencies  in
         your account. We have taken into consideration  your  taskeria  you
         have iin your possession.

         An age assessment conducted on 12 July 2016  of  which  a  copy  is
         enclosed. Our conclusion has reached using some of the following:

         We the  assessors  have  reached  this  conclusion  and  have  aged
         disputed FA for the following reasons:

          "1. FA left a safe loving environment and showed a high  level  of
             maturity in reaching this decision, by leaving the home of his
             auntie to pursue an unknown outcome  and  accommodation,  i.e.
             both FA and his aunt confirmed that he left her  home  of  his
             own accord.

         2.   During the age assessment process  you  have  presented  as  a
             mature manner which leaves us to conclude that  you  have  the
             emotional IQ of someone much older than 18 years of age,  i.e.
             FA was self-assured in his responses.  He was calm and relaxed
             in the presence of adults.  Also his key worker  commented  on
             FA mannerism.

         3.   FA was age disputed by the Home Office and although not Metron
             compliant, the assessors are of the  opinion  that  there  are
             sufficient reasons which suggest there  are  merits  in  their
             decision i.e. FA physical appearance strongly suggests  he  is
             older than 18 years old.

         4.   FA refused a medical age assessment (DAE) saying that  he  did
             not belief in the accuracy  of  dental  age  assessment.   The
             assessors felt that this demonstrated a maturity of being able
             to take this stance and have this belief.

         5.   The contributions from  other  agencies  were  considered  and
             whilst the Red Cross accepted your  age,  the  other  agencies
             (Tavistock and key worker) have made  reference  to  FA  being
             "mature & young man" (Tavistock) and "FA's overall  appearance
             and how he engages in conversations as well as the answers  he
             gives makes me feel he is of a mature age" (Key worker).

         6.   We  consider  FA  taskeria  and  consider  its  content.   The
             information contained about your  DOB  is  based  on  physical
             appearance.  We have taken into account that you may have been
             young or older at the time it was issued, therefore  it's  not
             an accurate source of information regarding your claimed  age,
             i.e. the English translated version of the tazkeria  concludes
             that FA age is "based  on  his  physical  appearance,  age  is
             established as (13) thirteen years old in the year  of  1391".



 8. There were a number  of  reasons  why  I  concluded  that  the  reasons
    provided by the respondent attracted little weight.

    The First Reason

 9. The first reason given by Local Authority for finding the applicant  to
    be over 18 is that he  chose  to  leave  his  aunt's  home  and  pursue
    independent accommodation, indicating a high level of maturity.

10. It has always been the evidence of the applicant and his aunt  that  he
    left his aunt's home because it was extremely unsuitable and he was not
    receiving his NASS payments regularly so  was  struggling  financially.
    His aunt and uncle lived in the flat with their two small children. The
    only spare room was unfit for habitation, being damp and  mouldy.   The
    photographs provided showed clearly that this  was  so.  The  applicant
    therefore had to sleep on the sofa in the living  area.  This  was  far
    from ideal as it was a small flat so, for example, the children had  to
    get dressed for school in the room in which the applicant was sleeping.



11. The Local Authority maintained that the aunt had said in  her  evidence
    that the applicant had made his own  decision  to  leave  and  that  he
    wanted "more independence".  I  was  referred  to  a  transcript  of  a
    telephone conversation with the aunt  at  D1/42  of  the  bundle.  This
    records that the aunt  stated  to  Mr  Dean,  the  lead  Social  Worker
    conducting the age assessment that "we had no problem  but  it  was  he
    decided to be on his own".  There was no reference there  or  elsewhere
    in records of conversations with the aunt or her witness statements  to
    the applicant wanting  "more  independence".  In  the  context  of  the
    clearly inadequate circumstances in which the applicant had to live  at
    his aunt's house, it was not my view that this comment was in  any  way
    inconsistent with the applicant leaving because of the  very  difficult
    circumstances in the flat.

12. It was accepted by Mr Dean in his oral evidence  that  the  information
    about the flat being very inadequate was not before the Local Authority
    when the decision on age was made. He accepted that the spare  room  in
    the aunt's flat was clearly unfit for habitation and that the applicant
    left his aunt's home not because of an independent and mature  wish  to
    do  so  but  because  of  the   significant   difficulties   with   the
    accommodation.

    The Second Reason

13. The Local Authority's second reason for finding the applicant to be  18
    or above at the date of the age assessment was that the applicant had a
    "mature manner", referring to him as "self-assured in  his  responses".
    The view of his key worker was cited as one of  the  reasons  for  this
    conclusion.

14. The applicant's response to this part of the decision is  that  he  had
    not seen his key worker very much at that time and that the key  worker
    was not well-disposed towards him. In my judgment, the applicant's view
    is supported by the comment recorded in his initial  health  assessment
    conducted on 4 August 2016 which is at D22 of the bundle  which  states
    that he showed low mood, reported having little contact  with  his  key
    worker and had received no help in learning  how  to  shop  or  prepare
    food.  Mr Dean accepted in his oral evidence that this document had not
    been taken into account when the decision on the age of  the  applicant
    was made.

15. Mr Dean also accepted in his evidence that where the applicant is  from
    a middle-class family and is well-educated this could  be  a  plausible
    explanation for the applicant's ability to  appear  mature,  to  behave
    appropriately such as having a firm handshake and so on.

16. Further, following case law such as  AM  v  Solihull  MBC  [2012]  UKUT
    00118, it has been the settled approach for  some  time  that  evidence
    from those who have longitudinal knowledge of an applicant is likely to
    be more useful in assessing age than those who deal with him mainly  in
    the formal age assessment process and interviews.

17. I therefore found that the  opinion  of  Ms  Tindall,  the  applicant's
    keyworker from October 2016 to March 2017 and Mr  Briggs,  his  teacher
    from  November  2016  to  the  present  was  of  assistance.  This  was
    additionally so where Mr Dean, in his oral evidence, accepted that they
    had spent significantly more time with him than Social Workers for  the
    respondent. Ms Odusanwo, the second social worker involved in  the  age
    assessment, also accepted in her oral evidence that Ms Tindall  and  Mr
    Briggs knew the applicant much better than she  did,  her  interactions
    outside the formal age assessment process  consisting  of  pleasantries
    when she was present when he was collecting his funding.

18. The evidence of Ms Tindall and  Mr  Briggs  was  that  the  applicant's
    presentation indicated that he was likely to be the age he claimed,  if
    not younger, and not an  adult.   Both  gave  oral  evidence  that  was
    entirely consistent with their witness statements.

19. Ms Tindall confirmed that she worked with the applicant  for  at  least
    five hours a week, meeting him in his accommodation and  also  speaking
    to him relatively often on the telephone.  She confirmed that when  she
    first met him his independent living skills were nil and that  she  had
    to support him in learning how to shop, cook, clean  and  so  on.   She
    considered that his level of neediness was notably different from other
    teenagers who would want to be more independent whereas he  looked  for
    support a great deal from her and others.  She also considered that the
    applicant's manner when he presented to others and  the  way  he  dealt
    with other people was not  because  of  maturity  but  because  of  his
    upbringing and the moral standards that he had lived with and which  he
    wanted to live up to  having  been  separated  from  his  family.   Her
    evidence as to the  applicant  presenting  very  differently  to  older
    asylum  seekers  with  whom  she  had  worked  was  equally  clear  and
    objective. Her view of the applicant's  age  was  that  he  seemed,  if
    anything, to be younger than his claimed age.

20. It was suggested for the Local Authority that Ms Tindall was likely  to
    be sympathetic to the applicant's position given her relationship  with
    him. In my view her evidence was very clear and objective,  Ms  Tindall
    appreciating  the  difficulty  in  assessing  someone's  age.   In   my
    judgement, her evidence was not based on an inappropriately sympathetic
    view of the applicant.

21. Mr Briggs' evidence was that the applicant presented in line  with  the
    other 16-18 year olds in his class. Nothing about him  suggested  other
    than that he was the age he claimed. He gave a similar view to that  of
    Ms Tindall as to  the  applicant  being  somewhat  sensitive  and  this
    indicating that he was in the lower age range of the  students  in  his
    class. Given the difficulties in assessing age, he  accepted  that  the
    applicant could be 19 years' old but his view was clearly that  overall
    he considered the applicant to be under 18 years' old.

    The Third Reason

22. The respondent's third reason for finding that the applicant  was  aged
    18 or over was that the Home Office had found him to be over 18.  I did
    not find this part of the respondent's decision to be at all sound.

23. Firstly, it is accepted for the Local Authority that  the  Home  Office
    did not conduct anything akin to a "Merton" compliant assessment.

24. Secondly, the Home Office interview dated 30 September 2015 relied upon
    by the respondent is notably flawed and,  in  my  view,  an  unreliable
    source for assessing the applicant's age. The interview  record  is  at
    Tab F2 of the bundle.  It  records  that  the  interview  commenced  at
    16.30pm and ended 24 minutes later at 16.54pm.  It was accepted  by  Mr
    Dean in his evidence that this is not long enough to  assess  someone's
    age.   The  interview  record,  unaccountably,  has   "N/A"   for   the
    applicant's name and date of birth. It records that the applicant  told
    the interviewing officer that he was worried, that he could not  sleep,
    that he was not able to think properly and could not think well at that
    time, the interview being conducted soon after he entered  the  country
    after travelling across Iran, Turkey and Europe in the hands of agents.
    The applicant's fitness for interview  on  arrival  is  not  stated  as
    something taken into account by the Home Office or  by  the  respondent
    when seeking to rely on the Home Office's view of the applicant's  age.



25. Also, following the interview on arrival, the Home Office  completed  a
    Form IS97M dated 30 September 2015. This document is at F11 and F12  of
    the  bundle.  It  states  initially  that  the   applicant's   physical
    appearance and demeanour did not "very strongly suggest  that  you  are
    over 18 years of age" and that he would be treated as a child but  then
    goes on  in  the  third  paragraph  states  that  applicant's  physical
    appearance and demeanour did very strongly suggest that he was over  18
    years' old. It refers to the applicant having claimed his date of birth
    to be both 1 January 1997 and 1 January 1998. In addition,  it  is  now
    well established that relying on appearance and demeanour to assess age
    is unreliable and should not, alone, be the basis of an age assessment;
    see, for example, R (NA) v LB Croydon [2009] 2357  at  [27]  and  AM  v
    Solihull at [19].

26. The Home Office also provided a BP7 report  which  is  at  F39  of  the
    bundle. This has a box ticked to indicate that it was  the  applicant's
    physical appearance and/or demeanour which led to the  assessment  that
    he was over 18; see above for comment on this approach.   The  document
    is not signed or dated. It does not indicate the name  of  the  officer
    although it has a printed space for this information  to  be  included.
    The section for the applicant's response to the decision that  his  age
    was disputed is blank. The section for  the  respondent's  reasons  for
    maintaining the disputed age decision after the applicant's comments is
    also blank. It is difficult to see how such a  partial  document  could
    form the basis of a reliable age assessment decision.

27. Mr Dean accepted in his oral evidence that  these  documents  were  not
    correctly filled out.  He also accepted that the documents did not show
    that the Home Office had followed its own internal policy of not making
    a decision on a disputed age  assessment  without  a  "second  pair  of
    eyes".  Mr Dean also accepted that it is common for the  respondent  in
    situations where the age of an applicant is not  clear  to  choose  the
    date of 1 January as working practice and accepted that  the  applicant
    was unlikely to have done so. Mr Dean accepted  in  his  oral  evidence
    that it would be "highly unlikely" that the applicant had  given  dates
    of birth of either 1 January 1997 or 1 January 1998 to the Home Office.



28. In the light of all of these accepted shortcomings in the  Home  Office
    documents, the respondent's third reason for finding the  applicant  to
    be an adult is not a reliable one.

    The Fourth Reason

29. The Local Authority's fourth reason is that the  applicant  refused  to
    have a medical age assessment, specifically, a dental  age  assessment.
    It was felt that this showed the maturity of someone aged 18  or  over.
    Again, I found that the respondent was not entitled  to  draw  such  an
    inference.

30. Mr Dean maintained in his evidence that in his initial meeting with the
    applicant at the applicant's NASS accommodation that the applicant  had
    agreed to have a medical assessment.  That may or may not be so;  there
    is no record of  that  conversation.  It  remains  the  case  that  the
    applicant's position thereafter is very clear.  He was advised  by  his
    solicitors not to undergo the dental age assessment and refused  to  do
    so, on the basis of that advice.

31. Mr Dean accepted in his oral evidence that it was entirely  proper  for
    someone, whether a minor or not, to follow a solicitor's legal  advice.
    He also accepted also that where the solicitors here had  informed  the
    applicant why  a  dental  age  assessment  was  not  considered  to  be
    reliable, an intelligent, well-educated teenager would be able to  form
    his own independent opinion and decide that he did not want to  undergo
    a dental age  assessment.  That  evidence  appeared  to  me  to  reduce
    significantly the reliability of the  respondent's  fourth  reason  for
    finding the applicant to be an adult.

32. I noted the evidence of Ms Odusanwo that the applicant being clear that
    he did not want to undergo a dental age assessment was not typical of a
    minor who would be  more  likely  to  "bend"  if  the  Local  Authority
    suggested an  age  assessment.  She  considered  that  the  applicant's
    refusal to "bend" in this matter, and others, suggested to her that  he
    was an older person.  I was a little troubled by the  proposition  that
    Local Authority Social Workers would still expect a  potentially  minor
    applicant to "bend" as regards a dental age assessment after  receiving
    legal advice specifically to the contrary. I preferred the evidence  of
    Mr Dean on this point and, in my view, the respondent was not  entitled
    to take the applicant refusing to undergo a dental  age  assessment  as
    something showing him to be an adult or older than he claimed.

    The Fifth Reason

33. The Local Authority's fifth reason for finding the applicant to be aged
    18 or over is that the information from the Tavistock  Centre  and  the
    applicant's first key worker suggested that to be so. That reasoning is
    undermined because it misstates the evidence from the Tavistock Centre.
    That evidence is at D33 of the bundle. It states on the first page that
    "it is difficult to judge  FA's  age  due  to  the  complexity  of  his
    situation". It stated that the applicant "presented as mature  in  some
    ways and less developed and vulnerable in others", mentions twice  that
    it was "plausible  that  he  is  still  a  child"  and  refers  to  his
    presentation being "appropriate in light of his status as a refugee and
    other unaccompanied minors we have met in this service".   At  D34  the
    report states that "it may be important to consider FA's  vulnerability
    as an unaccompanied minor", suggesting that it was  the  psychologist's
    view that the applicant was under 18.

34. The view of the Tavistock Centre, overall, in my  view,  was  that  the
    applicant was likely a minor, not that he was an adult.

35. Further, as in the discussion above of the respondent's second  reason,
    the reliance on the view of the applicant's first  key  worker  omitted
    consideration of the potentially material evidence from the  applicant,
    supported by comments he made in his initial  health  assessment,  that
    they did not see each other very much  and  that  the  key  worker  was
    hostile towards him.

    The Sixth Reason

36. The respondent's final reason for finding the applicant  to  be  18  or
    over is that it was concluded that little weight could be placed on his
    taskera or identity document.

37. The Local Authority's position on the taskera  in  the  age  assessment
    decision has to be undermined by the fact that, unfortunately,  it  was
    based on a materially inaccurate translation.  It is common ground  now
    that the taskera states not that the applicant's age had been  assessed
    "based on his physical appearance" but that it was found to be his  age
    "according to the  registration  records".   It  is  of  note  that  an
    interpreter and the applicant did point out this mistake to  the  Local
    Authority prior to the decision being made but their concerns were  not
    taken any further.

38. Mr Dean accepted in his oral evidence that the correct translation  put
    a different light on the taskera and that if  the  correct  translation
    had been available it  could  have  made  a  difference  to  the  Local
    Authority's assessment of the applicant's age.

39. I was also provided with written and oral evidence on  the  applicant's
    taskera from Mr Jawad Zadeh. Mr Zadeh is  originally  from  Afghanistan
    and, after coming to the UK, returned to spend extended periods of time
    there working for international humanitarian agencies. He  has  carried
    out a number  of  assessments  of  taskera  documents.  His  experience
    indicated to me that he had the expertise to provide an opinion on  the
    applicant's taskera.

40. Mr Zadeh's opinion, after studying the physical aspects of the  taskera
    as well as what was written on it, was that it was a  genuine  document
    on which weight could be placed. He confirmed that the  form  used  was
    the correct form, that the format and stamps endorsed on  the  document
    were in the correct format and that nothing  about  the  appearance  or
    contents of the document suggested that it was not genuine.

41. Mr Zadeh also confirmed that the applicant's evidence as  to  when  and
    how the document was obtained for him by his father was consistent with
    general practice in Afghanistan.

42. A significant dispute arose during cross-examination, however. Mr Zadeh
    was asked about the line of the taskera which stated:

         "Volume No.: 2nd Q 1392              Page No.: 133       Entry  No.
         683"

43. In submissions, the  respondent  maintained  that  Mr  Zadeh's  initial
    comments on the number "1392" in this line was that this was  the  year
    of the registry book in which the taskera was  recorded.  This  was  of
    significance because the taskera elsewhere indicated that it was issued
    and entered in the registry book in 1391.

44. It was submitted for the respondent that when asked to clarify this, Mr
    Zadeh used a "diversionary tactic", querying  the  calligraphy  of  the
    entry and whether it was 1392 or 1391. It was maintained that  he  then
    changed his earlier evidence, stating that the use of 1392 in this line
    did not represent a year. It was a number in a  sequence  allocated  to
    the registry book for 1391  and  not  generated  with  reference  to  a
    particular year.

45. As this was clearly a matter of some concern to the respondent  at  the
    close of the hearing it was agreed that my record  of  proceedings  and
    those  of  two  lawyers  from  the  applicant's  legal  representatives
    containing this part of Mr Zadeh's  evidence  would  be  circulated  in
    order to establish exactly what was said,  the  respondent  not  having
    made a note. Also, as requested by the respondent, I listened again  to
    the recording of the hearing at this point of Mr Zadeh's evidence.

46. Having taken those actions, my conclusion on  Mr  Zadeh's  evidence  is
    that there was no inconsistency or "diversionary  tactic"  that  should
    lead to his evidence being found unreliable or  to  the  taskera  being
    found to be a forgery.

47. Mr Zadeh's evidence confirmed that the taskera was  issued  on  26  May
    2012. It stated that the applicant's date of birth was 24 June 1999. It
    also stated that as of the year of issue  of  the  taskera,  2012,  the
    applicant was 13 years' old.

48. Mr Zadeh went on to state that the applicant's taskera  was  logged  in
    the registry book which was being used that year, in the second volume.
     The number of the registry book being used in that year was  1392.  At
    no point in his evidence, however, did he state that the number of  the
    registry book was or should be the year in which it was being used. The
    confusion appeared to me to arise, in part, from the complicated system
    used for issuing a taskera and registering that document. It also arose
    from the use of the term "yearbook". This term was initially used by Mr
    Harrop-Griffiths in his questions to Mr Zadeh but without it ever being
    clarified that this term meant that the registry book number  was  that
    of the year in which it was being used. Mr Zadeh responded by using the
    term  to  refer  to  the  registry  book  but  without  ever  expressly
    indicating that he meant that "1392" in the line set out  above  was  a
    reference to a year at all.  He was very certain when the point was put
    to him that he had not done so and that the use of "1392" in this  part
    of the taskera was not a reference to a year.

49. Having read, listened to and thought about the evidence on  this  point
    very carefully I do not accept that Mr Zadeh ever  indicated  that  the
    registry book in  which  this  taskera  is  stated  to  be  issued  was
    allocated the year 1392 by way of an identifier rather  than  just  the
    number 1392. His concerns about the calligraphy  of  this  number  (and
    others) on the document appeared to me to be an indication of his  very
    detailed approach to his assessment of the document and not an  attempt
    to divert attention away from an inconsistent entry.

50. I noted that this conclusion leaves a somewhat striking coincidence  as
    to the registry book allocated the number 1392 being used in  the  year
    1391. I thought about that coincidence carefully when  considering  the
    reliability of the evidence of Mr Zadeh  and  the  reliability  of  the
    taskera. When considered against all of the materials before me, it was
    not my view that  this  coincidence  was  capable  of  undermining  the
    evidence of the applicant, his aunt, Mr Zadeh, Ms Tindall and Mr Briggs
    as to the applicant's age and or the reliability of the taskera.

51. It was also argued in submissions that the entry on the  front  of  the
    taskera as to the applicant being 13 when it was issued in 1391 and  to
    the applicant also being 13 at the date of the attestation in  1392  on
    the reverse of the document were not consistent. Mr Zadeh's evidence on
    this is at [31] of his witness statement. He states:

         "The attestation: Taskira documents issued in  Afghanistan  may  be
         accompanied by an attestation on the reverse  of  the  Taskira.  An
         attestation is an extra layer of security whereby the organisations
         which use a Taskira document are assured that a Taskira is genuine.
         The attestation  is  not  recorded  automatically.  It  has  to  be
         requested by  the  Taskira  owner  or  by  his  guardian  or  legal
         representative. If the date of issue of the attestation  post-dates
         the date of issue of the Taskira then the attestation  is  correct.
         If it is the reverse, this is suggestive of forgery. In  this  case
         the date of issue is 06.3.1391  =  [26.05.2012]  and  the  date  of
         attestation is 19.01.1392 = [08.04.2013]. The  date  order  of  the
         Taskira and its attestation is  in  conformity  with  Afghanistan's
         administrative standards. The attestation  is  for  confirming  the
         "assessed age" which appears in the front section of  the  Taskira.
         For instance, if the Taskira is endorsed 5 years after the date  of
         issue, the  newly  recorded  attestation  still  will  confirm  the
         information in the front section and it will not calculate the  age
         at the time of attestation. The contents of the attestation in this
         Taskera confirm and are consistent with the information recorded in
         the front  section,  and  the  attestation  appears  genuine.  This
         Taskira was issued on 26.05.2012 and the  date  of  attestation  is
         08.04.2013. This date is after the issue date which  is  consistent
         with the practice of Taskera attestation.

52.  Mr  Zadeh's  explanation  is  clear.  The  applicant's  age  was   not
    recalculated as of 8 April 2013 when the attestation  was  endorsed  on
    the reverse of the taskera. The attestation confirms that in  the  year
    that the taskera was issued the applicant was 13 years' old.  There  is
    no inconsistency, therefore. At the hearing he also clarified that  the
    less stringent approach to age in Afghanistan meant that it  would  not
    be unusual for a taskera issued on 26 May  2012,  a  month  before  the
    applicant's actual birthday, to state that he was 13 years'  old  where
    he would be so in the year of issue and within a few weeks of issue.  I
    saw no reason to doubt that comment in light of Mr Zadeh's overall very
    detailed and consistent evidence.

53. These being the only serious challenges to Mr Zadeh's evidence, I found
    that I could place weight on his opinion that the taskera was  genuine.
    I found that Mr Zadeh's evidence undermined the reasons  given  in  the
    age assessment for not placing weight on the taskera and supported  the
    applicant's case, corroborating his evidence and that of his aunt as to
    his age and on the taskera.

54. Certainly, in isolation, there  may  be  concerns  about  any  document
    emanating from Afghanistan given the level of technology and disruption
    of civil administration the country has suffered for many years but the
    evidence of Mr Zadeh, the applicant and his aunt on  this  document  is
    consistent and consistent with the other evidence of the applicant  and
    his aunt as to why they maintained that he was born on 24 June 1999.

55. I should indicate before moving on from consideration of  the  taskera,
    that after the  hearing  had  ended  and  the  decision  reserved,  the
    respondent made an application on 28 April 2017 to be afforded time  to
    find an expert to address the disputes  considered  above.   I  refused
    that application in a decision  issued  on  23  May  2017.  A  copy  is
    appended to this decision.

    Other Evidence

56. Set against what appeared to me to be significant shortcomings  in  the
    reasoning in the respondent's age assessment decision, the evidence  of
    the applicant and his aunt was generally consistent and credible and to
    be preferred.

57. The applicant has stated in all of his various accounts either that  he
    was 16 on arrival or that his date of birth is 24 June 1999. He gave  a
    credible explanation of how he knows this, being able  to  link  it  to
    stages of his education. His evidence as to the stages of his education
    and age at those times is consistent with country evidence.

58. The applicant's oral evidence  was  consistent,  even  after  extensive
    cross-examination. He confirmed that he started school between the  age
    of 6 and 7.  He confirmed that he remembered his grandmother  arranging
    a birthday party for him when he was 8 or 9 years  old  but  could  not
    remember any others for him and only one other for his younger  brother
    when that brother was much younger.  He indicated that  he  only  found
    out his own age when he needed a taskera in order to sit some exams  to
    obtain free private tuition.  He was in year 8 or 9 at school and  went
    home and asked his father for his taskera which  his  father  provided.
    He confirmed that at this time he was not living in the family compound
    but was in Char-e-Barakat.  His aunt had obtained the taskera  for  him
    after he had come to the UK.

59. I did not find that much could hang  from  the  applicant  having  been
    recorded as an adult in Hungary given that it is not disputed  that  he
    was travelling with an agent who was being paid to get him  to  the  UK
    rather than being taken into  the  system  for  minors  in  an  interim
    country.

60. The  applicant's  aunt  was  consistent  as  to  remembering  when  the
    applicant was born as it was during a period when  she  was  unable  to
    attend school because the Taliban had taken over their home area.  This
    was consistent with  the  country  evidence  albeit  the  Taliban  were
    dominant in Mazar-e-Sharif for a number of years and not just in  1999.
     Her account was consistent with her being 12 or 13  years  of  age  at
    that time and living in the same family compound with his  family.  She
    and the applicant were consistent as to his family moving  out  of  the
    compound during his childhood. I did not find that anything could  turn
    on the aunt not referring in her initial statement, taken by  telephone
    in support of an interim injunction, to the  applicant  living  in  the
    same compound. Both the aunt and her husband were consistent as to  the
    applicant attending their wedding when  he  was  aged  approximately  9
    years old.

61. The applicant's aunt  was  also  able  to  give  further  corroborative
    evidence as to the relatively high status of the  family  and  how  the
    applicant would have been brought up to present himself  very  properly
    to adults and would have been well-educated in Afghan  terms.  As  with
    the applicant, the evidence of the aunt also remained consistent  after
    extensive cross-examination.

62. The aunt was also an important witness because it was she who  obtained
    the applicant's taskera. Her oral evidence on this issue  was  entirely
    consistent with that she provided in  her  witness  statements  to  the
    applicant's solicitors.  When she realised that  the  applicant  needed
    his taskera to prove his age, she contacted his mother's sister because
    she knew that she was close to the applicant's  mother.  This  maternal
    aunt sent the taskera.  The taskera was sent to the work address of her
    husband. He opened the package containing  the  taskera.  AA's  husband
    gave consistent evidence on the latter part of this account,  including
    the fact that he had not thought to keep the envelope in which  it  was
    sent.

63. The respondent identified a number of concerns about  the  evidence  of
    the applicant and his aunt, such as the plausibility  of  the  maternal
    aunt being able to locate the  taskera.  Where  the  reasoning  in  the
    respondent's age assessment was relatively weak,  however,  it  was  my
    view that the evidence of the applicant and his aunt over a  number  of
    statements and after being  cross-examined  was,  by  comparison,  more
    reliable.

64. I did not find that the evidence of Mr Francisco Jeff could assist  the
    applicant a great deal, notwithstanding Mr Jeff's extensive  experience
    working with unaccompanied minors. He had limited direct  knowledge  of
    the applicant, and his opinion could not take matters further than  the
    evidence of Ms Tindall and Mr Briggs.

65.  I also did not find that anything of much import could arise from  the
    photographs relied upon by the applicant, obtained by his aunt from her
    sister and said to have been taken whilst he  was  in  Afghanistan.  As
    above, it is not appropriate to draw  inferences  from  appearance  and
    although the dates that the photos were uploaded to  the  internet  was
    given, the dates that they were taken was not documented.

Conclusion

66. For these reasons, I found that the evidence before me  indicated  that
    the applicant was born on 24 June 1999.

Costs

67. The applicant has been found to  be  the  age  he  claims  and  he  has
    therefore been entirely successful in this judicial review.

68. The respondent is to  pay  the  applicant's  reasonable  costs,  to  be
    assessed if not agreed.



Appeal to Court of Appeal

69. There was no application for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal  from  the  respondent.  I  am  required  to  consider  such  an
    application following Rule 44(4B)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008. I refuse permission to appeal  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal where the reasoning set out above is not show to  contain  legal
    error.

Signed: [pic]                                Dated:  28 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).







    Appendix - Decision dated 25 May 2017 refusing extension of time for
                     respondent to obtain expert report






                                                               JR/12123/2016

                               Upper Tribunal
                           Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                               Judicial Review



                     The Queen on the application of FA

                                  Applicant
                                      v

                          London Borough of Ealing
                                                                  Respondent



                              Interim Decision




Decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt: the Respondent's application for an
extension of time to locate an expert to prepare a taskera report is
refused



  1) The Respondent applies for an extension of time of 14 days to identify
     an expert to provide a report on the Applicant's taskera document. The
     application is made in the context of the case having been heard on 10-
     12 April 2017 and the decision reserved at the end of the hearing.


  2) In these proceedings the Applicant relied on written and oral evidence
     on his taskera document from Mr Zadeh. Mr Zadeh's main report was
     served on 31 January 2017. His addendum report was served on 29 March
     2017.


  3) The Tribunal has a copy of email correspondence dated 25 January 2017
     between the parties showing agreement to the Respondent having an
     extension of time of 21 days from 30 January 2017 until 20 February
     2017 to serve any expert report in response to that of Mr Zadeh. The
     Respondent did not provide such a report.


  4) The current request appears to arise from oral evidence given by Mr
     Zadeh. It was open to the Respondent to apply for the hearing to be
     adjourned to obtain a taskera report if concerns arose during oral
     evidence. The Respondent did not do so.

  5) The application for an extension of time to find an expert to provide
     a report confirms that as of 28 April 2017, over two weeks after the
     hearing, no expert witness had indicated to the Respondent that a
     report could be provided.


  6) The Tribunal must consider the request for time to be extended in the
     context of the overriding objective in Rule 2 of the Tribunal
     Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the need for cases to be
     dealt with justly and fairly. The history set out above indicates that
     the Respondent had sufficient time prior to the hearing to provide a
     report on the taskera but did not do so. It is additionally unarguable
     that the Respondent had a fair opportunity to provide evidence on the
     taskera prior to the hearing where it was an issue addressed
     specifically in correspondence and the Applicant agreed time to assist
     the Respondent for this express purpose. It was also open to the
     Respondent to make an application to adjourn the hearing to obtain a
     report prior to the close of proceedings on 12 April 2017 but no
     application was made.


  7) Further, the application is stated to be only for time to find an
     expert. If granted and an expert located, there would inevitably be a
     further application for time for a report to be prepared and for the
     Applicant to comment on any report. The application is therefore, in
     reality, one for an unspecific and potentially extensive period of
     time for evidence which the Respondent has already had the opportunity
     to provide or apply to provide.


  8) In all the circumstances, the Tribunal does not find, where the
     Respondent had a fair opportunity to obtain a report prior to the
     hearing and to apply to find an expert to provide one prior to the
     decision being reserved, that it is appropriate or in the interests of
     justice to extend time for that purpose now. The case can be dealt
     with fairly and justly without granting the application.


  9) The application for an extension of time to locate an expert to
     provide a report on the Applicant's taskera is refused.


Signed: [pic]                   Signed on: 3 May 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


Dated:




Sent  to  the  Applicant,  Respondent  and  any  interested  party   /   the
Applicant's, Respondent's and any interested party's solicitors on (date):
Home Office Ref:
