
                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                                               JR/13672/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                                 30 May 2018


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                YOKE MUN KUM
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr D Bazini, instructed by David Tang & Co Solicitors appeared on behalf  of
the Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department  appeared  on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    JUDGE allen: In this case the  applicant  challenges  the  respondent's
    decision of 19 October 2016 refusing to grant her indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom.


1.   The brief immigration history of the applicant is as follows.  She  was
    granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a student on 12 June  2007
    until 31 December 2008.  She was granted further leave to remain  as  a
    student on 17 March 2009 until 31  August  2009.   Thereafter  she  was
    granted further leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant
    on 12 September 2009 until 12 September 2011, and subsequently she  was
    granted further leave to remain as a Tier 2  (General)  Migrant  on  10
    November 2010 until 1 October 2013.  She was granted further  leave  to
    remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant on  12  September  2012  until  14
    August 2015.  She was granted further leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant on 14 September 2015 until 14 November 2016.

2.   The applicant applied for indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  2
    (General) Migrant on 23 December 2015.  The application was accompanied
    by a certificate of sponsorship issued by the  sponsor,  Andystar  Ltd.
    Andystar's sponsorship licence was suspended by the Secretary of  State
    on 9 February 2016 and revoked on 25 June 2016.  The date  of  refusal,
    as noted above, is 19 October 2016 and was made on the basis  that  the
    mandatory requirements of paragraph 245HF of the Immigration Rules were
    not met.  An application for  administrative  review  was  made  on  31
    October 2016 and refused on 28 November 2016.

3.   The  claim  for  judicial  review  was  issued  on  21  December  2016.
    Permission was refused on the papers by Judge  Kopieczek  on  28  March
    2017, but, following oral renewal of the application, Martin Spencer  J
    granted permission to apply for judicial review on 7 February 2018.

4.   Paragraph 245HF of HC 395 provides so far as relevant as follows:

         "To qualify for indefinite leave to remain as a  Tier  2  (General)
         Migrant or Tier 2 (Sportsperson) Migrant, an  applicant  must  meet
         the  requirements  listed  below.  If  the  applicant  meets  these
         requirements, indefinite leave to remain will be  granted.  If  the
         applicant does not meet these requirements, the application will be
         refused.

         Requirements:

         ...

         (b)  The applicant must have spent a continuous period of  5  years
             lawfully in the UK, of which the most recent period must  have
             been spent with leave as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant ...

         (c)  The Sponsor that issued the Certificate  of  Sponsorship  that
             led to the applicant's last grant of leave must:

             (i)  still hold a Tier  2  Sponsor  licence  in  the  relevant
                    category, or have an application for a renewal of such a
                    licence  currently  under  consideration  by  the   Home
                    Office; and

             (ii) certify in writing:

                    (1)    that he still  requires  the  applicant  for  the
                        employment in question for the foreseeable future,

                    (2)    the gross annual salary paid by the Sponsor,  and
                        that this salary will be paid for  the  foreseeable
                        future,

                    (3)    if  the  applicant  is  currently  on  maternity,
                        paternity, shared parental or adoption  leave,  the
                        date that leave started, confirmation of  what  the
                        applicant's  salary  was  immediately  before   the
                        leave, and what  it  will  be  on  the  applicant's
                        return, and

                    (4)    if the applicant is paid hourly,  the  number  of
                        hours per week the salary in (2) or  (3)  is  based
                        on."

5.   The first ground of challenge, set out by Mr  Bazini  in  his  skeleton
    argument and  developed  by  him  in  oral  submissions,  is  that  the
    Secretary  of  State  acted  unfairly  in  refusing   the   applicant's
    application without giving her an opportunity, namely 60 days, to  find
    another sponsor.

6.   With regard to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Islam  and  Pathan
    [2017] UKUT 369 (IAC) it was argued that this  could  be  distinguished
    from the facts of the instant case as it concerned an  application  for
    further leave  rather  than  indefinite  leave  and  as  a  consequence
    different policy objectives applied.  It was also the case that at  the
    time of revocation in Islam and Pathan neither applicant had any leave,
    in contrast to the applicant in the immediate case.  It therefore could
    not have fallen within the 60 days policy.  But even in a case such  as
    that, if the  policy  was  not  applied  there  was  a  denial  of  the
    opportunity to find another sponsor  and  vary  leave,  obtain  another
    sponsor, get further leave and subsequently apply for indefinite  leave
    to remain.

7.   In Islam and Pathan a material distinction was  drawn  between  Tier  2
    and Tier 4 cases.  It was argued that the  purposes  in  an  indefinite
    leave to remain case were very different.  The point was the  Secretary
    of State had recognised  via  the  Rules  that  an  applicant  who  had
    satisfied the Tier 2 requirements would get indefinite leave to  remain
    after five years and this was a recognition of the  significance  of  a
    person with a Tier 2 visa to the economy and to UK society.   This  was
    to be contrasted with the position of a Tier 4 student who had obtained
    none of those benefits.  There was no  route  to  indefinite  leave  to
    remain for a student.  The Rule  therefore  recognised  the  value  and
    purpose behind indefinite leave to remain for a Tier  2  Migrant.   For
    others the route was via a ten year long residence period.

8.   It was right to say, as had been pointed out in Islam and Pathan,  that
    fairness was context specific.  That assumed that the information given
    to the Upper Tribunal in Islam and  Pathan  was  correct,  but  it  was
    argued that that was not the case.  Reference was made to paragraph  22
    of that decision and the evidence of Mr Jackson  whose  background  was
    set out at paragraph 14.  Among other things he had said  that  seeking
    another Tier 2 sponsor was not the specific reason for the existence of
    the 60 day provision.  This was important as it fed into the Tribunal's
    conclusions at paragraph 26, which were largely based on the premise of
    difficulties in finding another worker within 60 days.

9.   In fact the information provided was incorrect.  It  perhaps  reflected
    the post Islam and Pathan policy guidance.  The  applications  in  that
    case had been made on 1 February and 2 September 2016 respectively.  Mr
    Bazini referred to the relevant guidance that had been  put  in  today.
    This made it clear that the 60 days was  provided  to  give  a  Tier  2
    Migrant a chance to find a new sponsor.  That wording  was  not  to  be
    found in the more recent version of the policy and it  contrasted  with
    what the Upper Tribunal had been told in Islam and  Pathan.   It  meant
    that all the other evidence about  the  purpose  of  the  policies  was
    unsustainable.  The policy recognised that  people  would  have  decent
    prospects of getting another job and it  would  not  be  too  difficult
    administratively for the system to deal with it.  There was no evidence
    from the Secretary of State to apologise  or  explain  this  change  of
    policy and also it was to be questioned whether the points in Islam and
    Pathan, now the guidance had changed, held good for the  new  guidance.
    It was argued that they did not, as the Secretary of State had not been
    transparent with the court and had not explained that there had been  a
    change of policy and the reasons for it.

10.  The impression given by the witness statements in Islam and Pathan  was
    as if there was a grand plan and purpose behind the distinction between
    Tier 2 and Tier 4, but that was  plainly  not  right.   There  were  no
    policy documents explaining this in Islam and Pathan and in  any  case,
    there had to be serious reservations about what was said and why in the
    statements.

11.  It was argued that the reason for the distinction was in  fact  because
    of the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Patel [2011] UKUT 21 where  it
    was held that where a sponsor licence had been revoked by the Secretary
    of State during an application for variation of leave and the applicant
    was both unaware of the revocation and not party to any reason why  the
    licence had been revoked, he was required  to  afford  an  applicant  a
    reasonable opportunity to vary the application  by  identifying  a  new
    sponsor before the application was determined, and to  fail  to  do  so
    would be unfair.  The policy considered by the Upper Tribunal in  Patel
    was very similar to the policy as it now is.  It was  argued  that  the
    initial policy had been extended because of the  fairness  requirement.
    The Upper Tribunal in Patel had made it clear  that  a  60  day  period
    should be allowed, and  the  Tribunal  was  not  persuaded  as  to  the
    potential costs of not imposing a duty compared to the simple matter of
    sending out a letter.  There had been a delay in making a  decision  in
    this case and that had led to the lack of the benefit of the  grant  of
    indefinite leave to remain to the applicant.

12.  Mr Bazini referred to paragraph 6 of the  summary  grounds  of  defence
    which set out an extract from the Tier 2 policy guidance applicable  on
    23 December  2015  which  was  the  date  of  the  applicant's  Tier  2
    indefinite leave to  remain  application.   That  said  as  follows  at
    paragraph 261:-

         "261.    Any Tier 2  applications  submitted  while  the  sponsor's
                licence is suspended will not be considered.  We  will  hold
                the application until the suspension ends and  then  make  a
                decision."

13.  Mr Bazini disagreed with what was said at paragraph 9  in  the  summary
    grounds, in that there was no policy at the time,  but  there  was  one
    now.  He argued that the respondent had not done what was  set  out  at
    paragraph 9.  Nor did he agree that the delay could  only  be  arguably
    construed as referring to the period  from  the  date  of  the  licence
    revocation to the date of the refusal of the ILR application, as argued
    at paragraph 10 of the summary grounds.  It  could  not  reasonably  be
    said to be reasonable or lawful to have delayed for the period of  four
    months that had occurred.  As had been pointed out in Patel,  a  simple
    letter would suffice.  No explanation  had  been  given  for  the  four
    months delay.  Under the policy the applicant should have been given 60
    days as the guidance anticipated she would.  As a consequence  she  had
    lost the opportunity.  A 60 day letter meant that  a  person  knew  the
    time limits and could approach employers.

14.  In his reasons for granting permission,  Martin  Spencer  J  considered
    there was support for the interpretation that the relevant date was the
    date when the application was submitted from paragraph 261 of the  Tier
    2 policy guidance which said as follows:-

     "Any Tier 2 applications submitted  (emphasised)  while  the  sponsor's
         licence is suspended will not be  considered.   We  will  hold  the
         application until the suspension ends and then make a decision".

15.  The application was made at a time when the licence was suspended.   In
    the administrative review decision the reasons for the delay were given
    and it was admitted there that the case had been put on hold since  the
    sponsor's licence had been suspended, as  no  decision  could  be  made
    until the outcome of the suspension was known.  It could be  seen  from
    paragraph 20.26 of the relevant policy for Tier 2 and 5 of  the  Points
    Based System Guidance for Sponsors put in today, that while the licence
    was suspended, if a migrant made an application supported  by  a  valid
    COS assigned by the  sponsor  before  the  licence  was  suspended,  an
    application would not be decided until the reason  for  suspension  had
    been resolved.  It did not say that the application  would  be  put  on
    hold if they were suspended after the application was made.   This  was
    the point made by Martin Spencer J.

16.  As the policy was in its current form  paragraph  19.14  entailed  that
    the applicant would fall foul of that, but that policy did not apply at
    the relevant time.

17.  Mr Bazini also  referred  to  the  processing  times  set  out  in  the
    guidance at tab C of the policies bundle.  It was said  that  customers
    applying in the UK for  indefinite  leave  to  remain  could  expect  a
    processing time of six months, and it was said  that  if  there  was  a
    problem with the application or if it was complex, then the  respondent
    would write to explain why it would not be decided  within  the  normal
    standard and  would  write  within  twelve  weeks  for  the  six  month
    standard.  That letter would explain what happened next.   Again  there
    had been a complete failure by the respondent to inform  the  applicant
    about this, and also a failure to say that the employer's  licence  had
    been revoked.  These were clearly common law fairness points.   It  was
    argued that it was unlawful not to deal  with  the  matter  within  six
    months and unlawful that  although  they  knew  when  the  licence  was
    suspended the application would be put on hold they had  not  told  the
    applicant.  The implication of the guidance at paragraph 19.9 was  that
    the provisions of paragraph 19.9(b)  would  be  put  in  effect  fairly
    speedily and not in such a way as to deprive the applicant  of  the  60
    days period.  This was a very strong point of fairness.

18.  As regards the PBS case law, a point on which Mr Malik  relied  in  his
    skeleton, it was argued that this  did  not  apply  as  it  was  not  a
    question of near misses or a document nearly  being  correct  or  being
    missing: none of those matters applied to the issues in this case.

19.  In his submissions Mr Malik also relied on points made in his  skeleton
    argument, and he addressed the grounds specifically as follows.

20.   With  regard  to  ground  1  the  point  was  made  that  Mr  Bazini's
    submissions ignored the opening words of paragraph 245HF(c) in that  it
    was a mandatory requirement for indefinite leave to remain as a Tier  2
    (General) Migrant that  the  original  sponsor,  whose  certificate  of
    sponsorship had led to the last grant of leave must hold a licence  and
    also  confirm  certain  matters  in  writing.   Therefore,  giving   an
    opportunity to the applicant to find an alternative sponsor would  have
    been meaningless, and even if she had been able to find one and provide
    another certificate of sponsorship she would  not  have  satisfied  the
    requirements of paragraph 245HF(c).  He  relied,  inter  alia,  on  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Parayatta (JR/9934/2016).  The  point
    was made there among others that it would be pointless  for  a  Tier  2
    applicant for indefinite leave to remain to be offered a 60 day  letter
    to explore an alternative sponsor, even if she could  find  one  within
    the 60 day period, bearing in mind there  is  a  28  day  advertisement
    notice requirement, because she is required to have  the  sponsor  that
    issued the certificate of sponsorship that led to  her  last  grant  of
    leave, and that sponsor was required still to hold a Tier 2 licence  in
    a relevant category.  Thus, even if she had a 60  day  letter  enabling
    her to look for alternative employment she could not  comply  with  the
    requirements in the Immigration Rules.

21.  Mr Malik also argued that there was no reason to depart from Islam  and
    Pathan.  This was not an appeal from that decision, but  in  any  event
    the point was irrelevant in light of the  earlier  point  that  he  had
    made.

22.  Even if one took the contrary view of Islam and  Pathan,  the  guidance
    in Patel would not assist, bearing  in  mind  that  the  applicant  was
    required to be both unaware of the revocation  and  not  party  to  any
    reason why the licence had been revoked.  Here there was no  suggestion
    or evidence that the applicant was not even aware of the revocation  of
    the sponsor's licence.  If a person decided to do  nothing  they  could
    not point to the Secretary of State to give them the opportunity to get
    a sponsor.  Mr Malik accepted there was no question  of  complicity  in
    this case, but there was no evidence before the Secretary of  State  as
    to the lack of knowledge point.

23.  In addition Mr Malik argued that the points  made  on  the  applicant's
    behalf undermined the points-based system scheme read as a  whole.   He
    referred to quotations from a number of authorities where it was  said,
    among other things, for  example,  in  Alam  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  960  at
    paragraph 35 that:

         "The price of securing consistency and predictability is a lack  of
         flexibility that may well result in 'hard' decisions in  individual
         cases".

    Fairness was context specific, and the PBS was the  context  and  these
    authorities were relevant.  The applicant's  argument  would  risk  the
    benefits of the scheme.

24.  With regard to the policy, the Tribunal was referred  to  paragraph  22
    in Islam and Pathan.  The  evidence  was  not  misleading.   The  final
    sentence of what had been said by Mr Jackson had to be seen in context.
     Paragraphs 21  and  23  were  also  relevant  in  this  regard,  where
    reference was made to the purpose of enabling the migrant to  sort  out
    his affairs, make arrangements to leave the United Kingdom or submit an
    application for leave to remain, either in Tier 2 with another  sponsor
    or in another immigration category.   There  were  obvious  differences
    between Tier 2 and Tier 4.  If a student was in the middle of a  course
    of study and the sponsoring college lost its licence you  would  expect
    them to complete their course elsewhere, but  it  was  different  under
    Tier 2 where a person had to work for a particular employer and if  the
    employer no longer had a licence there was no basis of stay.

25.  Mr Malik made the point that the policy relied on by Mr Bazini was  not
    directed to indefinite leave to remain  applicants  but  to  applicants
    with existing leave to remain in the United Kingdom and  although  they
    had leave for more than 60 days it would be curtailed  to  60  days  to
    give them a chance to get a new sponsor and this was  not  inconsistent
    with paragraph 22 of Islam and Pathan.  It did not say the  reason  for
    the provision was needing another Tier 2 sponsor,  but  had  just  said
    they would get a chance to get a new sponsor by reducing the period  of
    leave to 60 days and the chance to sort  out  their  affairs  and  make
    arrangements to leave the United Kingdom.  The policy  did  not  apply.
    He agreed the policy was somewhat opaque with regard to  the  reference
    not reducing a period of less than 60 days further, but queried whether
    it assisted the applicant.  There was a logistical difficulty with  the
    applicant's argument.  She still had six months' leave and if the leave
    was reduced to 60 days they would complain.  It would  not  assist  the
    applicant.  It could not be said that where  there  was  an  indefinite
    leave to remain application pending and the licence  was  revoked  they
    would have  the  opportunity  to  find  an  alternative  sponsor.   The
    applicant in any event had still had leave  to  remain  for  more  than
    three weeks at the date of the refusal.  There was no duty to give  her
    an opportunity  to  find  an  alternative  sponsor  and  make  a  fresh
    application.  Ground 1 as a consequence must fail.

26.  With regard to grounds 2 and 4, Mr Malik referred to  the  decision  of
    the Supreme Court in Mahad [2009] UKSC 16, itself referring to what had
    been said in Odelola [2009] UKHL 25, and in particular paragraphs 24 to
    26 in Odelola as to the approach to be adopted in such a  case.   Those
    matters were also addressed in Mr Malik's skeleton.  In sum  the  point
    was that there needed to  be  a  specific  reference  to  the  date  of
    application for that to be the relevant date, in that the  Rules  would
    say so if that was so, otherwise it was the date of decision.  Mr Malik
    argued that it would also be administratively unworkable, in  terms  of
    the further requirements of paragraph 245HF, for the Secretary of State
    to grant an applicant indefinite leave to  remain  notwithstanding  her
    own knowledge that the sponsorship licence in question had in fact been
    revoked.  He argued that  this  was  also  reflected  in  the  relevant
    guidance.  There was no basis to depart from the natural  and  ordinary
    meaning of the language  of  paragraph  245HF(c).   This  approach  was
    endorsed by the Upper Tribunal in Parayatta.

27.  With regard to the argument of unreasonable delay, again reference  was
    made to Parayatta, at paragraph 58 in particular.  There was no  policy
    that the Secretary of State would make a decision within twelve  weeks.
    There was no public law error if that target were not met.   There  was
    no guarantee of a decision within a particular timeframe.  The  licence
    had been suspended within weeks of the application being  made  and  it
    was perfectly legitimate to wait and see the outcome  before  making  a
    final decision.  The licence had been revoked in June and the  decision
    was in October, so there had been no undue delay by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  Even if it should have been  done  earlier,  or  the  applicant
    informed of the decision  earlier,  this  did  not  mean  the  ultimate
    decision was unlawful.  There was no entitlement to relief in  relation
    to such a matter.  With regard to paragraph 20.26 of  the  policy,  the
    applicant was not within that and it only applied where an  application
    for leave to remain was made while the licence was suspended  and  that
    had happened after the application was made.  Even if that argument was
    accepted, it did not help the applicant and the respondent had not said
    she would make a decision even if the licence was suspended.  There was
    no unlawfulness.

28.  By way of reply Mr Bazini argued that Parayatta was not  binding.   The
    point that a person who made an indefinite leave to remain  application
    under the Rules would have to show that he had an employer  etc,  would
    suggest that they were not entitled to 60 days  as  it  was  indefinite
    leave to remain rather than limited leave to remain  was  wrong  as  it
    denied the opportunity for further leave to remain when it was no fault
    of that person that their sponsor had lost their licence.

29.  As  regards  Mr  Malik's  point  that  the  policy  did  not  refer  to
    indefinite leave to remain, it clearly referred to both  limited  leave
    to remain and indefinite leave to remain and that was irrelevant to the
    application in any event, as its wording had no reference  and  it  was
    only concerned with a case where the sponsor's licence was revoked, and
    it was silent as to whether it applied to indefinite leave to remain or
    limited leave to remain and that  could  not  be  read  into  it.   The
    contradiction as it was said to be at paragraph 60 of Parayatta was not
    made out.   As  could  be  seen  from  the  wording  of  the  Rule,  an
    alternative to being the original sponsor was that  they  only  had  to
    have a renewal application currently under consideration, and that  was
    sufficient for the grant of indefinite leave to remain so it could  not
    validly be said that there had to be a valid licence  in  existence  at
    the date of decision.  It  should  also  be  noted  from  Parayatta  at
    paragraph 64 that in that case  the  application  was  made  after  the
    sponsor's licence was suspended, so the case did not assist.  Mr Bazini
    disagreed with the conclusions at paragraph 69 in Parayatta and  argued
    that it missed the point.  It was a case where the Secretary  of  State
    knew long ago that she had revoked the licence and needed to grant  the
    60 days period, and that was the law  and  whether  it  was  indefinite
    leave to remain or limited leave to remain mattered not.   With  regard
    to paragraph 70 of Parayatta, the requirements of the  Rules  could  be
    met as the person could apply for further leave and there was  no  need
    for there to be a licence at the date of  decision  as  had  previously
    been argued.  There could be  a  further  application  which  might  be
    refused.

30.  With regard to what Mr Malik said about Islam and Pathan, it could  not
    simply be argued with no evidence as to what the caseworker meant.   If
    in fact it did make a difference then there were questions over whether
    60  days  should  be  given  in  non-revocation  cases.   This  was  an
    application case and a revocation case.  It was within the guidance  in
    Patel.  The fact that the applicant had now said that she was not aware
    of the suspension of the licence could not have  been  evidence  before
    the Secretary of State at the time of the decision.  It  was  necessary
    to inform people and that was clear from Patel.  The Secretary of State
    had failed to observe her legal duty to inform a person if  a  decision
    was not to be made within a fixed  time.   The  applicant  had  had  no
    reason to suspect that there was anything wrong.   The  position  under
    the old and the new policies could be contrasted.

31.  With regard to the proper approach in PBS cases, Mr  Bazini  relied  on
    what had been said by the Court of Appeal in Mudiyanselage [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 65.  There was reference for example at page 314 in the context  of
    PBS to the need for certainty and predictability,  but  there  were  no
    such issues in the way of the proper interpretation of  the  Rules  and
    the policy in this case.  It was not clear  why  the  policy  had  been
    changed and there was no predictability or certainty  and  perhaps  the
    decision might be a hard  one  for  the  Secretary  of  State  in  this
    instance.  Emphasis was  placed  on  paragraphs  44  and  45  and  also
    paragraphs 48 to 51.

32.   Mr  Malik's  argument  with  regard  to  Mr  Jackson's  evidence   was
    unsustainable.  It was clear from the guidance that the reason for  the
    60 days was to give a chance to find  a  new  sponsor.   There  was  no
    reference in that policy to the other points that Mr Malik had made  as
    to the reasons for the 60 day provision.  There was no excuse  for  the
    Secretary of State for failing to explain herself.  It was not  correct
    that the policy was not directed to people seeking indefinite leave  to
    remain.  It applied to revocation, whether it was indefinite  leave  to
    remain or further leave to remain.  Three weeks after the refusal would
    not have been long enough to find a sponsor and was unfair.  It was not
    so clear-cut as to be a question of the date of  decision  rather  than
    the date of application.  The point was reiterated that it was possible
    to obtain indefinite leave to remain even if the sponsor no longer  had
    a licence, if they  had  applied  for  a  renewal.   Therefore  if  the
    decision had not been unlawfully withheld the  application  would  have
    been successful.  Also it was argued that there would be a  public  law
    error if there was a failure to  meet  the  standard  set  out  in  the
    guidance as to time lines,  because  of  the  failure  to  notify,  the
    applicant had lost a period of further leave and  the  opportunity  for
    indefinite leave to remain.  There had been undue delay and  a  failure
    to follow policy, and the respondent had let time run  down  until  the
    applicant could not benefit from the 60 days  period.   No  explanation
    had been given.  The decision was unlawful.

Discussion

33.  The central  point  in  this  case  is  the  requirement  at  paragraph
    245HF(c) of HC 395 that, in the case of an application  for  indefinite
    leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant, a  sponsor  that  issued
    the certificate of sponsorship that led to the applicant's  last  grant
    of leave must still hold a Tier  2  sponsor  licence  in  the  relevant
    category, or have an application  for  a  renewal  of  such  a  licence
    currently under  consideration  by  the  Home  Office.   Various  other
    matters are specified thereafter  at  paragraph  245HF  which  must  be
    certified by the sponsor and further requirements that  exist  for  the
    provisions of the Rules to be satisfied.

34.  Mr Malik's simple point is that the  application  cannot  succeed,  and
    that whatever points are made about policies, to which I shall come  on
    in a moment, are entirely by the way.  Mr Bazini argues that  the  Rule
    requires that the applicant meets the requirements of the  points-based
    system rules at the date of  the  application  and  that  there  is  no
    dispute that the requirements of the Rules  were  indeed  met  at  that
    date.  He refers to the grant of permission by  Martin  Spencer  J  who
    considered it arguable that a proper interpretation of paragraph  245HF
    means that the time at which the respondent should consider whether the
    applicant meets the requirements for indefinite leave to remain is when
    the application is submitted and not  when  it  is  considered  by  the
    Secretary of State.  He also considered that there was support for this
    interpretation arising from the respondent's  Tier  2  policy  guidance
    which provides as follows:

         "261.    Any Tier 2 applications submitted  (Martin  Spencer's  J's
                emphasis) while the sponsor's licence is suspended will  not
                be considered.  We  will  hold  the  application  until  the
                suspension ends and then make a decision."

35.  Mr Bazini went on to argue that in this case suspension took place  six
    weeks after the application was submitted and as such it would not have
    been in accordance with the guidance to suspend the  decision  until  a
    revocation decision was made, and if that were not the case it would be
    difficult to see what the point of the guidance was in this regard.  He
    went on to note  what  had  been  said  in  the  administrative  review
    decision that the reason for delay in processing  the  application  was
    because of the decision maker awaiting the outcome of the suspension of
    the sponsor's licence.  He argued that this was unlawful  and  contrary
    to policy or practice in that the decision should not have been delayed
    because the timing of the application was prior to  suspension  and  so
    not caught by the guidance.   He  argued  that  as  a  further  aid  to
    construction the relevant Rules only refer to the fact that  a  Tier  2
    licence  must  be  held  on  making  the  application,  but  also  that
    alternatively the employer may have an application for renewal  of  the
    licence pending and that this allows for the grant of indefinite  leave
    to remain in circumstances where at the date of application the licence
    was in existence, but also in circumstances where it has expired but  a
    renewal application has been made.  He made the point  that  there  was
    thus no requirement for there to be a current licence at  the  time  of
    the application, let  alone  the  decision.   In  principle  therefore,
    indefinite leave to remain could be granted with  the  application  for
    renewal being refused at some later point.

36.  Mr Malik, as I have noted above, attached weight to Mahad  and  Odelola
    in respect of his submission that the proper date  on  which  paragraph
    245HF depends is the date of decision.  It was said in Odelola,  quoted
    at paragraph 30 of Mr Malik's skeleton, that the most  natural  reading
    of the Rules is that in the absence of any statement  to  the  contrary
    they will apply to the decisions the Secretary  of  State  makes  until
    such time as she promulgates different Rules.  Mr Malik also pointed to
    an example at paragraph EX.1. of Appendix FM of a case which stipulated
    that the date for relevant requirements of that paragraph were required
    to be met as "the date of application".  I  see  force  in  Mr  Malik's
    point that the use of the word "still" would, in effect,  be  redundant
    if the Rule was intended to mean "hold" at  the  date  of  application.
    There is also substance  to  the  point  he  makes  that  it  would  be
    surprising if  the  Secretary  of  State  were  required  to  grant  an
    applicant indefinite leave to remain notwithstanding her own  knowledge
    that the sponsorship licence in question has in fact been revoked.

37.  The fact that paragraph 261 of the Tier  2  Policy  Guidance  makes  it
    clear that Tier 2 applications submitted while  the  sponsor's  licence
    has been suspended will not be considered, and a decision will  not  be
    made until the suspension ends does not, in  my  view,  entail  that  a
    decision on an application made prior to suspension can or will not  be
    made similarly when the suspension ends.  The specific  provision  made
    in the case where the application is made after suspension is made  for
    the particular reasons relevant to that situation.  It does not  follow
    that it is not appropriately equally for the decision in a case such as
    the instant one to be made when  it  was  in  this  case.   Odelola  is
    applicable here.  The timing of the submission cannot  be  material  in
    determining the point at which the Rules' requirements have to be  met.
    With regard  to  Mr  Bazini's  point  that  in  the  alternative  under
    paragraph 245HF(c)(i) the sponsor may have an application  for  renewal
    of a Tier 2 sponsor licence currently under consideration by  the  Home
    Office, and therefore there is no requirement for him to hold a licence
    at all, it is clear that there must have been a licence  in  the  past,
    and that there  be  an  application  for  renewal  of  such  a  licence
    currently under consideration.  This in my view is properly read as  no
    more than the setting out  of  an  alternative  basis  upon  which  the
    requirements of the Rule can be met rather than indicating in some  way
    that because the sponsor does not have to hold a Tier 2 sponsor licence
    at the time of the decision it means that the date  of  application  is
    the relevant date.  The Rule is specific in its terms, and  I  consider
    that it cannot be properly  interpreted  other  than  in  the  way  put
    forward on behalf of the respondent by Mr Malik.  It is clear that  the
    sponsor in this case did not hold a  Tier  2  sponsor  licence  in  the
    relevant category at the time when the decision was made,  and  it  has
    not been suggested that they had an application for a renewal of such a
    licence under consideration by  the  respondent  at  the  time  of  the
    decision.  Accordingly the requirements of the Rules  are  not  met  in
    this case.

38.  As regards the issue of the  policy,  Mr  Bazini  relied  upon  certain
    words in the Tier 2 and 5  of  the  points-based  system  guidance  for
    sponsors that was in existence at the relevant date.  Neither side  put
    before me  the  policy  referred  to  by  Martin  Spencer  J  and  also
    considered by the Upper Tribunal in Parayatta.  I have however relevant
    quotations from that policy.

39.  It must be questionable whether a policy which  is  aimed  at  sponsors
    can be said to bite at all on the rights of migrants, in the absence of
    any parallel or similar provision in guidance to migrants, though  that
    is not a point that Mr Malik took on behalf of the respondent.  Rather,
    he argued that there was no reason to depart from  the  conclusions  of
    the Upper  Tribunal  in  Islam  and  Pathan,  and  the  fact  that  the
    respondent's policy is to curtail leave to remain to  60  days  in  the
    case of migrants who have more than 60 days left of their leave at  the
    time of the revocation decision does not mean that those who are in the
    applicant's position should also be given a further 60 days to find  an
    alternative  sponsor.   He  also,  as  noted  above,  argued  that  the
    applicant's argument undermined the scheme of the  points-based  system
    as a whole, and I have noted above  references  to  the  importance  of
    security and consistency  and  predictability  and  the  risk  of  hard
    decisions in individual cases that may result  as  being  part  of  the
    price paid for this.  Mr Malik, as I have also noted, argued that  what
    was said in Islam and Pathan about the reasons for the  60  day  policy
    held good, and that the reference to paragraph 19.9(b) of the sponsor's
    policy was not inconsistent with what had been said  there.   It  is  a
    point as Mr Bazini has said, that there has been no  statement  on  the
    part of the respondent as to why the policy  was  subsequently  amended
    when the reason for the 60 days, being to enable the migrant to have  a
    chance to find a new sponsor, is no longer present.  However I  do  not
    consider the absence of  a  statement  or  explanation  to  be  of  any
    materiality to the issues in this case.

40.  As I say, there does not appear to be a policy speaking to the  migrant
    which gives reasons for the 60 days provision in the sponsor's  policy.
    But it seems to me that the matter must in any  event  be  dictated  by
    what is contained in the Immigration Rule.  It is clear from  paragraph
    245HF(c), as I have set out above, that  the  sponsor  who  issued  the
    certificate of sponsorship that led to the applicant's  last  grant  of
    leave must still hold a Tier  2  sponsor's  licence.   I  have  already
    decided that that relates to the date of  decision,  not  the  date  of
    application.  That is, in essence, in my view the end  of  the  matter.
    Even  if  there  is  a  60  days  period  allowable  to  a  migrant  in
    circumstances where they still have 60 days  or  more  of  their  leave
    remaining, that cannot avail them in the face of  the  wording  of  the
    Rule.  If that period of time exists or such period of time which might
    enable them to find  another  sponsor,  then  again,  as  the  Tribunal
    pointed out in Parayatta, that could not avail them either, because the
    sponsor is  required  to  be  the  same  as  the  one  who  issued  the
    certificate of sponsorship that led to the applicant's  last  grant  of
    leave.  Quite why the policy for sponsors says what it does is unclear,
    but it is not a policy aimed at migrants, and I consider that  although
    it does not expressly limit its application or context to  cases  other
    than those concerning indefinite leave to remain, it can only  be  said
    to be applicable  in  practice  to  cases  that  are  not  governed  by
    paragraph 245HF, because of the specific  wording  of  that  Rule.   No
    doubt the policy may have a role to  play  in  other  cases  where  the
    sponsor's licence is revoked and a 60 day period  is  granted,  but  in
    light of the specific wording of the Rule, it can in my  view  have  no
    bearing on the particular circumstances of this case.  Even if it  did,
    the fact of the matter is that the respondent did not  seek  to  reduce
    the period of days left to the applicant at the time when the  decision
    was made, although I accept Mr Bazini's argument  that  it  would  have
    been difficult if not impossible for that to  be  satisfied  given  the
    limited period of time of leave remaining.   This  is  in  my  view  an
    example of the kind of hard decision that may arise in individual cases
    as a consequence of the lack of flexibility of the points-based system.
     I have every sympathy with the applicant who in the  circumstances  of
    the timing of this case was left in  a  situation  where  she  did  not
    realise that the sponsor's licence had  been  initially  suspended  and
    subsequently revoked, until a time within three  or  so  weeks  of  her
    leave expiring.  But, as the Tribunal pointed out  in  Parayatta,  that
    could  not  avail  her  because  the  Rule  is  clear  on  the   point.



                                  ~~~0~~~~
