
IAC-FH-LW-V2

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                                               JR/13743/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                               11 March 2019


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                                frank wuteron
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr P Nathan, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors  appeared  on  behalf  of
the Applicant.

Mr B Bedford, instructed by the  Government  Legal  Department  appeared  on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    JUDGE allen: The  applicant  has  applied  for  judicial  review  of  a
    decision of the Secretary of State of 23 September  2016  refusing  his
    asylum claim and granting him  30  months'  discretionary  leave.   The
    essence of the applicant's claim is  that  rather  than  being  granted
    discretionary leave to remain he should have been granted  humanitarian
    protection.  This stems from the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Clarke on  27  June  2016  rejecting  an  asylum  appeal  and  refusing
    humanitarian protection but finding that  the  applicant's  removal  to
    Uganda would lead to a breach of Article 3.


1.   By way of more recent background, the substantive hearing of the  claim
    initially came before Mr Justice Dove sitting in UTIAC,  on  4  October
    2017.  On the basis that a reference had been made by the Supreme Court
    to the CJEU in the case of MP (Sri Lanka), Dove J stayed proceedings on
    the basis  that  the  arguments  raised  by  the  applicant  would  all
    potentially be affected by the judgment in MP.   The  stay  was  lifted
    subsequent to the decision of the CJEU in MP dated 24 April 2018.

2.   The background to the applicant's claim can be taken from the  decision
    of the judge, and indeed it would be appropriate at this stage  to  set
    out in  some  detail  the  judge's  findings  as  they  impact  on  the
    subsequent decision of the Secretary of State and the challenge to that
    decision.

3.   The applicant is from Uganda.  He joined the Ugandan  People's  Defence
    Force (UPDF) in 2002 and  had  weapons  training.   In  March  2005  he
    overheard some confidential information at a meeting  of  high  ranking
    officers and reported this to the Chief Intelligence Officer.   He  was
    told not to reveal Government secrets and was told to  keep  his  mouth
    shut.  That night  he  was  taken  outside  and  beaten  by  the  Chief
    Intelligence Officer and others.  He was stripped naked and hit to  the
    head with an AK-47 and was kicked all  over.   He  managed  to  escape,
    while being led naked to a van, and got away, in the course of which he
    tripped over the body of a dead person whose clothes he  took  and  put
    on.  He was able to leave the country a few days later after his  uncle
    sold some land to pay for this, and he came to the United Kingdom.

4.   The judge found that the applicant suffered from PTSD  and  indeed  the
    diagnosis was not in dispute.  The judge also accepted that he was  not
    fit to give evidence due to his mental  health  problems.   Though  the
    judge expressed some doubts about the applicant's credibility, he  bore
    in mind the medical evidence and  taking  the  evidence  in  the  round
    accepted that the applicant was a member of the UPDF and  that  he  was
    ill-treated as he claimed and managed to escape and that the weight  of
    medical evidence, in particular his PTSD, supported the credibility  of
    his claim.

5.   The judge  found  that  there  were  two  traumatic  incidents  in  the
    applicant's life that appeared to have caused his current mental health
    difficulties.  The first was that he had been traumatised by the manner
    in which UKBA arrested him and his wife and  daughter  on  16  December
    2011.  The judge was quite satisfied that his PTSD had been exacerbated
    by the actions of the UKBA when they came to arrest him  and  expressed
    his concern as to the manner in which the arrest was carried  out.   He
    accepted that the applicant had  been  suffering  from  panic  attacks,
    flashbacks and nightmares.

6.   Secondly, the judge found that the applicant had  been  traumatised  by
    the events that he had experienced in Uganda.  He  found  that  he  had
    been stripped naked and beaten up and led towards a vehicle and that he
    feared he was going to be led away and shot and the manner in which  he
    and his wife and daughter were arrested was  reminiscent  of  what  had
    happened to him in Uganda.

7.   The judge did not accept that the applicant had proved that he  was  at
    risk on return.  There was no evidence before him of a credible  threat
    specific to the applicant from either state or non-state actors, and as
    a consequence internal relocation and sufficiency  of  protection  were
    not in issue.  The judge said that he  found  that  the  applicant  had
    failed to  prove  his  asylum  claim  or  his  claim  for  humanitarian
    protection.

8.   However, he allowed the claim in respect of Article 3 of  the  ECHR  on
    the basis of the severity of the applicant's mental health and his risk
    of suicide.  He reminded himself of the guidance in authorities such as
    N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31 and GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40, and also the
    country guidance in GJ and Others [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

9.   The judge was satisfied on the medical evidence that the applicant  was
    a suicide risk.  He considered his case had  striking  similarities  to
    the case of the third applicant in GJ and Others.  He had some physical
    scars but also significant mental and psychological scars from his time
    in Uganda and he had been assessed over the past few years as a suicide
    risk.  He had PTSD and despite a significant treatment plan his  mental
    health was actually deteriorating.

10.  The judge noted background evidence concerning the provision of  mental
    health support in Uganda.  A report of 2014 from the Mental  Disability
    Advocacy Centre entitled "Psychiatric hospitals in  Uganda  -  A  human
    rights investigation" said that:

         "One of the key findings is that people with mental  health  issues
         in hospitals were receiving treatment which,  under  international,
         regional and national law amount  to  torture,  cruel,  inhuman  or
         degrading treatment or punishment, including  violence  and  abuse.
         The degree, form and extent of abuse was found to differ  from  one
         hospital to next, but there were problems at all, clearly showing a
         system which violates the fundamental rights of people for whom  it
         is supposed to care."

11.  The judge  considered  the  report  to  be  damning  in  terms  of  the
    procedures adopted in the hospitals.  For example, it  was  found  that
    patients were locked in isolation without access to  toilet  facilities
    and often urinating on the same floor that they slept on naked.   There
    was no distinction between voluntary and compulsory admissions  and  no
    proper procedures to challenge detention.   There  was  compulsory  and
    forced treatment and no provision for the right to informed consent and
    the opportunity  to  refuse  treatment.   There  was  a  prevalence  of
    continuing to administer medications that had been banned in  the  rest
    of the world because of their intrinsic dangers.

12.  The judge noted that the respondent had constantly pointed to the  fact
    that there was a functioning healthcare system in Uganda, including the
    provision of mental health services.  However, he  said  he  could  not
    ignore the risk of suicide to the applicant if he were removed from the
    United Kingdom and found that he had a genuine  fear  of  returning  to
    Uganda.  He had said that  he  would  rather  die  than  go  back.   He
    suffered from severe PTSD and his mental health was getting worse.  The
    judge was not satisfied that the respondent would be able to remove the
    applicant safely from the United Kingdom.  Even if he were to fly back,
    the objective evidence on psychiatric hospitals in Uganda in  the  2014
    report led the judge to conclude that the applicant  would  not  obtain
    the treatment or care that he needed and that the treatment in  such  a
    hospital did not meet international standards.  He allowed  the  appeal
    under Article 3 and also under Article 8.

13.  On behalf of the applicant it is argued that the position  is  governed
    by what was said by the Court of Appeal in NO (Afghanistan) [2016] EWCA
    Civ 876.   This  case  concerned  an  appeal  against  the  refusal  of
    permission to apply for judicial review in the case  of  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan whose appeal before a First-tier Tribunal  Judge  had  been
    dismissed on asylum grounds and under the  Immigration  Rules  but  had
    been allowed under  Articles  3  and  8.   It  was  accepted  that  the
    applicant in that case  suffered  from  complex  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder and major depression.  The exact cause of that  condition  had
    not been established and his account of the circumstances in  which  he
    left Afghanistan had not been accepted, though the First-tier Judge did
    accept that his condition did  not  arise  only  from  his  experiences
    during his journey to the  United  Kingdom.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge found that the applicant was at risk of  suicide  which,  at  the
    date of the hearing before the judge, was  being  managed  by  careful,
    skilled intervention and a supportive network in London,  but  she  did
    not consider that the risk could be managed if he  was  told  that  the
    decision to remove him was final and that the chances of his finding in
    Afghanistan the palliative and therapeutic care  that  would  keep  him
    from taking his own life were remote.

14.   The  judge  noted  background  evidence   concerning   mental   health
    facilities in Afghanistan.  She noted from the  up-to-date  COI  Report
    that few facilities existed for the treatment of mental health patients
    in Afghanistan and there was  an  unmet  need,  shortage  of  treatment
    facilities and societal attitudes that hampered access to treatment for
    mental health problems  in  a  country  where  inhumane  and  degrading
    exorcism regimes were used by  many  to  treat  relatives  with  mental
    health  problems  and   face-to-face   contact   with   mental   health
    professionals was at best possible for only a very few and for  a  very
    restricted time before patients had to be discharged.

15.  The judge went on to say that the applicant's fear of ill-treatment  in
    Afghanistan as a person suffering from mental illness  was  objectively
    well-founded in that although there were some  medical  facilities  and
    medication there was also a prevalence of societally acceptable  highly
    inhumane and degrading treatment of those believed to be possessed,  as
    set out in the COIR.  There was a real risk that he  would  be  shunned
    and would become homeless and destitute or fall  victim  to  those  who
    used inhumane methods in order to attempt exorcism.

16.  The Court of Appeal concluded that the appeal against the  decision  of
    the Deputy High Court Judge refusing to grant permission to apply for a
    judicial review was to be allowed.  The challenge was on the basis that
    it was unlawful for the Secretary of State  not  to  have  granted  the
    applicant  five  years'  leave  to  remain  under  Article  3  of   her
    humanitarian protection policy document.  The Court of  Appeal  allowed
    the appeal.  It was said at paragraph 37 of the  judgment  that  whilst
    the court agreed that the Secretary of State was required  to  grant  a
    form of leave that accorded with the substantive decision of the  judge
    properly interpreted, the Secretary of State also was required to reach
    a conclusion which accorded with the substance of the decision  of  the
    Tribunal Judge.  In  the  court's  view  it  was  inescapable  that  in
    formulating her conclusions on the manner in which and  the  extent  to
    which Article 3 and Article 8 were engaged, the  judge  had  identified
    factors which satisfied the criteria for humanitarian  protection.   In
    this regard the court attached particular weight to  what  is  said  at
    paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules that a person "will" be granted
    humanitarian protection if the Secretary of  State  is  satisfied  that
    substantial grounds have been  shown  for  believing  that  the  person
    concerned, if returned to the country of return, would face a real risk
    of suffering inhuman or degrading treatment.

17.  It was not considered that  it  was  a  fair  reading  of  the  judge's
    findings that the applicant only faced the risk of ill-treatment if  he
    did not receive proper care and support in Afghanistan.  In the court's
    judgment, a fair reading of the findings  was  that  it  was  the  very
    requirement for such care and support which led to  the  risk  of  ill-
    treatment.  The applicant was not simply claiming that  the  healthcare
    available  to  him  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  not   available   in
    Afghanistan,  but  rather  he  submitted  that  his  condition,   which
    generated the need for that care, of itself gave rise to a risk of ill-
    treatment  in  Afghanistan.   He  was   not   complaining   about   the
    consequences of the lack of treatment  in  Afghanistan  but  about  the
    consequences to which his condition gave rise in Afghanistan,  that  is
    to say the risk of inhuman or degrading treatment.  The court  went  on
    to say that it was the risk of inhuman or degrading treatment which was
    capable of lifting cases out of the category of  "medical  cases"  into
    the category attracting, exceptionally, humanitarian protection.

18.  It is also relevant to note what was said by the Court  of  Justice  in
    M'Bodj (C-542/13), where it was held that in a case where a person  who
    had been a victim of acts of torture inflicted by  the  authorities  of
    his  country  of  origin  in  the  past  which   involved   substantial
    aggravation if he were to  be  returned  there  of  his  mental  health
    disorders on account of the psychological trauma that he  continued  to
    suffer as a result of the torture, could not be regarded in  itself  as
    inhuman or degrading treatment inflicted on him  than  the  meeting  of
    Article 15(b) of the Qualification Directive.

19.  The particular issue before the court in MP,  the  case  that  went  on
    reference from the Supreme Court, led to the  following  conclusion  by
    the CJEU:

         "Articles 2(e) and 15(b) of Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004
         on minimum standards for the  qualification  and  status  of  third
         country nationals or stateless persons as refugees  or  as  persons
         who otherwise need international protection and the content of  the
         protection granted, read in the light of Article 4 of the  Charter
         of Fundamental Rights of the European Union, must be interpreted as
         meaning that a third country national who  in  the  past  has  been
         tortured by the authorities of his country of origin and no  longer
         faces a risk of being tortured if returned  to  that  country,  but
         whose physical and psychological  health  could,  if  so  returned,
         seriously deteriorate, leading to a serious risk of him  committing
         suicide on account of trauma resulting  from  the  torture  he  was
         subjected to, is eligible for subsidiary protection if there  is  a
         real risk of him being intentionally deprived, in  his  country  of
         origin, of appropriate care for  the  physical  and  mental  after-
         effects of that torture, that being a matter for the national court
         to determine."

20.  Mr Nathan founded  his  main  argument  on  the  applicability  of  the
    conclusions of the Court of Appeal in NO to the facts of this case.  He
    argued that, though in NO there had been no  decision  on  humanitarian
    protection per se, it could be taken that the refusal of the appeal  in
    respect of the Immigration Rules effectively incorporated  humanitarian
    protection and therefore the matter was in essence on  all  fours  with
    this case where  the  judge  specifically  dismissed  the  humanitarian
    protection appeal.

21.  In contrast Mr Bedford argued that it made a difference that there  was
    no decision by the judge dismissing the humanitarian  protection  claim
    in NO and the Secretary of State's decision had to be  consistent  with
    the  findings  of  the  judge  who  in  this  case  had  dismissed  the
    humanitarian protection appeal.   He  also  argued  that  there  was  a
    difference between the two cases in that the risk to the  applicant  on
    return in NO was as a consequence of  him  being  subject  to  exorcism
    given the attitudes in mental health problems to  Afghanistan,  whereas
    there was no such evidence in this case.  He also argued that  for  the
    sake of legal certainty the Secretary of State was  entitled  to  place
    reliance on the First-tier Judge's decision, in particular when it  was
    expressed in such clear terms, and was entitled to act on the basis  of
    clear findings by the judge and could not be expected to go beyond such
    a finding.  No doubt the Secretary of State had a discretion to  do  so
    but had good reasons for not doing in this case.

22.  It is common ground that NO survives what was  said  by  the  Court  of
    Justice in MP.  I have set out in some detail above what the court said
    in the former.  Of particular importance is what is said  at  paragraph
    37 that the Secretary of State must reach a  conclusion  which  accords
    with the substance of the decision of the Tribunal  Judge.   I  do  not
    consider it can properly be said that the fact that the judge dismissed
    the humanitarian protection appeal meant that the Secretary of State as
    a consequence could ignore the possibility of any  grant  of  leave  on
    that basis, particularly if the judge's findings were such as in effect
    to give rise to  findings  consistent  with  the  conclusion  that  the
    requirements of humanitarian protection leave were made out.

23.  It is clear that a case where the complaint is simply that the  medical
    conditions that exist on return for  a  person  being  less  than  that
    person was benefiting from in the United Kingdom would not give rise to
    a successful claim for humanitarian protection.   Equally,  I  consider
    that it is clear that in a case such as this where, as it  was  put  at
    paragraphs 43, 44 and 45 in NO, such is the requirement  for  care  and
    support which leads to the risk of ill-treatment and the fact  that  it
    is the applicant's condition which generates the need  for  care  which
    itself gives rise to a risk of ill-treatment in Afghanistan.  There  is
    in my view a clear parallel between the  situation  in  NO  (and  hence
    different form the situation in M' Bodj) where the applicant in  effect
    was complaining of what would happen to him as  a  consequence  of  the
    mental health problems from which he suffered, in a society  which  did
    not have an absence of treatment but had poor treatment both within the
    healthcare  sector  and  the  risk  of  being  subjected  to   exorcism
    procedures by people outside the healthcare system, and the risk to the
    applicant in this case of being subjected to  the  kind  of  inadequate
    treatment effectively amounting to severe ill-treatment so  graphically
    set out in the background report upon which the judge relied.  This  is
    not a case which is a "medical case only", but  a  case  which  is  one
    which can properly be said to be one  where  the  applicant  has  shown
    substantial grounds for believing that if returned to Uganda  he  would
    face a real risk of suffering  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment.   The
    Secretary of State properly directing himself in light of  the  judge's
    decision, bearing in mind the evidence considered and the  legal  tests
    applied by the judge to that evidence, should in my view have concluded
    that this was a case where a grant of humanitarian protection  fell  to
    be considered and applied as  a  matter  of  law.   To  that  extent  I
    consider that the Secretary of State's decision has been  shown  to  be
    unlawful.

24.  The secondary issue is that of MP and what was said in the judgment  of
    the CJEU in that case.  In the event it is unnecessary to say very much
    about this  in  light  of  my  findings  above.   But  I  consider  the
    relatively narrow issue upon which the court adjudicated in  that  case
    is one which this case falls outside.  I agree with Mr Nathan  that  it
    can only properly be said that the  applicant  experienced  torture  in
    Uganda.  Though the judge did not use that word it is very  clear  from
    the account that he accepted of the ill-treatment  that  the  applicant
    suffered that that amounts to torture, and the helpful quotation by  Mr
    Nathan from what was said by Burnett J (as he then was)  in  EO  [2013]
    EWHC 1236 (Admin) is of clear relevance.   It  is  a  broad  definition
    which includes punishment and intimidation as part of its  purpose  for
    the ill-treatment.  But the CJEU in MP spoke in terms of a real risk of
    a person being intentionally  deprived  of  appropriate  care  for  the
    physical and mental after-effects of the torture, and that does not  in
    my view apply in this case.  There is not a real  risk  of  intentional
    deprivation of appropriate care,  but  rather  the  inadequacy  of  the
    facilities that  exist  in  Uganda  that  provides  the  basis  of  the
    difficulties that the applicant  will  face.   Accordingly,  I  do  not
    consider that the decision is unlawful with regard to what was said  by
    the Court of Justice in MP.

25.  However, for the reasons  above,  I  consider  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision is unlawful in dealing with this matter on  the  basis
    of  discretionary  leave  or  on  breach  of  Article  3  rather   than
    humanitarian protection, and accordingly the decision is quashed.

26.  I invite the  parties'  submissions  as  to  any  consequential  orders
    including costs in light of the above judgment.

                                  ~~~~0~~~~

                                                                      UTIJR6


                                                              JR/13743/2016.


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







                The Queen on the application of Frank Wuteron
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective  representatives,  Mr  P  Nathan,  instructed  by  Duncan   Lewis
Solicitors, on behalf of the Applicant and Mr B Bedford, instructed  by  the
Government Legal Department, on behalf of the Respondent, at  a  hearing  at
Field House, London on 11 March 2019.

     Decision: the application for judicial review is granted

(1)  The Respondent's decision of 23 September 2016 is quashed.

(2)  The Respondent is to pay the Applicant's costs, to be the subject of  a
detailed assessment if not agreed.

(3)  There is to be detailed assessment of the Applicant's  publicly  funded
costs.

Order


(5)  I therefore make an Order quashing the Respondent's decision  dated  23
      September 2016.




Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

(6)  I refuse permission to appeal to the  Court  of  Appeal.  There  is  no
error of law in the decision.










         Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




        Dated:






Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-------------------------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself. This must be done by  filing  an
appellant's notice with the Civil Appeals Office  of  the  Court  of  Appeal
within 28 days of the date the Tribunal's decision on permission  to  appeal
was sent (Civil Procedure Rules Practice Direction 52D 3.3).
