
                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                               JR/15618/2015

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                               25 April 2018

                                   Before

                       THE HON. MRS JUSTICE O'FARRELL
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                ASIF ALI KHAN

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr M Biggs, instructed by Mayfair Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr J Parker, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                         APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    MRS JUSTICE O'FARRELL: This is an application  by the  applicant,  Asif
    Ali Khan (with permission given by the Court of  Appeal,  by  consent),
    for judicial review of the defendant Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department's failure to  serve  a  notice  withdrawing  its  notice  of
    curtailment and/or confirming the applicant's immigration status.   The
    facts can be summarised as follows.

 1. The applicant is a national of Pakistan born on 12  October  1981.   He
    first entered the UK on 15 February 2009 with entry clearance as a Tier
    4 student.  That leave to remain  was  extended  on  various  occasions
    following applications for leave to remain made  whilst  the  applicant
    had leave.  The last such application for  current  purposes  gave  him
    leave to remain as a Tier 4 student valid until 7 September 2015.   For
    this purpose, his Tier 4 sponsor was the Bradford Regional College.


 2. Unfortunately, in September 2014, the Bradford Regional College's  Tier
    4 sponsor licence was revoked.  In those circumstances  the  respondent
    decided to curtail the applicant's leave to  remain  by  giving  him  a
    notice in writing pursuant to Section 4 of the  Immigration  Act  1971,
    the practice being to give 60 days for students in the position of  the
    applicant  to  find  an  alternative  educational  sponsor   and   seek
    alternative leave to remain as a student.

 3. On 3 February 2015 the respondent sent by recorded  delivery  a  letter
    curtailing the applicant's leave to his last  known  address,  175  The
    Broadway, Southall, Middlesex UB1 1LX.  The letter was not received  by
    the applicant. It is presumed that, having been held for a time by  the
    Royal Mail, the letter  was  eventually  returned  to  the  respondent,
    although a date for that return is not available to the court.


 4. On 3 March 2015 the applicant  notified  the  respondent  that  he  had
    changed his address to 25A Aldbury Avenue, Wembley, Middlesex HA9  6EY.
    This explains the failure of the  original  curtailment  letter  to  be
    delivered to and received by him.


 5. On 14 May 2015 the applicant received a  letter  from  the  Immigration
    Enforcement Interventions and Sanctions Directorate stating that he had
    no right to reside in the UK and  therefore  his  driving  licence  was
    being revoked.  On 15 June 2015 the applicant also  received  a  letter
    from DVLA informing him that his driving licence had  been  revoked  on
    the ground that he was a person without  leave  to  remain.   This  was
    challenged by the applicant's solicitors by email dated 11 June 2015.


 6. A response was then sent by the respondent by letter dated 17 June 2015
    which stated:

          "I can confirm that having checked your  client's  status  on  the
         Home Office database he does not have any lawful basis for being in
         the UK at this time.  According to our records your client's  leave
         was curtailed on 3 February 2015 to expire on 7 April  2015  and  a
         letter advising of this was sent to your client at his  last  known
         address on 3 February 2015."

    If correct, the position following that letter was that  the  applicant
    was outside the 60 days' period for seeking permission to remain  using
    an alternative sponsor and had been an overstayer by more than 28 days.




 7. The applicant's  solicitors  continued  to  write  letters  to  various
    government agencies, including border control and DVLA, protesting that
    the applicant had leave to remain and was not  an  overstayer.   On  30
    June 2015 the ISD indicated that the applicant's driving licence  would
    be reinstated but that was not accompanied by any explanation either as
    to the applicant's status or the fact that the curtailment  letter  had
    not been validly delivered. Indeed, on 9  July  2015  Capita  wrote  on
    behalf of the respondent again confirming that the applicant no  longer
    had the right to remain in the United Kingdom.


 8. On 9 July 2015 the applicant's solicitors again wrote to the respondent
    advancing their position on behalf of the applicant that  he  did  have
    leave to remain and relying on an  affidavit  sworn  by  the  applicant
    explaining that he had not received the 60 day curtailment letter.   On
    10 July  2015  the  applicant's  solicitors  wrote  to  the  respondent
    reiterating their request that  a  60  day  letter  be  issued  to  the
    applicant.

 9. On 22 July 2015 the GCID record entry in respect of the  applicant  was
    noted as follows:

         "Outcome reconsideration:  Our record Royal Mail  track  and  trace
         show that the letter was undelivered and  therefore  it  is  deemed
         that our decision has not been served.  The apps leave has now less
         than 60 days.  Therefore we are unable to give the app a  fresh  60
         days' extant leave.  Our decision is now curtailment not pursued."

10. For some reason the respondent did not write to the  applicant  or  his
    solicitors to explain  the  outcome  of  that  reconsideration  or  the
    respondent's understanding that the curtailment  letter  had  not  been
    validly served and therefore the applicant still had  leave  to  remain
    until 7 September.

11. The applicant's solicitors wrote on a number  of  occasions  throughout
    August 2015 but did not receive any confirmation from the respondent as
    to the correct position vis a vis the applicant's status.  It  was  not
    until 13 November 2015 that the respondent  wrote  to  the  applicant's
    solicitors and set out in the letter that:

         "Your client's curtailment notice was deemed not to be  served.   A
         re-service of the curtailment was not made due to less than 60 days
         remaining in the initial leave.  Therefore curtailment not pursued.
          Leave to remain valid until 7 September 2015."

    Of course, by that stage the 7 September 2015 date had expired and  the
    applicant was an overstayer by more than 28 days.

12. A further letter of claim was sent to the  respondent  on  26  November
    2015, to which the respondent replied by letter dated 1  December  2015
    effectively reiterating its previous position in which it  stated  that
    the applicant had the option of submitting an application and  did  not
    and therefore the applicant was considered to have overstayed  since  7
    September 2015  and  should  make  arrangements  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.

13. It is against that decision that the application  for  judicial  review
    was then  made  and  proceedings  were  issued  on  18  December  2015.
    Initially, the respondent's  Acknowledgment  of  Service  issued  on  3
    February 2016 took the position that the applicant  had  in  fact  been
    lawfully served with the curtailment notice and as a result  his  leave
    was curtailed to expire on 7 April  2015.   However,  in  the  detailed
    grounds of defence served on 29 March  2018,  the  respondent  accepted
    that the curtailment notice had not been validly served  and  therefore
    the position was that  the  applicant  had  leave  to  remain  until  7
    September 2015.

14. The ground for judicial review is the defendant's failure  to  serve  a
    notice  withdrawing  curtailment  and/or  the  defendant's  failure  to
    confirm the applicant's immigration status.  The  applicant's  case  is
    put by Mr Biggs on the basis that there was at least confusion  on  the
    part of the respondent  as  to  the  applicant's  status.  That  caused
    prejudice such that it should have but failed to  reissue  the  60  day
    notice or provide a letter of explanation or treat him as a student who
    was not an overstayer so that he could  have  obtained  an  alternative
    educational sponsor and made a fresh application for leave not  tainted
    by his status as an overstayer.  It is submitted on his behalf that  he
    was prejudiced by the respondent's conduct insofar as that conduct made
    it impossible or significantly difficult for the applicant  to  find  a
    new Tier 4 sponsor to apply for further leave  to  remain  so  that  he
    could continue his studies in the UK  between  February  and  September
    2015.

15. Mr Biggs submits that there has been conspicuous unfairness on the part
    of the respondent.  Reliance is placed on the case of The Queen (on the
    application of) Mohammad Mohibullah v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2016] UKUT 00561 and, in particular, paragraphs 64  to  69,
    in which it  is  explained  that  an  applicant  for  asylum  or  other
    immigration application has an expectation that a  general  policy  for
    dealing with asylum applications will be applied and  will  be  applied
    uniformly  and  serious  errors  of  administration  would  result   in
    conspicuous unfairness to the claimant.  Reference  was  made  in  that
    judgment to the case of The Crown (London Borough of Lewisham) v AQA  &
    Others [2013] EWHC 211 in which Lord Justice Elias stated at  paragraph
    111:

         "Logically, if there is a doctrine of conspicuous unfairness  as  a
         substantive head of judicial review which is to  be  treated  as  a
         distinct form of abuse of power, it must be for the court to decide
         whether in any particular case  the  decision-maker  has  infringed
         that principle since the court must decide whether power  has  been
         abused. It is no different from a court deciding  that  a  decision
         has been exercised for an improper purpose or  that  an  irrelevant
         consideration has been taken into account. But  I  do  not  believe
         that Unilever has formulated a fresh head of review  conferring  on
         the  court  a  wide  discretion  to  substitute  its  view  of  the
         substantive merits for the decision-maker. In order  to  constitute
         conspicuous unfairness, the decision must be immoral  or  illogical
         or attract similar opprobrium, and it necessarily follows  that  it
         will be irrational. I  would  treat  this  concept  of  conspicuous
         unfairness as a particular  and  distinct  form  of  irrationality,
         which in essence is how it was viewed  by  Sir  Thomas  Bingham  in
         Unilever. There are no doubt cases, of which Unilever is one, where
         the  concept  of  fairness,  and  an  allegation   of   conspicuous
         unfairness, better captures the particular nuance of the  complaint
         being advanced than the concept of irrationality. Indeed,  I  think
         that is typically so in any case  where  the  alleged  unreasonable
         behaviour involves  a  sudden  change  of  policy  or  inconsistent
         treatment. It is more natural  and  appropriate  to  describe  such
         conduct as unfair rather than unreasonable. But in my  view  it  is
         only if a reasonable body  could  not  fairly  have  acted  as  the
         defendants have that their conduct  trespasses  into  the  area  of
         conspicuous unfairness amounting to abuse  of  power.  The  court's
         role remains supervisory."


    Finally, at paragraph 69 it was stated that the  ultimate  question  is
    whether the decision under scrutiny is so unfair and/or unreasonable as
    to amount to abuse of power.

16. In this case, Mr Biggs submits that the decision made by the respondent
    not to revisit the applicant's status was unfair  and  unreasonable  to
    such an extent as to amount to an  abuse  of  power.  The  respondent's
    failure to explain to the applicant that the notice  sent  in  February
    was not validly served, so that the applicant still had leave to remain
    until September, meant that it was very difficult or indeed  impossible
    for the applicant to obtain a Tier 4 sponsor before his leave  expired.
    The reason for that has been explained by Mr Biggs by reference to  the
    case of The Crown (London St. Andrew's College) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2014] EWHC 4328 per  Mrs  Justice  McGowan  at
    paragraphs 12 to 13 in which it was emphasised that the Tier 4  sponsor
    must be vigilant to report and if necessary expel students  who  appear
    to have failed to meet the high requirements upon them even if they are
    some way through their period of study.  Given that the  applicant  had
    been told that he was an overstayer, he  could  not  satisfy  paragraph
    245ZX when making any further application  to  remain  because  he  had
    overstayed beyond the 28 days' grace period. Therefore  it  would  have
    been very difficult, if not impossible, for him  to  have  persuaded  a
    Tier 4 sponsor to act for him so as to obtain further leave  to  remain
    and to regularise his position.

17. It is submitted on  behalf  of  the  respondent,  by  Mr  Parker,  that
    firstly, there was nothing immoral or illegal in the position taken  by
    the respondent and, secondly, that no prejudice has been caused to  the
    respondent.  As to the first point, Mr Parker submits that  as  far  as
    the respondent was concerned the applicant had leave  to  remain  until
    the expiry of his original permission, that is 7 September 2015, and he
    could have made any application if he had so wished to  regularise  his
    position.  However, as Mr Biggs has correctly  pointed  out,  initially
    the applicant was waiting for his 60 day letter which he had been  told
    would be sent so that he could then approach a new sponsor.  On 14  May
    2015 he was told that  he  was  already  an  overstayer.  Although  the
    respondent knew that the letter had not been delivered  curtailing  his
    leave, at least by 22 July 2015, it did not  notify  the  applicant  of
    that position until November 2015. The respondent's position, that  the
    applicant continued to have leave  until  September,  in  circumstances
    where the respondent had told the applicant that he did not  have  such
    leave and was an illegal  overstayer,  did  give  rise  to  a  positive
    obligation to notify him of that.  In the absence of  any  notification
    (whether or not there was a  positive  duty  to  notify  him),  it  was
    immoral or illegal to allow the applicant to let time run  out  on  his
    valid leave to  remain  without  knowing  that  that  was  the  correct
    position.

18. Dealing with the second issue, namely whether there had been prejudice,
    the respondent  did  not  give  the  applicant  a  fair  or  reasonable
    opportunity to make a fresh application because it failed to clarify or
    confirm the applicant's status at any time prior to November  2015  and
    failed to serve a notice formally withdrawing  the  curtailment  letter
    together with an explanation of why the original curtailment letter had
    been invalid.  That led to real prejudice suffered  by  the  applicant.
    He should have been given a reasonable  opportunity  to  make  a  fresh
    application for permission to remain using a new Tier 4  sponsor.  That
    opportunity was denied to him because, through no fault of its own, the
    respondent had been unable to serve a valid curtailment notice, and  it
    failed to notify the applicant that that was in fact the position.

19. Therefore, we are satisfied that it was unfair for the  respondent  not
    to correct its error, that is in notifying the applicant that he was an
    overstayer, until after his current leave to remain had expired.   That
    is such as to amount to unfair and/or unreasonable conduct giving  rise
    to an abuse of power.  For that reason, we find  that  the  applicant's
    application for judicial review should succeed  and  the  applicant  is
    entitled to a declaration of unlawfulness.

                                  ~~~~0~~~~
