

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                               JR/15947/2015

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                            21 December 2016


                                  The QUEEN
                           (ON The application OF)
                              S A A AND OTHERS
                                                                  Applicants


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         THE HON. MR JUSTICE COLLINS



                               - - - - - - - -

Ms V Jeewon, a McKenzie friend, appeared on behalf of the Applicants.

Mr J Anderson, Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.









                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


MR justice collins:


1. This is an application for judicial review of a refusal by the  Secretary
    of State to accept the asylum  claim  made  coupled  with  humanitarian
    protection which was raised to challenge the  deportation  order  which
    had been made.


2.   The issue in question relates to the concern that if there  is  removal
    to Nigeria the applicant's young daughter will be subjected  to  female
    genital mutilation (FGM).  There was before the Secretary  of  State  a
    detailed report from Dr C Momoh who is known to the Tribunal and who is
    an expert in relation to a number of issues, including this  one.   She
    produced, as I say, a lengthy report in which she stated  that  because
    in the area of Nigeria in which the applicant's family live and because
    they were part of the Yoruba people there was a general view  that  FGM
    should be applied to all female children.  It  is  made  clear  in  the
    report that there is a very high percentage of FGM in the Yoruba tribe.
     The decision by the Secretary of State rejected the claim  and  in  so
    doing essentially failed properly to deal with what Dr Momoh had  said.
    Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb in granting permission stated:


         "The respondent in her summary grounds accepts that she  was  wrong
         to conclude the report should be given little  weight  because  the
         expert was not a registered doctor, did not contain a statement  of
         truth and was the work of an informed advocate.   Nevertheless,  it
         is argued  the  decision  is  sound  and  in  accordance  with  the
         evidence."


    As I say and as is accepted the decision of the Secretary of State  was
    flawed for the reasons essentially  set  out  in  the  grounds  of  the
    decision by Judge Grubb which I have just cited.


3.   There was an offer to reconsider by the Secretary of State  given  some
    time ago.  That was turned down on the applicant's behalf on the  basis
    that they were not interested in an offer  which  did  not  include  an
    agreement that leave to remain should be granted.  That  as  I  pointed
    out is something which this Tribunal on judicial review  would  not  be
    able to entertain.  It would not be possible to direct  that  leave  be
    given. All that it would be possible  to  do  would  be  to  quash  the
    existing decision, but the importance of going further in this case  is
    that the Secretary of State certified in accordance with Section 94  of
    the 2002 Act and the effect of that certification was that there  would
    be no in-country right of appeal.  Certification can only properly take
    place on the basis that there is  no  reasonable  possibility  that  an
    Immigration Judge could decide in favour of the applicant.


4.   Mr Anderson has submitted that the evidence  before  the  Secretary  of
    State is such that she was clearly entitled to conclude that there  was
    no such  reasonable  prospect.   He  has  drawn  my  attention  to  the
    observations in a statement made by the applicant's  brother  who  says
    that he confirms that native  customs  and  traditions  mean  that  the
    daughter being female and first daughter should be and is  expected  to
    be subjected to FGM and that there would be pressure from the  extended
    family so that that could occur.  Similarly there is a letter from  the
    applicant's sister which effectively makes the same point.  Mr Anderson
    submitted that since the immediate  family  were  clearly  against  the
    practice, the risk of the daughter being subjected to it is  less  than
    real.  Having regard to the general approach in the area of Nigeria  in
    the report of Dr Momoh it is clear that in her view internal relocation
    would not be an answer and that there is indeed a real risk.  It  seems
    to me to be quite impossible for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  decide
    reasonably that there would be no possibility of a contrary decision by
    an Immigration Judge. One must remember that it is not  a  question  of
    FGM taking place, it is a question of there being a real risk  that  it
    would take place, which is the test under the Human Rights Act.


5.   I would only add this. I think that this is  not  a  case  in  which  a
    claim for asylum is the way to deal with it.   This  is  a  case  which
    essentially is on the basis of humanitarian protection because it would
    be a breach of Article 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights
    were the daughter to be subjected to FGM.  The result of this  decision
    will be that the decision of the Secretary of State  is  quashed.   The
    applicant will no doubt  then  make  a  fresh  claim  for  humanitarian
    protection and produce  all  up-to-date  evidence  that  he  wishes  to
    produce if any in addition to that which already exists.


6.   I will declare that it is not open to the Secretary  of  State  if  she
    decides against the application that is made to rely on  certification.
    The applicant must if there is a contrary decision be  granted  an  in-
    country right of appeal.




