
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                JR/2203/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                           1st December 2016

             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                      THE QUEEN (ON THE APPLICATION OF)
                                     MA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr T. Bahja, Counsel, instructed by OTS Solicitors appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mr R. Harland, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                   JUDGMENT

                   (TO BE HANDED DOWN on 12th April 2017)

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
    UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS:

Introduction

 1. This is an application for judicial review of the decisions made by the
    Secretary of State ("the Respondent") on  21st  January  2016  and  the
    decision of the 26th February 2016; the application having been  lodged
    on 26th February 2016 and permission having  been  granted  at  a  oral
    permission hearing by order of Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on  the  2nd
    August 2016.  At that hearing  permission  was  granted  to  amend  the
    grounds to include a challenge to the decision  of  the  26th  February
    2016.

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269 as amended) I make an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the
    Upper  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  no  report  of   these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify the applicant or  her
    family members. For the avoidance of doubts, this order also applies to
    both the applicant and to the Respondent. The failure  to  comply  with
    this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Background

 2. The applicant is a national of Somalia born on the 1st  December  1991.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom via Heathrow  on  the  19th  December
    2015 and claimed asylum. Upon arrival she claimed not to know anyone in
    the UK.  She underwent an asylum interview relating to the substance of
    her claim and at that time made reference to a sister living in the UK.
     A Eurodac check revealed that she had been fingerprinted in Germany on
    the 2nd November 2015.  On  the  18th  January  2016  Germany  accepted
    responsibility for the claim under Regulation 604/2013 ("the Dublin III
    Regulation").

 3. On the 21st January 2016, the Secretary of State  declined  to  examine
    the applicant's asylum claim substantively in the light of  the  German
    authorities having accepted responsibility for the  claim  and  Germany
    being a safe third country. Thus a decision was made to refuse  and  to
    certify her case. In accordance with schedule 3, part 2, paragraph 5(3)
    of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc)  Act
    2004("the  2004  Act"),  if  the  Respondent  proposes  to  remove  the
    applicant to a safe third country (and she is not a  national  of  that
    country) she cannot bring an appeal in her asylum claim.

 4. On the 22nd February 2016 a pre-action protocol letter was received  by
    the Home Office seeking to challenge the  lawfulness  of  the  decision
    made on the 21st January 2016 under Article 17 of the Dublin Regulation
    and gave details of her relatives in  the  UK,  including  her  sister,
    aunts and cousins with accompanying witness statements.

 5. On the 23rd February 2016 removal directions were set for  her  removal
    to Germany.

 6. On  the  26th  February  2016  the  applicant  lodged  proceedings  for
    permission to apply for judicial review of the  decision  of  the  21st
    January 2016 on the grounds that the Secretary of State was  in  breach
    of Article 17(2) of the Dublin Regulation.

 7. On the same day, the 26th February 2016 the Secretary of State  refused
    the applicant's representations and a decision was made  on  Article  8
    grounds, and also under the Dublin Regulation.  The  decision  was  not
    certified and thus the applicant had an in-country right of appeal. The
    removal directions were duly cancelled  and  the  applicant  lodged  an
    appeal against the decision of the 26th February 2016.

 8. On 20th April 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley refused permission on
    the papers but upon oral renewal, Upper Tribunal Judge  Kebede  granted
    permission to apply for judicial review  as follows:-

         "1. The Applicant seeks to challenge the Respondent's  decision  of
             21st January 2016 certifying her asylum application  on  third
             country grounds under paragraphs 4 and 5 of Part 2 of Schedule
             3 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants)  Act
             2004.


         2. Permission is granted to the Applicant to amend her  grounds  to
             include a challenge  of  the  Respondent's  decision  of  26th
             February 2016 refusing an Article 8 claim.


         3.   It is arguable, given the Respondent's arguable concession  at
             paragraphs 16 to 19 of the decision  of  26th  February  2016,
             that limiting the Applicant's grounds of appeal to Article  to
             article 8 grounds, is contrary to the provisions of the Dublin
             III Regulation and that the Applicant is arguably entitled  to
             challenge the transfer decision of 21st January 2016  on  that
             basis".

 9. The decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede then set out  a  number  of
    Case Management directions.  Those Case Management directions  included
    a requirement for the Respondent to lodge and  serve  detailed  grounds
    within 35 days of the date of the order and an extension  of  time  was
    sought and was granted. As can be seen from  the  decision  of  the  UT
    Judge, the Secretary of State had not been represented at that  hearing
    and thus was not aware of the amended grounds that had been referred to
    in the oral renewal grounds.

10. On the 23rd November 2016 the Respondent served a supplementary  letter
    on the applicant.

The Parties' Respective Submissions:

11. Both  parties  have  provided  skeleton  arguments  setting  out  their
    submissions on the  relevant  issues  and  supplemented  their  written
    arguments with oral submissions.  It is not necessary  to  set  out  in
    detail all of those submissions but the relevant points  made  by  each
    party in advancing their respective submissions. I shall deal in detail
    with  those  submissions  when  considering  the  relevant  issues   as
    identified by the parties.

12. Mr Bahja's submissions can be summarised as follows:-

        i)   The Appellant is entitled to  challenge  a  transfer  decision
           under Article 27 (alongside Recital 19) by alleging a breach  of
           Article 17 which is justiciable.

       ii) He relies on the CJEU decisions of Ghezelbash and Karim and that
           those decisions are not confined to Chapter III  but  extend  to
           discretionary criteria in Chapter IV.

      iii) He places reliance on the decisions made by other Member  States
           relating to justiciability.

       iv) He places significant weight and  reliance  upon  the  dicta  of
           Beatson LJ in the decision of ZAT.

        v)   Therefore he submits the discretionary clause of Article 17 is
           subject to judicial  review  when  considering  an  exercise  of
           discretion on humanitarian and compassionate  grounds  to  bring
           together family reunification.

13. Mr Harland on behalf of the Secretary of State takes the opposite  view
    that Article 17 is not justiciable either on its own or when read  with
    Article 27 and Recital 19. Thus he submits:-

        i)   The cases in respect to Dublin II are still applicable and the
           exercise  of  discretion  set  out  in  Article  17(2)  is   not
           justiciable because it confers discretion on a state to act in a
           certain way rather than bestowing a right upon individuals.

       ii) The CJEU decisions only go so far as finding that under  Article
           27 an asylum seeker can challenge the incorrect  application  of
           one of the criteria for determining responsibility laid down  by
           Chapter III of the Regulations (and following Karim the  way  in
           which the criteria are assessed  under  Article  19).   Thus  he
           submits it does not extend to a  challenge  to  a  discretionary
           clause in Chapter IV.

      iii) The decisions of other Member States are of limited value.

       iv) The decision of ZAT was not a case  concerning  Dublin  III  and
           that the comments of Beatson LJ are obiter dicta and they should
           not be followed.

14. Each party sought to raise other grounds but I have distilled the  main
    arguments relied upon by each of the advocates as set out above.

The Dublin Regulation:

15. The European Union Regulation 604/2013, commonly known as  Dublin  III,
    establishes the criteria and  mechanisms  for  determining  the  Member
    State  responsible  for  examining  an  application  for  international
    protection lodged in one  of  the  Member  States  by  a  third-country
    national or a stateless person. Dublin III replaced Dublin II. It  sets
    out a hierarchy of criteria  for  determining  which  member  state  is
    responsible for determining an asylum claim and sets out procedures for
    that to take place.


16. The stated aim of the Dublin III regulation is  to  provide  a  process
    based on:-

           "objective, fair criteria both for the Member States and for the
           persons concerned. It should, in particular, make it possible to
           determine  rapidly  the  Member  State  responsible,  so  as  to
           guarantee  effective  access  to  the  procedures  for  granting
           international protection and not to compromise the objective  of
           the  rapid  processing   of   applications   for   international
           protection" (see recital 3 of the preamble to the Regulation).

17. The structure of the Regulation  is  relevant  to  this  claim.  It  is
    divided into chapters. Chapter II (Articles  3-6)  is  called  "general
    principles and safeguards", and sets out how the Regulation is to  work
    (see in particular Article 3(1): "the application shall be examined  by
    a single Member State, which shall be the one which  the  criteria  set
    out in Chapter III indicate is responsible").  It  also  sets  out  the
    minimum procedural requirements  that  member  states  must  afford  to
    asylum applicants (essentially, the  provision  of  information  and  a
    personal interview; guarantees for minors).

18. Chapter III (Articles 7-15) is called  "criteria  for  determining  the
    member states responsible" and sets out the  different  criteria  which
    determine the responsible member state,  and  the  hierarchy  of  those
    criteria (so that one can determine  which  member  state  is  in  fact
    responsible if the different criteria identify  two  or  more  possible
    candidates).

19.  Chapter  IV  (Articles  16-17)   concerns   "dependent   persons   and
    discretionary clauses", of which Article 16 is concerned with dependent
    persons and Article 17 headed 'Discretionary Clause'. It says in terms:

                                 Article 17

                            Discretionary clauses

           1. By way of derogation from Article 3(1), each Member State may
                decide  to  examine   an   application   for   international
                protection lodged with it by a third-country national  or  a
                stateless person,  even  if  such  examination  is  not  its
                responsibility  under  the  criteria  laid  down   in   this
                Regulation.

               The Member State which decides to examine an application for
                international protection pursuant to  this  paragraph  shall
                become the Member State responsible  and  shall  assume  the
                obligations associated with that responsibility...

           2. The Member State in which an  application  for  international
                protection is made and which is carrying out the process  of
                determining the Member  State  responsible,  or  the  Member
                State responsible, may, at any time before a first  decision
                regarding the substance is  taken,  request  another  Member
                State to take charge of  an  applicant  in  order  to  bring
                together any family relations, on humanitarian grounds based
                in particular on family  or  cultural  considerations,  even
                where that other Member State is not responsible  under  the
                criteria laid down in Articles 8 to 11 and 16.  The  persons
                concerned must express their consent in writing...

20. Chapter V is headed "obligations of the member state  responsible"  and
    sets out (i) what a responsible member state must  do  once  identified
    (Article 18) and (ii) how a member state's responsibility can end,  and
    what is to happen in those circumstances ("an application lodged  after
    an effective removal has  taken  place  shall  be  regarded  as  a  new
    application giving rise to a new procedure for determining  the  Member
    State responsible" (Article 19(3)).

21. Chapter VI (Articles 20-33) sets out the procedures for  taking  charge
    of and taking back asylum  applicants.  Relevant  for  the  Applicant's
    purposes is Article 27:



                                 Article 27
                                  Remedies

           The applicant or  another  person  as  referred  to  in  Article
           18(1)(c) or (d) shall have the right to an effective remedy,  in
           the form of an appeal or a review, in fact and in law, against a
           transfer decision, before a court or tribunal.

 1. The provisions of Dublin III are given effect in the  UK  by  the  2004
    Act. Part 2 of Schedule 3 to  that  Act  applies  to  a  list  of  safe
    countries which includes Germany. Paragraph 3 provides:

         "(1) This paragraph applies for the purposes of  the  determination
                by any person, tribunal or court whether a  person  who  has
                made or a human rights claim may be removed -

                (a) from the United Kingdom, and

                (b) to a state of which he is not a national or citizen.

         (2)  A State to which this part applies shall be treated, in so far
                as relevant to the question mentioned in sub-paragraph  (1),
                as a place -

                (a) where a person's life and liberty are not threatened  by
                    reason of his race, religion, nationality, membership of
                    a particular social group or political opinion,

                (b) from which a person will not be sent to another State in
                    contravention of his convention rights, and

                (c) from which a person will not be sent  to  another  State
                    otherwise  than   in   accordance   with   the   refugee
                    convention."

 1. Paragraph 4 disapplies s.77 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 and thus enables a person who has made a claim for  asylum  to
    be removed from the United Kingdom and to a state to which  Part  2  of
    Schedule 3 to the 2004 Act applies  "provided  that  the  Secretary  of
    State certifies that in his opinion the person is  not  a  national  or
    citizen of the State".

 1. Paragraph 5 contains important certification provisions:

         "(1) This paragraph applies where the Secretary of State  certifies
             that-

             (a) it is proposed to remove a person to a State to which this
                  Part applies, and

             (b) in the Secretary of State's opinion the person  is  not  a
                  national citizen of the State.

         (3) The person may not bring an immigration appeal from within  the
             United Kingdom in reliance on -

             (a) an asylum claim which asserts that to remove the person to
                  a specified State to which this Part applies would  breach
                  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations  under   the   Refugee
                  Convention...

         (4) The person may not  bring  an  immigration  appeal  within  the
             United Kingdom in reliance on a human rights  claim  to  which
             this sub-paragraph applies if the Secretary of State certifies
             that the claim is clearly  unfounded;  and  the  Secretary  of
             State shall certify a human rights claim to  which  this  sub-
             paragraph applies  unless  satisfied  that  the  claim  is  no
             clearly unfounded.

The issues:

 2. The first issue is whether Article 17 is justiciable.  As his  starting
    point, Mr Bahja submits that a Regulation that is said to  be  directly
    applicable is necessarily justiciable (relying on the wording of Dublin
    III inserted after Article 49 which provides as follows:-

         "The Regulation shall be  binding  in  its  entirety  as  "directly
         applicable in the Member States in accordance with the Treaties."


 3. Mr Harland, on behalf of the Respondent, disagrees with  that  approach
    and cites a number of cases which concern its predecessor the Dublin II
    Regulations which have considered this issue.   I  observe  that  being
    directly applicable does not mean directly effective rights  have  been
    conferred on an individual which can be exercised in a domestic  court.
    In this context, Dublin III's predecessor also had a similar  provision
    and also stated it was directly applicable in the same  terms  but  was
    not justiciable.

 4. In my judgment, the Dublin II case law that has  been  the  subject  of
    argument before me, when broadly analysed, demonstrates that even where
    the Regulation is said to be directly applicable, one  still  needs  to
    consider  whether  the  intention  of  the  provision  is  to  regulate
    relations between the States rather than confer rights on  individuals.
    Thus provisions which are intended to regulate relations between Member
    States and between Member States of  the  European  Union  may  not  be
    intended to confer directly effective rights  on  individuals  and  may
    not, therefore, have direct effect.
Case law relevant to Dublin II:


 5. There are two cases relied upon  by  Mr  Harland  to  demonstrate  that
    discretionary clauses under Dublin II are not justiciable.  Those cases
    are Jeyarupan v SSHD [2014] EWHC  and  the  Court  of  Justice  of  the
    European Union ("CJEU".  Federal Republic of Germany v Puid  [2014]  QB
    346 (Case C-4/11).  Those cases were concerned  with  Article  3(2)  of
    Dublin II and whether it was justiciable.

 6. Article 3(2) of Dublin II reads as follows:-
         "By way of derogation from  paragraph  1,  each  Member  State  may
         examine an application for asylum lodged with it by a third country
         national, even if such examination is not its responsibility  under
         the criteria laid down in this Regulation.  In such an event,  that
         Member State shall become the Member State responsible  within  the
         meaning  of  this  Regulation  and  shall  assume  the  obligations
         associated with that responsibility.  Where appropriate,  it  shall
         inform the Member State previously responsible,  the  Member  State
         conducting a procedure for determining the Member State responsible
         or the Member State which has been requested to take charge  of  or
         take back the applicant."

The Decision in Puid


 7. The facts of the case can be briefly summarised.  The applicant  was  a
    national of Iran who travelled to Greece and then to Germany where  the
    application for asylum was refused and, in accordance with the criteria
    specified in Dublin II  Greece  was  identified  as  the  Member  State
    responsible for  examining  his  asylum  claim  and  his  transfer  was
    ordered.  This was annulled by a German court on the basis that Germany
    was required to exercise the assumption of responsibility enshrined  in
    Article 3(2) in light of the relevant conditions in Greece.  On  appeal
    a reference was made to the CJEU (see paragraph 24).

 8. The CJEU reiterated its ruling in NS v SSHD  C-411/10  that  Dublin  II
    provides a hierarchy  of  criteria  in  determining  the  Member  State
    responsible for examining an asylum claim.   If  it  is  impossible  to
    transfer the asylum seeker to the  Member  State  initially  identified
    under the criteria, the Member  State  in  which  it  is  located  must
    continue to examine the criteria in order to establish whether  another
    Member State can be identified.  It is only if no Member State could be
    identified to which the asylum seeker can be  transferred,  because  of
    the real risk of inhuman or degrading treatment contrary to  Article  4
    of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European  Union,  that  the
    Member State in which the asylum seeker is located may need to  examine
    the asylum claim itself using its  discretion  under  Article  3(2)  in
    order to avoid the procedure taking an  unreasonable  length  of  time.
    The failure at the initial stage to identify another  Member  State  to
    which the asylum seeker can be transferred does not itself require  the
    first Member State to invoke Article 3(2).

 9. The CJEU concluded at paragraphs [57]-[58] as follows:-
         "The fact that .. Article 3(2) of  Regulation  No.  343/2003  is  a
         discretionary measure, points  away  from  an  interpretation  that
         would vest asylum seekers with any individual  rights  relating  to
         the application of that provision.  As the court  has  consistently
         held, while Regulations generally  have  immediate  effect  in  the
         national legal systems  of  the  Member  States  without  it  being
         necessary  for  the  national  authorities  to  adopt  measures  of
         application, or with it being necessary for the EU  Legislature  to
         adopt supplementary  legislation,  some  of  the  provisions  of  a
         Regulation may, however, necessitate, for their implementation, the
         adoption of measures of application either by the Member States  or
         by the EU Legislature itself  ...   Further  measures  are  plainly
         required when a Member State is vested with discretion.  Therefore,
         under normal circumstances asylum seekers cannot derive  any  right
         from the provisions of Regulation 343/2003 to the effect that  they
         could require a Member State other  than  the  one  responsible  in
         accordance therewith to examine their application for  asylum.   As
         pointed out in the written observations of the  Commission,  for  a
         provision of EU law  to  produce  direct  effects  in  relation  to
         between individuals and Member  States,  there  must  a  clear  and
         unconditional obligation imposed on Member States, the execution or
         effects of which are not subject to intervention by an Act  of  the
         Member States or the Commission.  Article 3(2)  of  Regulation  No.
         343/2003 does not correspond to these criteria."


10. In the decision of Jeyarupan v SSHD [2014] EWHC  386,  the  High  Court
    considered the issue of justiciability of the  exercise  of  discretion
    under Article 3(2) and whilst a  review  of  the  authorities  was  not
    undertaken, the court cited at [27] the Court of Appeal's  decision  in
    Habte v SSHD [2013] EWHC 3295:-
         "Provisions which are intended to regulate relations between Member
         States (or between Member States and European institutions) may not
         be intended to confer directly effective rights on individuals  and
         may not, therefore, have direct effect.  The Court Appeal has  held
         the provisions of the Dublin II Regulation, including  Article  16,
         are concerned with the  allocation  of  responsibility  as  between
         Member States and are not intended [to] and do not create  directly
         effective rights for individual asylum seekers."


11. Mr Bahja argues that the decision of the Northern Irish  Court  in  ALJ
    and A, B and C's application for JR [2013] NIQB 88 took a contrary view
    as to the scope of Article 3(2).  In that  decision  Stephens  J  dealt
    with two issues; whether there were systemic deficiencies in  Ireland's
    asylum system and whether the UKBA  in  Northern  Ireland  should  have
    exercised  discretion  to  assume  responsibility  for  assessing   the
    applicant's asylum claim under Article 3(2).  The  court  rejected  the
    first challenge but quashed UKBA's decision and its failure to consider
    and exercise a discretion under Article 3(2) to  assume  responsibility
    for assessing the claim for asylum.

12. The brief facts of the case are as follows.  ALJ aged 37 and her  three
    children (A, B and C aged 18, 16 and  12)who  were  Sudanese  nationals
    arrived in Ireland in May 2010 and sought asylum.  In July 2011 she and
    her children travelled to Northern Ireland and sought asylum.  After  a
    fingerprint search was undertaken, it was found that  ALJ  had  claimed
    asylum in Ireland and a request was made by the UK Government  for  ALJ
    and her children to be taken back to Ireland. Ireland  agreed  to  take
    them back and their claims were certified on third country  grounds  in
    October 2011.  Judicial proceedings  were  instituted  challenging  the
    Secretary of State's decision to certify their claims for protection on
    third country grounds based on the existence of  systemic  deficiencies
    in the Ireland's  asylum  system  and  also  the  failure  to  exercise
    discretion under Article 3(2).  Stephens J  at  paragraphs  [110]-[111]
    held:-
         "[110]   I reject all the applicant's grounds  of  challenge  which
               rely on the contention that there is a systemic  deficiency,
               known  to  the  United  Kingdom,  in  Ireland's  asylum   or
               reception procedures amounting to  substantial  grounds  for
               believing that the asylum seeker would face a real  risk  of
               being subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment (Article 4
               of the Charter) on return to Ireland.

         [111]    I quashed the removal decision and  the  decision  not  to
               assume  responsibility  under  Article  3(2)  of  Dublin  II
               Regulation on the basis of a failure to have regard  to  the
               need to safeguard and promote the welfare of the children A,
               B  and  C  as  required  by  Section  55  of  the   Borders,
               Immigration and Citizenship Act 2009."


13. Thus Mr Bahja argues that this is a case that demonstrates  an  example
    of a failure to exercise discretion under Article 3(2) s justiciable on
    rationality grounds.

14. However, as Mr Harland submits  the  more  recent  case  of  R  on  the
    application of CK (Afghanistan) and Others v SSHD [2016] EWCA  Civ  166
    carried out an extensive  consideration  of  all  the  authorities  and
    reached a contrary view.

15. The brief facts of that case involved  CK,  a  vulnerable  Afghan  Sikh
    mother who had been the victim of rape in Afghanistan who had a 3  year
    old child.   They  left  Afghanistan  travelling  to  France  and  were
    fingerprinted there.  However the  father  had  an  adult  brother  and
    sister in London and the father entered the UK on a false passport  and
    claimed asylum, he was then joined by his  wife  who  became  pregnant.
    They claimed that they required the help  of  their  relatives  in  the
    United Kingdom on whom they were dependent.  The applicants  relied  on
    Article 3 and Article 15 of Dublin II.  They also relied on  Article  8
    of the European Convention on Human Rights and on  Section  55  of  the
    2009 Act.  The applications were refused by the Secretary of State.

16. As regards Article 3(2) of Dublin 2, the Secretary of State  considered
    that there were no "exceptional circumstances" to justify and  exercise
    discretion in their favour and also  that  Article  15  did  not  arise
    because it only fell for consideration upon a request being made by the
    State that would otherwise  be  responsible.   When  dealing  with  the
    Article 8 consideration, the Secretary of State observed that the first
    and second Appellants had only been in the UK since September 2012  and
    thus it was not accepted that  they  had  established  any  significant
    private life in the UK.  The Secretary of  State  certified  the  human
    rights claim was clearly unfounded with the consequence they could  not
    appeal against the decision whilst they remained in the United Kingdom.

17. The High Court  concluded  that  the  decisions  under  the  Dublin  II
    Regulation were not justiciable  save  where  the  enforcement  of  the
    decision would lead to inhuman or degrading  treatment  which  had  not
    been raised on the facts of this particular case.   However  the  court
    went on to state that if they were wrong  in  taking  that  view,  when
    considering the merits of the case whilst it was accepted the Secretary
    of State had made a legal error in concluding that Article 15 of Dublin
    II only fell for consideration upon a request being made by  the  State
    that would otherwise be responsible (applying K v Bundesasylamt  [2013]
    1 WLR 883).  However, the court concluded that even if the Secretary of
    State had proceeded to consider Article 15(2) it  was  inevitable  that
    she would have  declined  to  examine  the  asylum  claim.   The  court
    concluded that had the applicants been entitled  to  bring  a  judicial
    review claim, it would have failed on the merits.

18. On behalf of the applicants, before the Court of Appeal it  was  argued
    that the decision as to whether to apply  the  humanitarian  clause  in
    Article 15(2) was subject to challenge on ordinary public law  grounds.
    The argument was refined further on the basis that a Dublin II decision
    to remit an asylum claim to another  Member  State  is  justiciable  on
    Wednesbury grounds or by reference to Article 8 of the ECHR.

19. The issue of principle identified by the Court of Appeal at [9] was
         "what, if any is the scope for challenge  to  the  removal  of  the
         affected individual to another Member State  following  a  decision
         under Dublin II  that  the  other  State  is  responsible  for  the
         examination of his asylum claim".

    As the Court of Appeal went on to state:-

         "The issue is one of principle because its resolution requires  the
         court  to  find  an  accommodation  between  two  competing   legal
         imperatives:

         (i)  The vindication of Dublin II is a regime for the  distribution
             of  an  Inter-State  level  between  the  Member   States   of
             responsibility for the determination of asylum claims, and

         (ii)The vindication of individual claims of right  which  might  be
             denied by a rigorous enforcement of  the  Inter-State  regime.
             ... the learning, unfortunately, swings between the two."


20. At paragraphs [11] to [16] of the  decision,  Laws  LJ  summarised  the
    cases that had reached the conclusion that a Dublin II  decision  could
    not be challenged by an individual save for on ECHR Article 3  grounds.
    Laws LJ went on to cite passages from AR (Iran) v SSHD [2013] EWCA  Civ
    778 at paragraphs [29] and [31] and the decision of Stadlen J in a case
    called Kheirollihi-Ahmadrogain v SSHD [2013] EWHC Admin  1314  at  [47]
    and  [166].   Lastly  he  quoted  the  CJEU  decision  in  Abdullahi  v
    Bundesasylamt (Case C-394/12).  That was a case in which the applicant,
    having travelled through Greece and Hungary claimed asylum in  Austria.
    The  applicant  was  a  Somali  national.   The  Austrian   authorities
    mistakenly believed that Hungary was the first Member  State  that  she
    had entered and Hungary agreed to take charge of  the  applicant.   She
    claimed that  Greece,  not  Hungary  was  responsible  for  her  asylum
    application but because of Greece's human rights record,  the  Austrian
    authorities should examine her case.  The Austrian  Court  referred  to
    the Court of Justice the  question  whether  an  asylum  claim  it  was
    entitled to seek review of the determination of the responsible  Member
    State on the ground that Chapter III criteria in  Dublin  II  had  been
    misapplied.  The court held as follows:-
         "[57]    Thus, Article 3(2) of [Dublin II] ...  and  Article  15(1)
                ... are designed to maintain the prerogatives of the  Member
                States in  the  exercise  of  the  right  to  grant  asylum,
                irrespective  of  the  Member  State  responsible  for   the
                examination of an application on the basis of  the  criteria
                set out in that Regulation.  These are  optional  provisions
                which grant a wide discretionary power to Member States ...

         [60] The only way in which the applicant for asylum can  call  into
                question the choice of that  criterion  [SC.  under  Article
                10(1)] is by pleading systematic deficiencies in the  asylum
                procedure  and  in  the  conditions  for  the  reception  of
                applicants for asylum in that  latter  Member  State,  which
                provides  substantial  grounds  for   believing   that   the
                applicant for  asylum  would  face  a  real  risk  of  being
                subjected to inhuman or degrading treatment ...".


21.  Having  reviewed  the  authorities,  Laws  LJ  reached  the  following
    conclusion:
         "[16]    It can be seen, then, that there is a consistent  line  of
                authority  demonstrating  that  the  choice  of  responsible
                Member State for the purpose of Dublin II is ascertained and
                regulated at the Inter-State level.  This learning  supports
                the view that Dublin II  confers  no  rights  in  individual
                asylum  seekers  to  challenge  the  decision  as   to   the
                responsible Member State or to require a  particular  Member
                State to examine their asylum application.  But that is  not
                the only line of authority which bears on this appeal."


22. At paragraphs [17] to [23], Laws LJ went on to  consider  the  contrary
    line of authority.  The first case considered  was  K  v  Bundesasylamt
    Case C-245/11 [2013] 1 WLR 883.  That was a case in which the  Austrian
    authorities rejected the applicant's asylum application on  the  ground
    that Poland was a responsible Member State.  On  appeal,  the  Austrian
    Court sought a preliminary ruling on the interpretation  of  Dublin  II
    Article 15, asking:-
         "Whether Article 15 of Dublin II must  be  interpreted  as  meaning
         that, in circumstances such as those in the  main  proceedings,  in
         which the daughter-in-law of the asylum seeker is dependent on  the
         asylum seeker's  assistance  because  that  daughter-in-law  has  a
         newborn baby and suffers  from  serious  illness  and  handicap,  a
         Member State which is not the State responsible for  examining  the
         asylum request according to the criteria laid down in  Chapter  III
         of that Regulation can automatically become the  responsible  State
         on humanitarian grounds.  If the answer to that question is in  the
         affirmative,  the  Austrian  Court  wishes  to  know  whether  that
         interpretation remains valid,  where  the  Member  State  which  is
         responsible in accordance with those  criteria  did  not  make  any
         request pursuant to the second sentence of  Article  15(1)  of  the
         Regulations."


23. The Court of Justice at [38] held that the scope of Article 15 was  not
    limited to the ties between the asylum seeker and "family  members"  as
    defined in Article 2(i) of Dublin II.  The conclusions at [47] and [54]
    were as follows:-
         "[47]    Where the condition stated in Article 15(2) are satisfied,
                the Member State which, on the humanitarian grounds referred
                to in that provision, is obliged to take charge of an asylum
                seeker  becomes  the  Member  State  responsible   for   the
                examination of the application for asylum.

         [54] In the light of all the foregoing considerations,  the  answer
                to the first question is  that,  in  circumstances  such  as
                those in the main  proceedings,  Article  15(2)...  must  be
                interpreted as meaning that a  Member  State  which  is  not
                responsible for examining an application for asylum pursuant
                to the criteria laid  down  in  Chapter  III  of  Dublin  II
                becomes so responsible.  It is for the  Member  State  which
                has become the responsible Member State within  the  meaning
                of that Regulation to assume the obligations which go  along
                with that responsibility. It must inform in that respect the
                Member State previously responsible.  This interpretation of
                Article 15(2) also applies when the Member  state  which  is
                responsible pursuant to the criteria laid  down  in  Chapter
                III ... did not make a request in that regard in  accordance
                with  the  second  sentence  of  Article   15(1)   of   that
                Regulation."


24. Laws LJ went on to consider some observations that he had  made  in  AA
    (Afghanistan) [2006] EWCA Civ 1550 at  [19]  and  the  decision  in  AM
    (Somalia) [2009] EWCA Civ 114 at [20-21].  That was the case  in  which
    the Appellant was a Somalian national who  had  entered  the  UK  after
    claiming asylum in Italy.  He had mental health  difficulties  and  was
    reliant upon his two brothers and sister-in-law who were in the  United
    Kingdom.  The  Italian  authorities  accepted  responsibility  for  the
    examination of his asylum claim and the Secretary of State proposed  to
    remove him to Italy.  The Appellant appealed to the Tribunal  asserting
    a prospective violation of Article 8 of the  ECHR.   The  Secretary  of
    State issued a certificate that the objection to removal to  Italy  was
    manifestly unfounded so that he  would  have  no  in-country  right  of
    appeal.  The applicant thus sought judicial review of that certificate.
     The court considered the merits of the Article 8 case.  However  given
    that the challenge was to the validity of the certificate the  question
    for the court was not whether in  all  the  circumstances  removal  was
    nevertheless proportionate it was whether the Secretary of State  could
    properly decide that the contrary  argument  was  bound  to  fail  (per
    Sedley LJ at paragraph [20]).  Sedley LJ continued:-
         [22] The Dublin system  has  nothing  to  do  with  the  merits  of
                individual cases: it is designed  simply  to  prevent  forum
                shopping while ensuring that every asylum claim is  properly
                processed.  By itself it does not  address  the  problem  of
                removals which  may  violate  Convention  rights.   That  is
                catered for by the separate obligation of the Home Secretary
                not to act inconsistently with such rights.

         [23]  Thus  the  question  in  the  present  case  is  whether   an
                independent  adjudication  could  find  substance   in   the
                contention that had followed the Dublin  procedure  in  this
                Appellant's case will be disproportionate.  In  my  judgment
                it undoubtedly could.

         [25] .. (i)(f) as is distinctly possible ... he is given asylum  in
                Italy, all that will lie ahead there is a life of  isolation
                and probable relapse.  In other words, this  is  a  case  in
                which, on appeal, an Immigration Judge might well hold  that
                the  lawful  purpose  of  the  Dublin  Regulation  was   not
                sufficient to justify the damaging effect on this  Appellant
                of disrupting what is now his private  and  family  life  by
                compelling him to present his asylum claim in  Italy  rather
                than here."


25. Jacob Lloyd LJ agreed, and the certificate was quashed.

26. Lloyd LJ then went on to consider the decision of the Upper Tribunal in
    ZAT and Others v SSHD [2016]  UKUT  0061.   This  case  involved  seven
    applicants, all were Syrian nationals;  the  first  four,  having  fled
    Syria got as far as Calais and desired to join the last three  who  had
    been granted asylum  in  the  UK.   All  seven  were  related  and  had
    previously enjoyed family life in Syria, thus sought family reunion  in
    the UK.   In  that  decision,  the  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    McCloskey J observed that it was
         "common ground among the parties ... that all  the  applicants  are
         entitled, in principle to invoke Article 8  ...;  and  the  central
         question to be determined  is  whether  the  Secretary  of  State's
         refusal is a proportionate means of achieving  the  legitimate  aim
         (of effective and orderly immigration control)".

    As the Court of Appeal noted this  was  a  case  that  proceeded  under
    Dublin III which entered into force as the successor to  Dublin  II  on
    the 1st January 2014.  That included  Article  27  which  conferred  an
    expressed right of an appeal or review in fact and in law  against  the
    transfer decision before a court or Tribunal.

50.   In  that  decision,  the  President  addressed  the   terms   of   the
    relationship between the two regimes of the Dublin Regulation  and  the
    ECHR.  Whilst the decision was  concerned  with  Dublin  III,  Laws  LJ
    considered that it had value when considering the issues in the present
    appeal.  He quoted paragraphs 50 to 52 of ZAT (as cited) as follows:-

         "[50]    It is not suggested,  correctly  and  in  our  view,  that
                either of these regimes has any  inherent  value  or  status
                giving one precedence over  the  other.   They  are  not  in
                competition with each other.  However,  as  this  litigation
                demonstrates,  they   may   sometimes   tug   in   different
                directions.    Where   this   occurs   full   cohesion,   or
                harmonisation,  is  unlikely  to  be  achievable  and   some
                accommodation, or compromise, must be found.

         [51] ... the question to be determined in (a) a case of  this  kind
                is whether a disproportionate interference with the  Article
                8 rights of a person claiming to  be  a  victim  within  the
                compass of Section  7  of  the  Human  Rights  Act  1998  is
                demonstrated.

         [52] What is the correct approach of the  Dublin  Regulation  in  a
                case of this kind?  We consider that the Dublin  Regulation,
                with its rational and overarching aims and principles, has a
                status of a material consideration of undeniable potency  in
                the proportionality balancing  exercise.   It  follows  that
                vindication of an Article  8  human  rights  challenge  will
                require a strong and persuasive case on its merits.   Judges
                will not likely find that, in a  given  context,  Article  8
                operates in a manner  which  permits  circumvention  of  the
                Dublin Regulations, procedures and  mechanisms,  whether  in
                whole or in part.  We consider that such cases are likely to
                be rare."

    51. Laws LJ quoted from the President's observation that the Dublin and
    ECHR regimes "may sometimes  tug  in  different  directions"  which  he
    considered was in line with his reference in paragraph [9] to the  need
    to find an accommodation between the two competing legal imperatives.

52.  The conclusions on that issue of principle were set out  at  paragraphs
    [24] to [32].  Laws LJ concluded as follows:-

         "[25]     ...  however  the  difficulty  in  this  case,  and   the
                explanation of the apparent tension between the two lines of
                authority I have discussed (on the Inter-State regime and on
                individual claims of  right),  arises  from  a  non-sequitur
                which needs to be exposed: the proposition  that  Dublin  II
                confers no right on the affected individual to  challenge  a
                decision as to which Member State  is  responsible  for  the
                determination of  his  asylum  claim  does  not  entail  the
                further proposition that the decision to remove him  to  the
                responsible State may not be challenged from  grounds  other
                than that of Dublin II.

         [26]  The  cases  on  the  Inter-State  regime  vouched  the  first
                proposition, not the second.  Thus in G at paragraph 25:

                    "The  effect  of  Article  15  is  not   to   confer   a
                    freestanding    substantive    right    on    individual
                    applicants".

                In KA at paragraph 166:

                  "alleged breaches of those provisions are  not  actionable
                  at the suit of an individual".

                In Abdullahi v Bundasasylamt at paragraph 60:

                    "The only way in which the applicant for asylum can call
                    into question the choice of that  criterion  [SC.  under
                    Article 10(1)] is by pleading systemic  deficiencies  in
                    asylum procedure ...".

                These formulations deny the conformant or individual  rights
                by Dublin II.  I have considered whether K  v  Bundasasylamt
                is to contrary effect, and allows for  a  challenge  by  the
                affected individual to the Dublin  II  decision  as  to  the
                responsible State,  on  the  footing  that  the  proceedings
                giving rise to the preliminary ruling in that case  were  by
                way of an appeal  of  the  applicant  against  the  Austrian
                authorities' refusal of her asylum application on the ground
                that Poland was the responsible Member State; and the  Court
                of Justice did not conclude that the questions asked of them
                did  not  arise  because  of  the  issue  raised   was   not
                justiciable.

         [27] But this, I think, will be to misread K v Bundasasylamt.   The
                fact that an asylum seeker's daughter-in-law  was  dependent
                on the asylum seeker's assistance was given - a premise - of
                the first question asked of the court (which I have cited at
                paragraph 17), not an issue which fell  for  decision.   The
                Court of Justice then had to decide  whether  the  referring
                Member  State  (Austria)  "can  automatically   become   the
                responsible State on humanitarian grounds".  The  issue  was
                as to the interpretation  of  Article  15(2).   The  court's
                judgment opens no  door  to  the  possibility  of  a  merits
                challenge to the Dublin II determination.  In the course  of
                argument My Lord Davis  LJ  posed  the  question,  what  the
                position will be if the Dublin II decision maker  reached  a
                wholly unsustainable conclusion that Article  15(2)  had  no
                application from the facts it plainly did.  This is not,  of
                course, the K v Bundasasylamt case; but  where  it  arise  I
                think the court  will  consider  it  through  the  prism  of
                Article ECHR Article 8, to whose viability in the Dublin  II
                context I now turn."

         [28] The cases  on  the  Inter-State  regime  are  in  my  judgment
                perfectly consistent with the enjoyment of a  right  in  the
                hands of the affected individual to challenge his removal to
                the responsible State on grounds having nothing to  do  with
                Dublin II - notably Article 8; and the cases  on  individual
                claims that show in principle such challenge may be brought.

         [29] The distinction between a challenge to the Dublin II  decision
                itself, which is not justiciable, and  an  Article  8  claim
                directed to the affected person's removal, which is, has not
                been altogether lost in the cases though it has  not  always
                been spelt out ..."


  53. Laws LJ made reference to the right under the  ECHR  to  challenge  a
      removal decision alongside the absence of any right  to  challenge  a
      Dublin II determination as a responsible State.  He found this to  be
      "wholly unsurprising" [see 30].  However he found that the  existence
      of the Dublin II regime had a
         "profound impact on the application of Article 8 to  a  case  where
         the claimant is to be removed to another Member State  following  a
         decision that  the  other  Member  State  is  responsible  for  the
         determination of his asylum claim" [see 31].


  54. Laws LJ cited with approval McCloskey J's description of  the  Dublin
      III Regulation as a "material consideration of undeniable potency and
      the proportionality balancing exercise"  in  such  a  situation.   He
      further quoted with approval the following:-
         "Judges will not likely find that, in a given  context,  Article  8
         operates in a manner which  permits  circumvention  of  the  Dublin
         Regulation procedures and mechanisms, whether in whole or in  part.
         We consider that such cases are likely to be rare."





55. Laws LJ went on to state:-
         "I would express the force of the Regulation in stronger terms.  It
         is a legal instrument of major importance for the  distribution  of
         responsibility among the Member States for  the  administration  of
         asylum claims.  If it was seen as establishing little more  than  a
         presumption as to which State would  deal  with  which  claim,  its
         purpose  will  be  critically  undermined.   In  my   judgment   an
         especially compelling  case  under  Article  8  would  have  to  be
         demonstrated to deny removal of the  affected  person  following  a
         Dublin II decision."


56. I therefore conclude from those authorities (although  in  relation  to
    the Dublin II Regulation) that  even  when  a  Regulation  is  directly
    applicable, there is still the need to consider whether  the  intention
    of the provision is to regulate relations between Member States  rather
    than confer individual  rights.   I  have  set  out  in  the  preceding
    paragraphs at some length the decision in CK (cited).  However at  [32]
    Laws LJ recognised that Dublin II had  been  succeeded  by  Dublin  III
    which included a right of appeal or review given by Article 27.  He did
    not therefore consider whether the redrafting of the Regulation and the
    inclusion of a  specific  clause  namely  Article  27  would  make  any
    difference to the issue of principle decided.
Dublin III and Article 27:


57. I therefore now turn to the decision under Dublin III and Article 27.

58. Mr Bahja seeks  to  argue  that  there  is  a  difference  between  the
    provisions of Dublin II and Dublin III  and  that  Dublin  III  is  not
    limited to the regulatory duties and obligations of the Member State.

59. Mr Harland for the Secretary of State argues that Article 17  does  not
    create individual rights.  The Dublin III Regulations, he argues,  were
    not intended to confer legal rights in the way Dublin II did  not.   He
    further submits that even if the transfer could be challenged, there is
    nothing to suggest that there was any intention that the discretion set
    out in Article 17 should confer any individual rights.

60. The extent of  any  change  in  the  law  under  Dublin  III  has  been
    considered by the CJEU in  two  relevant  cases  and  by  the  domestic
    courts; none of  those  cases  however  have  dealt  with  Article  17.
    However those decisions  do  demonstrate  that  certain  provisions  of
    Dublin III are capable of direct effect so as to permit  an  individual
    to invoke them against the  State  and  thus  give  individual  rights.
    Article 27 is identified as one of them

61. Article 27 reads as follows:
    Article 27
    Remedies
    1.   The applicant or another person as referred to in Article 18(1)(c)
         or (d) shall have the right to an effective remedy, in the form  of
         an appeal or a review, in fact  and  in  law,  against  a  transfer
         decision, before a court or tribunal.
    2.   Member States shall provide for a reasonable period of time within
         which the person concerned may exercise his  or  her  right  to  an
         effective remedy pursuant  to  paragraph  1.EN  29.6.2013  Official
         Journal of the European Union L 180/45 ( 1 ) OJ L 348,  24.12.2008,
         p. 98.
    3.   For the purposes of  appeals  against,  or  reviews  of,  transfer
         decisions, Member States shall provide in their national law that:
         (a) the appeal or review confers  upon  the  person  concerned  the
             right to remain in the  Member  State  concerned  pending  the
             outcome of the appeal or review; or
         (b) the transfer is automatically  suspended  and  such  suspension
             lapses after a certain reasonable period of time, during which
             a court or a tribunal, after a close  and  rigorous  scrutiny,
             shall have taken a decision whether to grant suspensive effect
             to an appeal or review; or
         (c) the person concerned has the opportunity to  request  within  a
             reasonable period of time a court or tribunal to  suspend  the
             implementation of the transfer decision pending the outcome of
             his or her appeal or review. Member States shall  ensure  that
             an effective remedy is in place  by  suspending  the  transfer
             until the decision on the first suspension request  is  taken.
             Any decision on whether to suspend the implementation  of  the
             transfer decision shall be taken within a reasonable period of
             time, while permitting a close and rigorous  scrutiny  of  the
             suspension  request.   A   decision   not   to   suspend   the
             implementation  of  the  transfer  decision  shall  state  the
             reasons on which it is based.
    4.   Member States may  provide  that  the  competent  authorities  may
         decide, acting ex officio, to suspend  the  implementation  of  the
         transfer decision pending the outcome of the appeal or review.
    5.   Member States shall ensure that the person concerned has access to
         legal assistance and, where necessary, to linguistic assistance.
    6.   Member States shall ensure that legal  assistance  is  granted  on
         request free of charge where the person concerned cannot afford the
         costs involved. Member States may provide that, as regards fees and
         other  costs,  the  treatment  of  applicants  shall  not  be  more
         favourable than the treatment generally accorded to their nationals
         in matters pertaining to legal assistance.
         Without arbitrarily restricting access to legal assistance,  Member
         States may provide that free legal  assistance  and  representation
         not be granted where the appeal or  review  is  considered  by  the
         competent authority or a court or  tribunal  to  have  no  tangible
         prospect of success.
         Where  a  decision  not  to  grant  free   legal   assistance   and
         representation pursuant to this paragraph is taken by an  authority
         other than a court or tribunal, Member  States  shall  provide  the
         right to  an  effective  remedy  before  a  court  or  tribunal  to
         challenge that decision.
         In complying with the  requirements  set  out  in  this  paragraph,
         Member States shall ensure that legal assistance and representation
         is not arbitrarily restricted and that  the  applicant's  effective
         access to justice is not hindered.
         Legal assistance shall include at  least  the  preparation  of  the
         required procedural documents and representation before a court  or
         tribunal and may be restricted to  legal  advisors  or  counsellors
         specifically designated by national law to provide  assistance  and
         representation.
         Procedures for access to legal assistance shall  be  laid  down  in
         national law.
Recitals 16, 17 and 19 of Dublin III provides:


16.  Any Member State should be able to derogate from the responsibility
criteria, in particular on humanitarian and compassionate grounds, in order
to bring together family members, relatives or any other family relations
and examine an application for international protection lodged with it or
with another Member State, even if such examination is not its
responsibility under the binding criteria laid down in this Regulation.

    17. In order to ensure full respect for the principle of  family  unity
         and for the best  interests  of  the  child,  the  existence  of  a
         relationship of dependency between an  applicant  and  his  or  her
         child, sibling or parent on account of the applicant's pregnancy or
         maternity, state of health or old  age,  should  become  a  binding
         responsibility criterion. When the applicant  is  an  unaccompanied
         minor, the presence of a family member or relative on the territory
         of another Member State who can take care of him or her should also
         become a binding responsibility criterion.

    19. In order to guarantee effective protection of  the  rights  of  the
         persons concerned, legal safeguards and the right to  an  effective
         remedy in respect of decisions regarding transfers  to  the  Member
         State  responsible  should  be  established,  in   accordance,   in
         particular, with Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of
         the European Union. In order to ensure that  international  law  is
         respected, an effective remedy against such decisions should  cover
         both the examination of the application of this Regulation  and  of
         the legal and factual situation in the Member State  to  which  the
         applicant is transferred".


62. The two decisions of the CJEU are  Ghezelbash  v  Staatssecretiris  Van
    Veiligheid en and Justitie Case (C-63/15)[2016] WLR 301 (7th June 2016)
    and Karim v Migration Skverket [2016] EUECJ C-155/15 (7th June 2016).

63. The facts of Ghezelbash are as follows.  The applicant  applied  for  a
    residence permit to the Netherlands authorities for a fixed period,  on
    the grounds of asylum.  After  a  search   disclosed  that  the  French
    Republic's external representation in Iran had previously  granted  the
    applicant a visa covering an earlier period,  the  Secretary  of  State
    requested the French authorities to take charge of them on the basis of
    Parliament  and  Counsel  Regulation  No.  604/2013  (establishing  the
    criteria and mechanisms for determining the  Member  State  responsible
    for examining an application for international protection lodged in one
    of the Member States  by  a  third  country  national  or  a  stateless
    person).  Article  4  of  the  Regulation  conferred  a  right  on  the
    applicant to be informed of, inter alia, the  criteria  of  determining
    the Member State responsible  and  the  relative  importance  of  those
    criteria, including the fact  that  an  application  for  international
    protection lodged in one Member State could result in that Member State
    becoming  the  Member  State  responsible,  even  if  that  designation
    responsibility was not based on those criteria.  Article 5(1), (3)  and
    (6) of Regulation No. 604/2013 provided that the Member State  carrying
    out the determination of the Member State responsible had to conduct  a
    personal interview of the asylum seeker.  Pursuant to Article 5(2), the
    interview did not have to take  place  if  the  applicant  had  already
    provided the information relevant to the determination  of  the  Member
    State responsible and, in that case, the Member State in  question  had
    to  give  the  applicant  the  opportunity  to  present   any   further
    information.  Section IV of Chapter IV of the Regulation No.  604/2013,
    entitled "Procedural Safeguards", set  out  the  arrangements  for  the
    notification of transfer decisions and the Rules governing the remedies
    available  in  respect  of  such  decisions.   Article  27(1)  of   the
    Regulation provided that the asylum seeker was to have the right to  an
    effective remedy in the form of an  appeal  or  a  review  against  the
    transfer decision before a court or Tribunal.  The scope of the  remedy
    available to an asylum seeker against the decision to transfer him  was
    made clear in Recital 19 of Regulation No. 604/2013.

64. The applicant made further submissions to the Netherlands'  authorities
    and was questioned more closely and he requested the Secretary of State
    to examine  his  application  under  the  extended  asylum  application
    procedure in order to allow him to submit  original  documents  proving
    that he returned to Iran and remained there after visiting  France  and
    during the period to which the visa applied, which meant, according  to
    the applicant, that France was not the  Member  State  responsible  for
    examining his asylum application.  On the applicant's challenge to  the
    Secretary of State's decision, a judge granted an interim  measure  and
    ordered that the Secretary  of  State's  decision  be  suspended.   The
    Netherlands Court referred the Court of Justice of the  European  Union
    for a  preliminary  ruling;  the  question  whether  Article  27(1)  of
    Regulation No. 604/2013, read in the light of Recital 19, meant that an
    asylum seeker was entitled to plead, in an appeal against the  decision
    to transfer him, the incorrect application of one of the  criteria  for
    determining responsibility laid down in Chapter III of the  Regulation,
    in particular the criterion relating to the grant of a visa set out  in
    Article 12 of the Regulation.  The referring court was  also  uncertain
    as to the relevance of Abdullahi v Bundesasylamt (Case C-394/12) [2014]
    1 WLR 1895 in determining the scope of Article 27(1) of Regulation  No.
    604/2013.

65. The Grand Chamber of the CJEC held at paragraphs [46-51]:-
         "Parliament and Council  Regulation  No  604/2013  differed,  to  a
         significant degree, from Council Regulation (EC) No 343/2003, which
         was applicable in Abdullahi v Bundesasylamt (Case C-394/12)  [2014]
         1 WLR 1895. The detailed "Procedural safeguards" under  Section  IV
         of Chapter VI of Regulation No 604/2013 were not covered  with  the
         same degree of detail in Regulation No 343/2003.  It  was  apparent
         from article 27(3) to (6) of Regulation No 604/2013 that, in  order
         to ensure that those remedies were effective, the asylum seeker had
         to be given the opportunity to request within a  reasonable  period
         of time a court or tribunal to suspend the  implementation  of  the
         transfer decision pending the outcome of his or her appeal and have
         legal assistance. It followed that the European  Union  legislature
         did not confine itself, in Regulation No 604/2013,  to  introducing
         organisational rules  simply  governing  relations  between  member
         states for the purpose of determining the member state responsible,
         but decided to involve asylum seekers in that process  by  obliging
         member states to  inform  them  of  the  criteria  for  determining
         responsibility and to provide them with an  opportunity  to  submit
         information  relevant  to  the  correct  interpretation  of   those
         criteria, and by conferring on  asylum  seekers  the  right  to  an
         effective remedy in respect of any transfer decision  that  may  be
         taken at the conclusion of that process. Article 27(1), read in the
         light of recital (19) of  the  Regulation,  meant  that  an  asylum
         seeker was entitled to plead, in an appeal against  a  decision  to
         transfer him, the incorrect application of one of the criteria  for
         determining  responsibility  laid  down  in  Chapter  III  of   the
         Regulation, in particular the criterion relating to the grant of  a
         visa set out in art 12 of the Regulation ".


66. The second case is Karim v Migrations Skolverket [2016] EUECJ  C-155/15
    (7th June 2016).  In that case  the  Grand  Chamber  of  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Union  dealt  with  the  issue  of  whether  an
    applicant is entitled to  challenge  a  transfer  decision  within  the
    meaning of Article 27(1).  The facts are as follows.

67. Mr Karim applied for asylum in Sweden on 03rd  March  2014.  A  Eurodac
    search revealed that he had applied for asylum in Slovenia on 14th  May
    2013. On 20th March 2014, the Sweden authorities required the Slovenian
    authorities to take Mr Karim back on the basis of Article  18(1)(b)  of
    Dublin III. Slovenian authorities agreed to that take-back  request  on
    03rd April 2014. The Sweden authorities  then  informed  the  Slovenian
    authorities that Mr Karim had claimed that he  had  left  the  Slovenia
    territory for more than 3 months, after he first  applied  for  asylum,
    and his passport had an entry visa for Lebanon dated  20th  July  2013.
    Following an exchange of letters between Member States,  the  Slovenian
    authorities on 12th May 2014 repeated their acceptance of the take-back
    request. On 13th May 2014, the Sweden authorities rejected  Mr  Karim's
    application for a  residence  permit,  including  his  application  for
    asylum, closed the case and decided to transfer  him  to  Slovenia.  Mr
    Karim challenged the Swedish authorities' decision before  the  Swedish
    court.

68. The Swedish court dismissed his action on the ground that, in the  case
    where a Member State agrees to take back an asylum applicant, s/he  may
    challenge his/her transfer to that Member State only  by  pleading  the
    existence of systemic deficiencies. Mr Karim contested the judgment  of
    the Swedish court, contending that; (i) Slovenia  was  not  the  Member
    State responsible for examining his asylum claim in that that  he  left
    Slovenia for more than 3 months after his first asylum application; and
    (ii) for humanitarian reasons his transfer should not proceed and  that
    the asylum procedure in Slovenia had systematic deficiencies.

69.  In  those  circumstances,  the  Swedish  court  decided  to  stay  the
    proceedings and to refer  the  following  questions  to  the  Court  of
    Justice of European Union for a preliminary ruling:
         '(1) Do the new provisions on the right to an effective remedy  set
             out in Regulation No 604/2013 (recital 19  and  Article  27(1)
             and (5)) mean that an asylum applicant is also to be given the
             opportunity to challenge [the implementation of] the  criteria
             in Chapter III of Regulation No 604/2013 on the basis of which
             he or she is transferred to another  Member  State  which  has
             agreed to receive him or her? Alternatively, can the right  to
             an effective remedy be limited to mean only the  right  to  an
             examination of whether there are systemic deficiencies in  the
             asylum procedure and the reception conditions  in  the  Member
             State to which the applicant is  to  be  transferred  [as  the
             Court of Justice held in the judgment of 10 December  2013  in
             Abdullahi, C-394/12, EU: C: 2013:813];


70. In the event that the Court should consider  that  it  is  possible  to
    challenge [the implementation  of]  the  criteria  in  Chapter  III  of
    Regulation No 604/2013, does Article 19(2) of  Regulation  No  604/2013
    mean that that regulation may not be applied where the asylum applicant
    shows that he or she has been  outside  the  territory  of  the  Member
    States for at least three months?'


    The Grand Chamber of the CJEU at [Para 28] of its judgment held:
         " Article 19(2) of Regulation (EU) No 604/2013 of the European
         Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 establishing the
         criteria and mechanisms for determining the Member State
         responsible for examining an application for international
         protection lodged in one of the Member States by a third-country
         national or a stateless person must be interpreted to the effect
         that that provision, in particular its second subparagraph, is
         applicable to a third-country national who, after having made a
         first asylum application in a Member State, provides evidence that
         he left the territory of the Member States for a period of at least
         three months before making a new asylum application in another
         Member State.
         Article 27(1) of Regulation No  604/2013,  read  in  the  light  of
         recital 19 thereof, must be interpreted to the effect  that,  in  a
         situation such as that at issue in the main proceedings, an  asylum
         applicant may, in an action challenging a transfer decision made in
         respect of him, invoke an infringement of the rule set out  in  the
         second subparagraph of Article 19(2) of that regulation".

71. Thus in the decision of Karim, the CJEU  found  that  the  criteria  in
    Chapter III had been applied wrongly because  responsibility  with  the
    claim had already ceased under Article 19.  Article 27  must  therefore
    permit a challenge to Article 19 as well as Chapter  III  (I  refer  to
    paragraphs 23 and 27 of the decision), the former being  the  framework
    for the correct interpretation of the latter.

72. Dealing with the domestic cases, the first relevant case is that of K v
    SSHD No. 2 [2016] EWHC 1394, a decision of Garnham J.  In that case the
    applicant asserted that he could rely  on  Article  28  of  Dublin  III
    (governing the criteria for detention of the applicant) in the  context
    of his detention being unlawful.  It was argued  by  the  Secretary  of
    State that Article 28 did not create individual  rights  and  that  the
    Dublin III Regulation did not alter the position as it  had  previously
    been under Dublin II and that it did not confer individual rights.   It
    was further argued on the Respondent's behalf that even if the transfer
    decision could be challenged, there was nothing to suggest  that  there
    was any intention that Article 28 should confer individual rights:  the
    terms of Article 28 did not create a clear, precise  and  unconditional
    outcome "which is the cornerstone of conferring  a  directly  effective
    right" [see 45].

73. Garnham J considered the Regulation itself at  [50],  and  reached  the
    following view:-
         "[50]    In my judgment, it is plain from a reading  of  the  whole
                Regulation that  its  primary  objective  is  improving  the
                mechanics of determining which Member State  is  responsible
                for examining an asylum  application.   A  determination  to
                avoid  forum  shopping  remains  central   to   the   Dublin
                arrangements.  That was true for Dublin II  and  it  remains
                true for Dublin III.

         [51] That notwithstanding,  however,  there  does  seem  to  be  an
                argument  of  substance  that  certain  provisions  of   the
                Regulation are capable of having  direct  effect  so  as  to
                permit an individual to invoke them against the  State.   In
                other words, there is force in  the  point  that,  alongside
                changes to  the  arrangements  between  Member  States,  the
                Regulation  appears  to   contemplate   giving   rights   to
                individuals.  One such Article is Article 27."


74. Garnham J did not have the advantage of the CJEU Grand Chamber decision
    in Ghezelbash and Karim but had the decision of  the  Advocate  General
    Sharpston and her interpretation of Article 27 which he quoted at  [53-
    55].  He found the Advocate General's analysis to be  "persuasive"  and
    stated at [57]:-
         "[57]    Dublin III is drafted in notably  broader  terms,  with  a
                notably  greater  focus  on  the  position   of   individual
                applicants for asylum, than Dublin II.   In  my  judgment  a
                powerful case  can  be  made  in  respect  of  a  number  of
                Articles, notably Article 27, that they were intended to  be
                of direct effect.  Whether or not any particular Article can
                be relied upon by an  individual  against  a  Member  State,
                however, turns on an analysis of the  Article  in  question.
                For present purposes, therefore, it is necessary to consider
                in detail the terms of Article 28."


75. Garnham J then went on to consider Article 28.  He did not find Article
    28 to be sufficiently clear and unconditional as to make reliance  upon
    it possible by a detained person in the position of the claimant in his
    case.  He considered at [69]:-
         "[69]    It follows that I conclude that Dublin III is  capable  of
                direct effect, but whether or not it has that effect depends
                on an analysis that the  individual  Article  concerned  but
                that Article 28 does not  provide  an  individual  with  the
                right to challenge at administrative detention by the UK  in
                circumstances such as the present."


76. Mr Bahja also relied on further case law and in  particular  two  cases
    which refers directly to Article 17 of Dublin III.
Further relevant case law:


77. The first is case IB 5946/5, a judgment of  the  German  Administrative
    Court of Hanover of 7th March 2016.  The brief facts  are  as  follows;
    the applicants were a mother and her three children  who  were  Russian
    nationals of the Yazidi faith.  The mother, her husband and  the  three
    children  had  entered  France  in  2012  and  lodged   a   claim   for
    international protection which was rejected by the French  authorities.
    In 2015 the mother and her three children entered Germany and lodged  a
    second claim for international protection.  A Eurodac  search  revealed
    that they had claimed asylum in France in 2012 and thus a  request  was
    made to France to take them back.  The French authorities agreed to the
    general request to take them back.  They sought to resist removal under
    Article 17(1) of Dublin III, arguing that the father  of  the  children
    had been extradited to Germany and was serving a prison  term  of  nine
    years.  They also contended that they were presently receiving  support
    from the  children's  grandparents  who  were  German  nationals.   The
    children were attending school and sought to stay close to their father
    who was in prison.  It was thus asserted that Germany  should  exercise
    discretion on humanitarian grounds to  maintain  family  unity  and  to
    assess their claim rather than remove them to France under  the  Dublin
    III Regulation.  The Federal Office held  that  the  applications  were
    inadmissible according to Section  72(a)  of  the  Asylum  Act  because
    France was responsible to examine  the  claims  for  protection.   Thus
    there were no reasons to invoke the discretionary clause under  Article
    17(1).  The applicants appealed their decision  to  the  Administrative
    Court of Hannover  and  separately  claimed  interim  legal  protection
    against the deportation  order  of  the  Federal  Office  (pursuant  to
    Section 80(5) of the German Code  of  Administrative  Court  Procedure.
    The court granted the applicants' request for interim legal  protection
    and ordered the appeal to have suspensive effect.

78. In its decision the court addressed three main  areas.   First  of  all
    dealing with the circumstances which would be  sufficient  to  derogate
    from the provisions and responsibility laid  down  in  the  Dublin  III
    Regulation according to Article 17(1).  Article 17 did not specify  the
    circumstances  under  which  a  Member  State  may  derogate  from  the
    provisions on responsibility.  However Recital 17  of  the  Dublin  III
    Regulation explicitly states that Member States may derogate  from  the
    binding criteria of responsibility laid down in  Article  3(1)  of  the
    Dublin III Regulation based on humanitarian or compassionate grounds in
    order to bring together family members, relatives or persons  that  are
    related in any other way.  In this context, Recitals 13 and 14  of  the
    Dublin III Regulation set out that the best interests of the child  and
    the respect for family life should  be  a  primary  considerations  and
    applying the Regulation.  Article 6(3)(a) of the Dublin III  Regulation
    also stipulates that Member  States  shall  take  due  account  of  the
    possibility of family reunification when assessing the  best  interests
    of a child.

79. Applying this, the court held that the Federal Office  failed  to  take
    due  account  of  these  considerations  in  the  assessment   of   the
    discretionary clause since it disregarded  the  possibility  of  family
    reunification  and  the  particular  interest  of   the   children   in
    maintaining regular contact with the father  during  his  imprisonment.
    Additionally the support of the grandparents who were also residing  in
    Germany in particular with regards to the care and  upbringing  of  the
    children due to the mother's mental illness would also have to be taken
    into  account.   The  court  therefore  concluded   that   there   were
    exceptional  circumstances  which  justified  a  derogation  from   the
    provisions  on  responsibility  pursuant  to  Article  17  taking  into
    consideration humanitarian grounds and family reunification.

80. As to whether the Federal Office had discretionary powers it  was  held
    that the office did enjoy discretionary powers  in  applying  17(1)  of
    Dublin III.  However  the  court  concluded  that  in  cases  involving
    humanitarian considerations there may be no room for discretion by  the
    Federal Office.  In the court's view,  there  was  no  possible  action
    other than the invocation of  the  discretionary  clause  in  order  to
    safeguard the primary objectives of the Dublin III Regulation, the best
    interests of the child and the support of family reunification.

81. The third question  was  whether  the  provision  governing  procedural
    aspects  of  the  Member  State's  responsibility  for   examining   an
    application for international protection provided with  the  individual
    with subjective rights. When looking at this question, in  the  court's
    view, the Procedural Rules laid down in  the  Regulation  (time  limits
    etc.) did not generally provide for subjective rights of the individual
    since such Rules merely governed the  legal  relationship  between  the
    Member States.  However, the court held that Article 17 of  Dublin  III
    constitutes  an  exemption  given  that  the  discretion  granted  when
    assessing  the  discretionary  clause   aims   precisely   takes   into
    consideration humanitarian and compassionate grounds.   Article  17  of
    the  Dublin  II  Regulation  therefore  governs  not  only  the   legal
    relationship between Member States but  also  serve  to  protect  human
    rights/fundamental  rights.   Consequently  the  court  concluded  that
    Article 17 of the Dublin III Regulations served to  protect  rights  of
    individuals and therefore provided the applicants with  the  subjective
    right which can be enforced in a court of law.

82. The second case relied on by Mr Bahja is case number 387329  (a  French
    case).  This was a judgment of the State Council on 29th January  2016.
    The applicants, MA, Mrs C and their five  children  entered  France  in
    August 2014 to join the brother of MA, a French  national.   The  claim
    for international protection was lodged on  9th  September  and  having
    ascertained that  they  claimed  asylum  in  Hungary  in  July,  France
    requested Hungary to take them back under Article  18  of  Dublin  III.
    Hungary accepted responsibility for assessing their asylum  claims  and
    on  12th  November  2014  the  French  authorities  refused  to  accept
    responsibility for assessing his claim for protection and declared  the
    applications inadmissible.

83. The applicants sought to challenge the decision  in  the  French  court
    (State Council) who held as follows:-


         "6.  Whereas Regulation (EU) No 603/2013 of  26  June  2013  laying
             principle  in  paragraph  1  of  Article  3  that  an   asylum
             application is examined by a single Member State;  that  State
             is determined by applying the criteria established by  Chapter
             III, in the order stated by this chapter;  that  according  to
             the regulation, the  application  of  criteria  for  examining
             applications for asylum is rejected in case of implementation,
             or the notwithstanding clause of paragraph 1 of Article 17  of
             the Regulation, which proceeds from a unilateral decision by a
             member  State  or  of  the  humanitarian  clause  set  out  in
             paragraph 2 of the same Article 17  of  the  Regulation;  that
             paragraph 2 of this Article provides that a Member State  may,
             even if it is not responsible under the criteria  set  by  the
             regulation, "any parent bring on humanitarian grounds based in
             particular on family grounds or cultural "; the implementation
             by the French authorities of Article 17 must be ensured in the
             light of the requirements of the second paragraph  of  Article
             53-1 of the Constitution, which reads: "the authorities of the
             Republic still the right to grant asylum to any foreigner  who
             is persecuted for his action in favor of freedom or who  seeks
             the protection of France for some other reason.


         7. Whereas both parts produced before the court of  first  instance
             referred that the parts produced and  discussions  during  the
             hearing that, since their arrival in  France,  the  applicants
             and their five  children  are  accommodated  and  fully  taken
             supported by the brother of MA .., of French nationality;  the
             five daughters of the couple  are  all  minors,  the  youngest
             being two years old and the  eldest  of  fourteen  years;  the
             latter  suffers  from  psychological  disorders  that  require
             therapeutic monitoring; it appears that many certificates from
             their schooling in France in September 2014, four older  girls
             showed real integration capabilities  and  achieved  excellent
             academic results; that  in  these  circumstances,  the  French
             authorities' refusal to make use of the option to consider the
             asylum request of interested while this  examination  normally
             under the jurisdiction of Hungary  ignores  obvious  from  the
             constitutional right asylum; It  follows  from  the  foregoing
             that the interior minister, who does not dispute the existence
             of an emergency, is not  justified  in  complaining  that,  by
             order  of  22  December  2014,  the  judge  of  the   Toulouse
             administrative court ordered the suspension of  the  execution
             of these orders and  directed  the  prefectural  authority  to
             review the situation of those concerned within fifteen days. "


84. A further case relied upon is AL v Advocate General [2015]  CSOH  which
    considered Article 27 of Dublin III  and  whether  the  Regulation  had
    direct effect in the UK.  The petitioners challenge in  that  case  was
    whether the right to an effective remedy contained  in  Article  27  of
    Dublin III  had  been  transposed  into  Scottish  law  and  they  also
    challenged the validity of judicial review as  giving  effect  to  that
    right.  The petitioner had submitted that the law did not provide for a
    transfer decision to be suspended in  accordance  with  Article  27(3).
    Whilst the policy of the Respondent was to cancel any removal direction
    once first orders  had  been  granted,  that  policy  was  unpublished,
    unknown and the law was unclear.  In any  event,  the  policy  did  not
    amount to automatic supervision which was what Article 27(3)  required.



85. The petitioner failed in both challenges.  The  Lord  Ordinary  decided
    that the language of Article  27(3)  was  clear.   It  required  Member
    States to provide a means by which an asylum seeker could remain in the
    country for a period of time sufficient to allow him to  challenge  the
    transfer decision.  This could be by way of a right to  remain  pending
    appeal or review; automatic suspension of the transfer request  pending
    appeal or review or the opportunity to require  suspension  pending  an
    appeal or review.  Judicial review taken together  with  the  published
    policy and the opportunity to request suspension pending  determination
    of review.  Article 27(3)(c) required a  Member  State  to  provide  an
    effective remedy by suspending the transfer while the decision  as  the
    first supervision required was taken.  Thus it had  been  open  to  the
    petitioner to apply for interim suspension pending the outcome  of  the
    request.  Judicial review amounted to an  effective  remedy  where  the
    Respondent sought a transfer on receipt of  the  first  order,  he  was
    acting as envisaged under Article 27(4).

86. The court also ruled that there was no obligation on a Member State  to
    "transpose" the provisions  of  Dublin  III  into  domestic  law.   The
    provisions had direct effect and there was no inconsistency as what was
    required because what was required under Article 27(3) and the judicial
    review even if the UK had breached Article 27 the Lord  Ordinary  would
    have  refused  judicial  review  given  the  petitioner  had   achieved
    suspension pending the outcome of review.

87. The last relevant case is that of the Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department v ZAT and Others (Syria)[2016] EWCA Civ  810.   This  is  an
    appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal (President Vice President) and was the  case  referred  to  by
    Laws LJ in the decision of  CK  (as  cited)  which  I  have  considered
    earlier in this judgment.  For the purposes of this judgment it is  not
    necessary to set out the factual background any  further  than  I  have
    done already.

88. It was submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State that in  principle
    Article 8 co-existed with the Dublin III processes and  procedures  but
    submitted that it was only in an exceptionally compelling case that the
    ECHR Article 8 could prevail on  the  basis  that  because  the  Dublin
    Regulations strikes  the  proportionate  balance  of  the  purposes  of
    Article 8  by  putting  family  reunification  in  appropriate  certain
    circumstances at the top of  the  hierarchy  of  the  applicable  State
    (Recital 3 to 15 and Article 6 and 8  of  Dublin  III).   Thus  it  was
    submitted that the  Regulation  allowed  for  the  orderly  and  proper
    consideration of family life by process and a system, that if  followed
    will be compliant with Article 8 [see paragraphs 59 to 60].  On  behalf
    of the Respondents, it was accepted that the adherence  to  the  Dublin
    processes and procedures had a "high  value"  but  submitted  that  the
    Upper  Tribunal  would  carefully  analyse  them   and   the   relevant
    authorities.  As to the balance between the Dublin process and  Article
    8, it was argued that in their special circumstances the  operation  of
    the Dublin process in France fell to vindicate and protect their rights
    under the ECHR. It was submitted that an unaccompanied minor has formed
    a category of
         "particularly vulnerable persons as  to  those  with  physical  and
         mental health problems and it is important not to prolong more than
         is strictly necessary the  procedure  for  determining  the  Member
         State responsible for the claims of such persons".

    It was argued that it was not possible  to  ignore  conditions  in  the
    "jungle"  camp  because  together  with   delay   in   bringing   about
    reunification, they go to the severity of any breach  and  that  was  a
    relevant factor in considering proportionality under Article 8.  It was
    secondly asserted that they had a  freestanding  right  to  assert  the
    right under Article 8 irrespective of the efficacy or adequacy  of  the
    operation of the Dublin III Regulations in France.  The United  Kingdom
    was under a substantive obligation to admit the first four  Respondents
    to the UK to make asylum  claims  because  they  had  siblings  legally
    present in the United Kingdom.


89. Beatson LJ set  out  his  discussion  at  paragraphs  64  to  100.   At
    paragraphs 64 to 68, the court considered previous authorities relevant
    to the Dublin II which did not contain a provision similar  to  Article
    27 of the Dublin III Regulation [see  69].   He  concluded  that  those
    earlier authorities demonstrated that although the ECHR and the  Dublin
    II regime co-existed,
         "where the Dublin II processes and procedures have  been  operated,
         to date it is only where there is a systemic deficiency or  a  real
         risk of ill-treatment contrary to the ECHR Article 3 in  the  first
         Member State that the provisions of the ECHR had been  accepted  as
         overriding them."


90. The court then went on to consider  the  decisions  relating  to  cases
    asserting systemic deficiency including Abdullahi v Bundesasylamt,  and
    R (NS) (Afghanistan) v SSHD and R (EM) (Eritrea)  v  SSHD,  Tarakhel  v
    Switzerland at paragraphs 70 to 75.

91. At paragraph 76 Beatson LJ considered the two cases of  Ghezelbash  and
    Karim noting that  the  Grand  Chamber  in  those  cases  had  taken  a
    different approach to that taken by Abdullahi in relation to the Dublin
    III Regulation.  At [77] Beatson LJ did not consider that  those  cases
    gave any support to the Respondent's argument because Article  27  only
    dealt with the position where a person  had  made  an  application  for
    asylum in the first Member State, which  alone  or  together  with  the
    second Member State had to determine which  State  is  responsible  for
    determining the application.  Those two  cases  therefore  concern  the
    scope of an appeal within the Dublin system but that  was  a  different
    scenario than the Respondents in the present case where there had  been
    no application made for asylum [see 77]

92. At paragraphs [78] to [80] Beatson LJ considered the  second  situation
    where the court of the second Member State is concerned  not  with  the
    conditions in the first Member State but with  an  individual's  family
    and private life and  quoted  the  decision  of  CK  (Afghanistan)  and
    summarised the issue of principle in that case at [79 and 80].

93. Having  considered  that  case  Beatson  LJ  observed  that  there  was
    "considerable force" in the  Secretary  of  State's  emphasise  on  the
    importance of an orderly process  and  the  need  for  biometric  data,
    verification of identity and assessments of age and that there will  be
    cases where certain  individuals  would  be  given  priority.   However
    notwithstanding the histories and trauma of the individuals  concerned,
    it was not considered that the subjective fear about the French process
    could justify bypassing the Dublin process in the  French  courts  [see
    82].

94. However Beatson LJ went on to reject the Secretary of State's  case  in
    the following way:-
          1. "In my judgment, Mr Eadie also puts the matter too  high  when
             he argues  that  the  Dublin  Regulation  itself  strikes  the
             proportionate ECHR Article 8 balance because it places  family
             reunification at the top of the hierarchy in ascertaining  the
             responsible  state  and  allows   for   orderly   and   proper
             consideration of family life. There was tension  between  what
             can be described as this absolutist strand of his  submissions
             and his acceptance that in an  exceptionally  compelling  case
             ECHR Article  8  can  prevail  over  the  Dublin  process  and
             procedures. Moreover, the authorities  do  not  suggest  that,
             even in what Mr Eadie described  as  the  "initial  procedural
             stages", there is an absolute rule that the  determination  of
             the responsible Member State must be by the operation  of  the
             Dublin process and procedures in the Member State in which the
             individual is present.
          1. The  need  for  expedition  in  cases  involving  particularly
             vulnerable  persons  such   as   unaccompanied   children   is
             recognised in the Regulation and authorities such as  Case  C-
             648/11 R (MA (Eritrea)) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2013] 1 WLR 2961 and  Manchester  City  Council  v
             Pinnock [2010] UKSC 45, [2011] 2 AC  104  at  [64].  Delay  to
             family reunification may in itself  be  an  interference  with
             rights under  ECHR  Article  8:  see  Tanda-Muzinga  v  France
             (Application No. 2260/10) 10 July 2014, although it should  be
             noted that in that case the delay was of three years. Mr Eadie
             accepted that the decisions in R (Chikwamba)  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL  40,  [2008]  1  WLR
             1420 and Mayeka v Belgium, to which I referred at [64]  above,
             show  that  the  operation  of  a  procedural  rule   may   be
             disproportionate. I accept Ms Demetriou's submission that  the
             urgency of particular  circumstances  may  require  a  shorter
             period  than  the  periods  specified  as  longstops  in   the
             Regulation. It is therefore material to consider not only what
             provisions are made in  the  procedural  rules  but  how  they
             operate in practice.
          1. A further reason for rejecting Mr Eadie's  submission  in  its
             absolutist form is Article 17 of the  Dublin  III  Regulation.
             Since the relevant officials in the second Member  State  have
             power  to  assume  responsibility  in  a  case  in  which  the
             Regulation assigns it to another Member State,  it  cannot  be
             said that it is never open to an individual  to  request  that
             state to do  that.  Mr  Eadie  suggested,  or  came  close  to
             suggesting, during the course of the hearing that a refusal to
             exercise the power under Article 17 was not justiciable. That,
             in my judgment, is unsound in  principle  and  also  finds  no
             support  in  the  authorities.   Abdullahi   v   Bundesasylamt
             recognised only that the second Member State has a wide margin
             of discretion in deciding  whether  to  assume  responsibility
             pursuant to the provision in the Dublin II Regulation that  is
             the equivalent of Article  17.  In  a  context  in  which  the
             exercise of power relates  to  relations  between  two  Member
             States as to the operation  of  a  treaty  arranging  for  the
             allocation of responsibility for  examining  applications  for
             asylum between Member States, this is clearly  correct.  There
             will be a  wide  range  of  relevant  considerations  for  the
             decision-maker to take into account: see all the factors  that
             the Upper Tribunal stated were relevant to the  assessment  of
             proportionality.  But  subject  to  the  effective  scope   of
             judicial review being narrower for this reason,  the  exercise
             by the Secretary of State of her discretion is subject to  the
             ordinary  public  law  principles  of  propriety  of  purpose,
             relevancy  of  considerations,  and  the  longstop  Wednesbury
             unreasonableness category and, because of  the  engagement  of
             ECHR Article 8, the intensity of review which  is  appropriate
             in the assessment of the proportionality of  any  interference
             with Article 8 rights.
          1. The fact that ECHR Article 8 can be engaged by delay and  that
             the operation of a procedural rule  may  be  disproportionate,
             together with the existence of Article 17, brings one back  to
             the question of the balance between what Laws LJ in CK's  case
             (see [79] above)  referred  to  as  the  two  competing  legal
             imperatives and the height of the hurdle  required  to  permit
             the Dublin process to be "trumped" by ECHR Article 8. The AIRE
             Centre criticise Laws LJ's statement in CK's case that what is
             needed is "an especially compelling case" but the  respondents
             maintained that, in any event,  they  fall  within  Laws  LJ's
             formulation. It was argued by the AIRE Centre  that  all  that
             has to be shown is a manifest deficiency in the protection  of
             ECHR rights in the  first  Member  State,  because  that  will
             defeat the presumption that Member  States  will  comply  with
             their international obligations, including those in the  ECHR:
             see the discussion of the principle of  equivalent  protection
             in Bosphorus v Ireland (2006) 42 EHRR 1, reaffirmed in Avotins
             v Latvia (Application No.17502/07) 23  May  2016.  It  is  not
             contended that there  is  a  general  manifest  deficiency  by
             France in protecting rights under the ECHR and the EU Charter.
             The criticisms relate only to the  specific  circumstances  of
             family reunion of unaccompanied minors.
          1. There will be a need for expedition in  many  cases  involving
             unaccompanied minors. The  circumstances  of  the  first  four
             respondents'  cases,  especially  the  psychiatric   evidence,
             suggested in their cases  there  was  a  particular  need  for
             urgency. But an orderly process is also important in cases  of
             unaccompanied minors. The need to examine their identity, age,
             and claimed relationships remains, and there is  a  particular
             need to guard against people trafficking. I do not accept that
             the "especially compelling case" hurdle articulated by Laws LJ
             in CK's case is too high for the "initial procedural  stages".
             In  R  (Elayathamby)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
             Department  [2011]  EWHC  2182  (Admin)  at  [42(i)]  Sales  J
             described the principle of mutual confidence  as  creating  "a
             significant evidential presumption". In EM (Eritrea) (at [64])
             Lord Kerr approved of this description. He had stated  earlier
             in  his  judgment  (at  [40]  -  [41])  that  the  presumption
             reflected not only  principle  but  pragmatic  considerations.
             This is because a system which  required  a  Member  State  to
             conduct an intense examination of avowed failings  of  another
             Member State would lead to disarray."

95. As to the merits of the case, the court considered  that  the  Tribunal
    had set "too low a hurdle" for permitting the Dublin III process to  be
    displaced by Article 8  considerations  [see  92]  and  also  that  the
    Tribunal had taken "too broad a brush and approach to the relevance  of
    the appalling conditions in the camp".  The court considered that those
    conditions were not central to the Article 8 claim the focus  of  which
    must be family life rather than conditions but were, however,  relevant
    to the assessment of proportionality  namely  when  considered  in  the
    context of delay in bringing about reunification such  conditions  went
    to  the  severity  of  any  breach  which  was  a  relevant  factor  in
    considering  the  proportionality   of   an   interference   with   the
    Respondent's Article 8 rights.  That was a matter  that  had  not  been
    explained in the judgment [see paragraph 93].  Thus at [95]  the  court
    considered  that  the  application  such  as  the  one  made  by  these
    Respondents should only be made in
         "very exceptional circumstances" where they can show the system  of
         the Member State they do not wish to use, in  this  case  a  French
         system, is not capable of responding adequately to their needs."

    The court went on to state that it would  generally  be  necessary  for
    minors to institute the process in the country in which they are in  to
    find out and to be able to show that the system there is not working in
    their case.  However there will be cases of such urgency and of such  a
    compelling nature because the situation of the unaccompanied minor  can
    clearly be shown that the Dublin system in the other country  does  not
    work fast enough.  It is only after it is demonstrated that there is no
    effective way of proceeding in that jurisdiction that they should  turn
    to the authorities in the courts in the United Kingdom [see 95].

Discussion:


96. It has been necessary to review the case law relied upon by each of the
    parties in the preceding  section  when  dealing  with  the  Dublin  II
    Regulations and in particular the decision of Laws LJ in CK (as  cited)
    and the issue of principle set out at [9] and the conclusion  at  [25].
    At [30] he observed that the "absence  of  any  right  to  challenge  a
    Dublin II determination as to the responsible State" whilst a right  to
    challenge a removal decision under  the  ECHR  subsisted,  was  "wholly
    unsurprising".  Any other conclusion could not have been the  intention
    of the European legislature when enacting  Dublin  II,  and  would,  at
    least potentially conflict with the Human Rights Act 1998.  However  as
    set out the decision in CK was not one concerned with Dublin III and in
    particular Article 27.  In those  circumstances  I  consider  that  the
    principles established  in  that  case  need  to  be  set  against  the
    introduction of Article 27 and the significant changes brought about to
    the Dublin III Regulation.

97. In this respect I do not find that any comparison with  the  Dublin  II
    Regulations assists me in reaching a conclusive view on  the  issue  of
    justiciability.  There have been a number of significant and  important
    changes brought about to Dublin III.  As Garnham J observed  in  Khaled
    (No. 2) at [57] Dublin III is drafted in notably broader terms  with  a
    notably greater focus on the position of the individual  applicant  for
    asylum.  He considered that there was a "powerful case" to be  made  in
    respect of a number of Articles, notably Article 27 which was  intended
    to have direct effect.  It is true to say that he went  on  to  observe
    that whether a particular Article will be relied upon by an  individual
    against a Member State  but  that  must  entail  the  analysis  of  the
    particular Article in question.  This is a  point  relied  upon  by  Mr
    Harland  who  strongly  resists  any  suggestion  that  Article  17  is
    justiciable in the light of it being a discretionary clause.

98. However in my judgment what is equally important  is  to  consider  the
    context in which the Articles are now set and the aims  and  objectives
    of Dublin III.

99. It must beyond argument that there have been important and  significant
    changes made to Dublin III.  They are set out in the  judgment  of  the
    Advocate General Sharpston and ultimately the decision of the  CJEU  in
    Ghezelbash and Karim.

100. It is helpful to consider the  judgment  of  the  Advocate  General  in
    Ghezelbash who refers to a number of substantial changes, including the
    introduction of Recital 19.  In  her  examination  of  Article  27  she
    identified that Dublin III had introduced procedural  safeguards  which
    were not found in Dublin II (notably those relating to notification  of
    transfer decisions and suspensions of such decisions) and at  [57]  she
    said about Article 27 that it created "in unequivocal terms" a right to
    an effective remedy.  The remedy was also specified as "in the form  of
    an appeal or review in fact and in law against  the  transfer  decision
    before a court or Tribunal".  The differences between the  two  regimes
    were set out at [58].  They included the following; a right  to  appeal
    or review available to all asylum  seekers,  the  right  to  appeal  is
    expressed in mandatory terms "shall" have the right under the appeal or
    review was to cover both "law and fact".  The Advocate General went  on
    to state that the appeal or review was to provide "judicial  oversight"
    of the administrative decision taken by  the  competent  authority  and
    that Member States must allow a reasonable time in which an  individual
    could exercise their  right  to  an  effective  remedy.   The  Advocate
    General observed that Article 27 did not specify what components of the
    authority's decision making process leading up to the transfer decision
    may be the subject of a review or appeal.  However the Advocate General
    did consider the aims in the context of the Regulations  themselves  at
    paragraphs 64 to 66.  Those aims  included  establishing  a  clear  and
    workable method for determining the Member States responsible based  on
    objective criteria for the Member State and the person concerned and to
    improve the legal protection afforded to the applicant for asylum.  The
    Advocate General described it as  "the  enhanced  judicial  protection"
    created by Article 27(1).  The Advocate General also considered Recital
    19 (which she considered to be expressed as a substantive provision  in
    Article 27(1)) which explicitly stated in order to guarantee  effective
    protection of an applicant's rights, legal safeguards and the right  to
    an effective remedy are to cover both the application of the Regulation
    and also the legal and factual situation.

 101. It is also plain from reading the Advocate General's observations that
      the second option (favouring a narrow interpretation of Dublin III  as
      an "Inter State measure" and the associated argument that the aim  was
      to eliminate "forum shopping")  was  an  argument  that  she  was  not
      convinced of (see 69).  The view taken by her was that  it  was  "over
      simplistic" to describe Dublin III as an "Inter State" instrument  and
      that whilst certain Inter State aspects remained in  force  that  with
      the introduction of Dublin  III  it  had  seen  the  introduction  and
      reinforcement  of  "substantive  individual  rights   and   procedural
      safeguards".  Examples of  such  substantive  individual  rights  that
      dealt with family reunification were identified as Articles 9  and  11
      and procedural safeguards in Article 4 and 5.   The  Advocate  General
      did not however identify Article 17 and at [72] made it plain that  in
      her view the possibilities for challenging the application of  Chapter
      III criteria were not "unlimited".

 102. The Advocate General also considered  that  the  "floodgate  argument"
      overstated the consequences of interpreting Article 27(1) and that  an
      application to the court to seek judicial scrutiny could not  properly
      be equated with "forum shopping".  Thus she observed that an appeal or
      review under Article 27 protected the individual  against  disregarded
      or incorrect characterisation of the relevant facts  and  against  any
      misinterpretation or misapplication of the relevant law.

 103. The conclusion reached at paragraph  [91]  was  that  the  Dublin  III
      Regulation should be interpreted as meaning that the applicant is able
      to challenge on appeal/review a transfer decision under Article  27(1)
      and to require the national court to verify whether  the  criteria  in
      Chapter III had been correctly applied in his case.  She  went  on  to
      state that the effectiveness of judicial review guaranteed by  Article
      47 of the Charter required an assessment  of  the  lawfulness  of  the
      grounds which were the basis of the transfer decision and  whether  it
      was taken on a sufficiently solid factual basis.  The manner in  which
      the examination is concluded as to whether the  Chapter  III  criteria
      has been applied objectively and fairly, is governed by national Rules
      "which also govern the intensity and outcome of the appeal  or  review
      process".  Thus at [93] she reached the  conclusion  that  an  "asylum
      applicant may bring proceedings under Article 27(1) of Dublin  III  in
      order  to  challenge  an  alleged  violation  of  any  substantive  or
      procedural right specifically conferred by that Regulation.

 104. Whilst the examples given included guarantees for minors  [Articles  6
      and 8] and the right to family reunification are set out [in  Articles
      9 and 11] the Advocate General stressed that she had not  conducted  a
      "complete examination" or  compiled an "exhaustive list" of the rights
      whose violation would be susceptible to  challenge.   In  my  judgment
      that  is  an  important  qualification  to  remember  when  making  an
      assessment of the issues before this Tribunal.

 105. The decision of the Grand Chamber stated as a preliminary  point  that
      the rights under Dublin III differed from those under Dublin II  which
      had given rise to the decision in Abdullahi and took the view that the
      scope of the appeal in Article 27(1) must therefore be  determined  in
      the light of the wording of the provisions of the new Regulation,  its
      general scheme and its objectives, its context and  the  evolution  in
      connection with the system that it formed part of.  I understand  that
      to mean the fundamental principles of EU law set out  in  the  Charter
      and under the ECHR.

 106. On looking at the wording of Article 27(1) they considered  any  legal
      remedy must be "effective" and cover questions of both "law and  fact"
      and observed that when drafting Article 27, there was no reference  to
      any limitation of the arguments that may be raised  by  an  applicant.
      At [37] the Grand Chamber  stated  that  it  was  clear  that  the  EU
      legislative did not provide for any specific  link  or  any  exclusive
      link between the legal remedies established in Article 27 and the Rule
      now set out  in  Article  3(2)  which  limited  the  possibilities  of
      transferring  an  applicant  to  the  Member   State   designated   as
      responsible where there were systemic flaws.  The Grand  Chamber  also
      highlighted that  the  scope  of  the  remedy  available  against  the
      decision to transfer an applicant is made clear in  Recital  19  which
      did not appear in Dublin II.  Recital 9 was intended to ensure that  a
      State ensured compliance with international law, the effective  remedy
      introduced in Dublin III in respect  of  a  transfer  decision  should
      cover the examination of the applicant of that Regulation and also the
      examination of the legal and factual situation in the Member State  to
      which any asylum seeker was to be transferred.

 107. The Grand Chamber also referred to the differences between  Dublin  II
      and  Dublin  III.   They  referred  to  the  general  thrust  of   the
      developments that have taken place in the system and the objectives in
      the Regulations.   They  referred  to  the  EU  legislation  which  it
      introduced and enhanced various rights and mechanisms guaranteeing the
      involvement of asylum seekers in the process of determining the Member
      State responsible.  The Grand Chamber stated that Dublin III  "differs
      to a significant degree"  from  Dublin  II  (see  [46])  and  set  out
      Articles in that respect namely Articles 4 and 5.  At [51]  the  Grand
      Chamber concluded that it followed that the  EU  legislature  did  not
      confine itself in introducing organisational  Rules  simply  governing
      relations between Member States but decided to involve asylum  seekers
      in that process by obliging  Member  States  to  inform  them  of  the
      criteria for determining responsibility and to provide them  with  the
      opportunity  to  submit  that  information  relevant  to  the  correct
      interpretation of those criteria and conferred a right to an effective
      remedy.  At [52] the Grand  Chamber  referred  to  the  objectives  of
      Dublin  III  and  that  it  was  intended  to  make   "the   necessary
      improvements" (in the  light  of  the  experience)  not  only  to  the
      effectiveness of the Dublin system but also the protection afforded to
      applicants to be achieved by judicial protection.

 108. In my judgment the decisions of  the  CJEU  recognised  that  not  all
      Articles of Dublin III were susceptible to challenge.  However  whilst
      Mr Harland submits that those decisions limit the right of  appeal  or
      review under Article 27 to the correct application of Chapter III  and
      Article 19(2)  of  Chapter  V  (Karim)  to  ensure  the  criteria  are
      "correctly  applied",  it  does  not  necessarily  follow   that   the
      underlying reasoning cannot extend to the Chapter  IV  criteria  which
      would include a challenge to Article 17.   I  have  set  out  at  some
      length the observations of both the Advocate General and those of  the
      Grand Chamber in Ghezelbash which  provide  an  understanding  of  the
      changes made to Dublin III and in particular in the context of Article
      27 and in my judgment the objectives, aims and principles referred  to
      underlying the introduction of Article 27 can extend to other Articles
      notably Article 17.

 109. I have been referred to decisions of other Member States who have been
      grappling with similar issues including both Germany  and  France.   I
      recognise, as Mr Harland submitted, that they are of limited value  in
      reaching a decision on this issue.  I have not been provided with  the
      full transcripts and Mr Bahja was not able to provide any knowledge of
      the German and French domestic legislation or law that was  applicable
      in those cases.  In the German case this appeared  to  be  an  interim
      application and thus could be the subject of an appeal further and the
      French case demonstrated that the implementation of Article 17 must be
      seen in the light of the French Constitution.

 110. Notwithstanding the shortcomings I have just identified,  those  cases
      are  instructive  and  in  my  view  that  other  Member  States  when
      interpreting Dublin III have found that Article 17 is justiciable when
      read with Article 27 and Recital 19.

 111. However, I also place weight and reliance on  the  view  expressed  by
      Beatson LJ in ZAT at [85] in which he rejected an argument thought  to
      be advanced by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  Article  17  was  not
      justiciable.  In his oral submissions Mr Harland submitted that  those
      words of Beatson LJ were obiter dicta and as such could not be  relied
      upon.  He reminded me that the decision itself  did  not  concern  the
      Dublin III Regulations.  That might be so, but when seeing that in the
      totality of the case law that I have been referred to and in the light
      of what I consider to be significant changes made to Dublin  III  both
      in its objectives and its aims and the introduction of a right  to  an
      effective remedy, that the words of  Beatson  LJ  are  persuasive  and
      powerful.

 112. Consequently I reach the conclusion that Article 17  when  taken  with
      Article 27 can be challenged by way of judicial review on  public  law
      grounds.

 113. I now turn to the arguments advanced  by  Mr  Bahja  relating  to  the
      Secretary of State's consideration of the  Dublin  Regulation  and  in
      particular, Articles 17  and  9  within  the  decision  letters  under
      challenge.
The decisions made by the Secretary of State:


 114. The applicant seeks to challenge the transfer  decision  made  by  the
      Secretary of State under the Dublin III  Regulations  by  asserting  a
      breach of Article 17(2) (see paragraph 12 of the original grounds).

 115. In his skeleton argument, Mr Bahja refined that argument  as  follows;
      that the applicant seeks judicial  review  of  the  decision  of  21st
      January 2016 and 26th February 2016  to  certify  the  case  on  third
      country grounds ("the transfer decision") and to remove her to Germany
      under Dublin III Regulations.  She contends that she  is  entitled  to
      challenge the Respondent's decision under  Article  27(1).   She  also
      asserts that the removal to Germany will be in  reach  of  her  rights
      under Article 9.  Further or alternatively she challenges the decision
      under Article 17(2) as being irrational.

 116. I observe that when the matter came before Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
      on 2nd August 2016 she gave permission to amend the grounds to include
      a challenge to the decision of 26th February 2016.   I  have  set  out
      earlier the grant of permission.  There  were  no  additional  grounds
      drafted setting out the nature of the  amended  challenge  but  it  is
      accepted by Mr Harland on behalf of the Secretary of  State  that  the
      decision letter of 26th February 2016 is challenged on the basis  that
      a concession is said to have been made by the Secretary of State  that
      Article 9 applied and that the applicant is entitled to succeed  (that
      is for the claim to be heard in the  UK  under  Article  9).   In  the
      alternative it is asserted the Secretary of State did  not  apply  her
      discretion under Article 17(2).

 117. Since the hearing before UTJ Kebede, a third decision letter has  been
      served on 23rd November 2016.  Mr Bahja has not sought  to  amend  his
      grounds but has filed a skeleton argument shortly before  the  hearing
      addressing that decision letter.  Mr Harland did not take  issue  with
      the challenge in the circumstances of its late service and  thus  that
      decision is also under challenge to the extent  that  it  is  asserted
      that it suffers from the same defects as the decision letters of  21st
      January and 26th February.  I shall therefore  deal  with  all  issues
      raised.

 118. In the original grounds for judicial review, the applicant  sought  to
      challenge the decision of 21st January 2016.  In his  submissions,  Mr
      Bahja  submitted  that  the  decision  letter  demonstrated  that  the
      Secretary of State failed to exercise any discretion under Article  17
      or Article 17(2) and that the Secretary of  State  was  aware  of  the
      circumstances of the applicant.

 119. During his oral submissions he  made  a  concession  in  this  respect
      namely that he accepted that Article 17(1) was not justiciable because
      it conferred too wide a discretion that could  not  be  associated  or
      linked to any objective criteria.  However he made  it  plain  in  his
      submissions that Article 17(2) was justiciable and therefore he relied
      upon Article 17(2).

 120. In considering the submissions, it is necessary to take account of the
      material that was before the Secretary of State when the decision  was
      taken.  The applicant had been initially interviewed on her arrival on
      19th December 2015 and claimed that she did not know anyone in the  UK
      and no family members were identified.  In an interview  on  the  same
      date, she informed the Secretary of State that she had a  sister  (see
      page 15; tab 2 1.15).  It is plain from the later  responses  in  that
      interview that she had a "sister" whom  she  identified  as  a  "half-
      sister" whom she had never met and who was  not  aware  that  she  was
      coming  to  the  UK.   No  further  material  was  submitted  on   the
      applicant's behalf before the Secretary of State  before  the  process
      under Chapter III began.  The case was therefore referred to the third
      country unit and a formal request was made to  Germany  under  Article
      18(i)(b) of the Dublin III Regulations and on 18th  January  2016  the
      German authorities accepted responsibility.   No  further  information
      was  provided  by  the  time  the  decision   was   made   to   accept
      responsibility.  The decision was therefore made in the light  of  the
      material provided.

 121. Furthermore no request had been made for the exercise of discretion or
      any grounds advanced upon which it was said such discretion should  be
      exercised.  There was no request made until after the decision of 21st
      January 2016 in a letter of 8th February 2016.

 122. In any event, I am satisfied that the Secretary  of  State  explicitly
      considered  whether  she  should  depart  from  normal  practise   and
      considered an exercise in her discretion but decided  not  to  do  so.
      This is demonstrated in the decision letter where it was stated:-
         "The Secretary of State will normally decline to examine the asylum
         application substantively if there is a safe third country to which
         the applicant be sent.  There are no  grounds  for  departing  from
         this practise in your case."


 123.  Notwithstanding  what  is  said  and  that   Germany   had   accepted
      responsibility,  the  Secretary  of  State  set  out  that  she  still
      considered  whether  to  depart  from  the  normal  practise  and  was
      therefore  applying  her  discretion  in  that  context.   Whilst  the
      consideration is brief, there is no requirement upon the Secretary  of
      State to explicitly state that there was  an  exercise  of  discretion
      under Article 17.  Furthermore, in  the  light  of  the  material  put
      before  the  Secretary  of  State  as  identified  in  the   preceding
      paragraph, the applicant had not identified any specific duty or given
      any reasons for departing from such a practise.

 124. The question is whether the decision maker turned her mind to  whether
      she should hear the claim in the UK and in my judgment  the  Secretary
      of State did that on the little material that was  before  her.   Thus
      the Secretary of State reached the rational conclusion that there  was
      no good reason to exercise her discretion to hear  the  claim  in  the
      United Kingdom.

 125. Whilst the skeleton argument at  [37]  argues  that  the  decision  to
      certify her claim was in breach of Article 9, there  was  no  material
      before the Secretary of State to support any such claim under  Article
      9 or any other Article.  Consequently the decision of 22nd January was
      a rational and lawful decision.

 126. I now turn to the decision letter of 26th February 2016.  The decision
      letter was in response to the letter of 22nd February 2016.

 127. I shall summarise the decision letter.  At  paragraphs  3  to  5,  the
      applicant's  immigration  history  was  set  out  before  turning   to
      consideration under Article 8 of the ECHR.   The  Secretary  of  State
      began by  considering  family  life  as  a  dependent  adult  applying
      Appendix FM to the information provided by the applicant that she  had
      members of her family who were present and settled in the UK including
      her half-sister, aunts and cousins.  At paragraph 8  of  the  decision
      letter, the  Secretary  of  State  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
      applicant did not meet the provisions set out in Appendix  FM  as  she
      had entered the United Kingdom with no valid leave.  It also  recorded
      that she had entered the UK under a false pretence claiming  that  she
      had not known anyone in the UK  but  had  now  submitted  evidence  of
      extended family present and settled in the  UK  and  further  observed
      that whilst the family members  had  offered  support,  there  was  no
      financial evidence to show  that  she  could  be  maintained  for  any
      prolonged period of time.

 128. The decision letter at paragraphs 9 to 15 considered  the  applicant's
      private life both under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules  and
      also outside of the Rules.  In relation  to  the  consideration  under
      paragraph 276ADE, the Secretary of State concluded that she  had  been
      present in the UK since 19th December 2015 and had been  in  detention
      since her  arrival  thus  she  could  not  meet  the  requirements  of
      paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).  At paragraph 13, it was not  accepted  that
      she had established any meaningful or significant private life in  the
      UK and  under  paragraph  14,  the  Secretary  of  State  reached  the
      conclusion that there were no circumstances demonstrating that a grant
      of leave outside of the Rules was appropriate and that the applicant's
      case had been considered  under  the  provisions  of  the  Dublin  III
      Regulations whereby Germany had accepted responsibility for  examining
      her claim.  Thus the claim made  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  was
      refused.

 129. The decision letter then went on to consider the  Dublin  Regulations.
      The decision letter stated as follows:-
         "Dublin Regulation

         16.  Consideration has been given to  preserving  family  unity  as
             defined under the terms of the Dublin Regulation:

             Article 9

             Where the applicant has a family member, regardless of whether
             the family was previously formed in the country of origin, who
             has been allowed to reside as a beneficiary  of  international
             protection in a Member  State,  that  Member  State  shall  be
             responsible for examining the  application  for  international
             protection, provided that the persons concerned express  their
             desire in writing.

         17.  It is noted that you have  provided  witness  statements  from
             seven members of your client's extended family which  includes
             aunts, cousins and in-laws.  They state that they are  settled
             in the UK, are willing to provide support to your client,  and
             have provided photocopies of their British  passport  details.
             With regards to the evidence provided,  it  is  accepted  that
             your client has a number of family members present and settled
             in the UK who  have  been  the  beneficiary  of  international
             protection in the UK.  Your client did however fail to mention
             that she  had  any  family  in  the  UK  when  she  was  first
             encountered, but during interview she did mention that she had
             a sister in the UK.

         Conclusion

         18.  In  view  of  the  aforementioned  jurisprudence,  and  having
             carefully considered your client's circumstances, the  benefit
             of the doubt has  been  provided  to  her,  and  while  it  is
             considered that her removal to Germany would  not  breach  the
             United Kingdom's obligations under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,
             given the aforementioned Dublin Regulation Article  9,  it  is
             considered appropriate to provide  your  client  with  an  in-
             country appeal to our refusal of her Article 8 ECHR claim.

         19.  As the Secretary of State has refused your client's Article  8
             ECHR claim but not certified the claim as  clearly  unfounded,
             it is now open to your client to lodge an  appeal,  solely  on
             Article 8 grounds, should she wish to challenge this decision.
              This appeal right has been  granted  because  of  the  Dublin
             Regulation aspect with  regards  to  family  members  and  the
             responsibility.  As  such  please  find  enclosed  appropriate
             appeal  papers.   If  you  do  intend  to  appeal  please  pay
             particular attention to the deadline for doing so ...

         21.  Removal scheduled for 29th February 2016 will be cancelled."


 130. It is submitted on behalf of the applicant that the decision letter in
      the terms of its drafting  clearly  accepts  that  the  applicant  had
      family members  who  have  been  the  beneficiaries  of  international
      protection.  However  the  Secretary  of  State  therefore  failed  to
      consider the applicant  under  Article  9  of  Dublin  III  which  was
      unlawful because having accepted that the applicant had family members
      in the UK who had been beneficiaries of international protection,  the
      Secretary of State had no discretion in terms of Article 9  to  refuse
      to examine her claim.  Mr Bahja submits that the Secretary of  State's
      refusal to consider that the UK was the Member State responsible under
      Article 9 was unlawful, irrational or Wednesbury unreasonable.  By way
      of reply, Mr Harland submits the applicant cannot fall within  Article
      9 and therefore any claim in this respect  must  fail  whether  it  is
      justiciable or not.

 131. I shall set out Article 9 of the Dublin III Regulations.  It reads  as
      follows:-
         "Article 9

         Family members who are beneficiaries of international protection

         Where the applicant has a family member, regardless of whether  the
         family was previously formed in the country of origin, who has been
         allowed to reside as a beneficiary of international protection in a
         Member State, that Member State shall be responsible for  examining
         the application for international  protection,  provided  that  the
         persons concerned expressed their desire in writing."


 132. For the  applicant  to  fall  within  Article  9  of  the  Dublin  III
      Regulation, the applicant must demonstrate  that  she  has  a  "family
      member ... who  has  been  allowed  to  reside  as  a  beneficiary  of
      international protection in a Member State ..."  The definition  of  a
      "family member" is set out in Article 2(g).  That reads as follows:-
         "(g) 'Family members' means, insofar as the family already  existed
              in the  country  of  origin,  the  following  members  of  the
              applicant's family who are present on  the  territory  of  the
              Member States:

              The spouse of the applicant or his or her unmarried partner in
              a stable relationship, where the law or practise of the Member
              State concerned treats unmarried  couples in a way  comparable
              to married couples under its law  relating  to  third  country
              nationals;

              The minor children of couples referred to in the first  indent
              or of the applicant, on condition that they are unmarried  and
              regardless of whether they were born in or out of  wedlock  or
              adopted as defined under national law;

              When the applicant is  a  minor  and  unmarried,  the  father,
              mother or another adult responsible for the applicant, whether
              by law or by the practise of the Member State where the  adult
              is present;

              When the beneficiary of international protection  is  a  minor
              and unmarried, the father, mother or another adult responsible
              for him or her whether by law or by the practise of the Member
              State where the beneficiary is present; .."


 133. There is no dispute that the applicant is an adult  and  therefore  by
      reference to the definition of a "family member"  under  Article  2(g)
      the applicant would have to demonstrate that the family member  relied
      upon was a  spouse  or  unmarried  child  who  was  a  beneficiary  of
      international protection.  The Appellant can demonstrate neither.  The
      relatives that she has set out in the representations of 22nd February
      were identified as a half-sibling, brother-in-law, aunts  and  cousins
      and thus they do not fall within the definition and therefore  Article
      9 does not apply.

 134. It is in this context that I have considered Mr Bahja's argument  that
      the definition of a "family member" should be read broadly to  include
      a half-sibling.  Thus he argues that  the  family  relationship  of  a
      sibling is referred to in Recital 17 in Article 16 of  Dublin  III  in
      order to preserve family unity and the guiding principle in Article  9
      is the maintenance of the family unit.

 135. He further argues that the proposals for Dublin IV indicate a proposal
      to redraft the definition of "family members".

 136. In considering those arguments  it  is  necessary  to  return  to  the
      structure and wording of  the  Dublin  III  Regulation.   Chapter  III
      contains Articles 7 to 15 and is called "Criteria for determining  the
      Member State responsible".  It sets out a criteria which determine the
      responsible Member State and the hierarchy of those criteria (so  that
      one can determine which Member State is in  fact  responsible  if  the
      different criteria identify two or more possible Member States).

 137. Where an applicant for asylum has a connection with two or more Member
      States that determination  is  primarily  an  interstate  process  and
      consequently it is not a feature of the process to take account of  an
      individual's preferences or desires.  However there are  a  number  of
      exceptions to that general rule within the legislative scheme  of  the
      Regulation as set out in the decision of Ghezelbash v Staatssecretaris
      van Veiligheid en Justitie (Case C-63/15) [2016] WLR at paragraphs  37
      to 43.  Those paragraphs in Ghezelbash make reference to when applying
      the Chapter III criteria the Member States must take  account  of  the
      presence of an applicant's family members in the EU  territory  (where
      relevant) before another Member State accepts a request to  take  back
      or take charge of the applicant.

 138. There is no doubt that one of the features of the  Dublin  Regulations
      is the provision which it makes for the protection of minors and those
      who are vulnerable as set out in Article 6 "guarantees for minors" and
      Article 8 which sets out a number of circumstances dealing with minors
      and their family members and relatives (see Article 8(2)).  Article  9
      (as already cited) makes reference to family members in the context of
      family members as so defined and Article 10 which  deals  with  family
      members whose applications for international protection in that Member
      State have not been the subject of a first decision.

 139. Article 16 is set out in Chapter IV of  Dublin  III  and  is  entitled
      "Dependent persons and discretionary clauses".  Article  16  reads  as
      follows:-
         "Article 16

         Dependent persons

         Where, on account of pregnancy, a newborn child,  serious  illness,
         severe disability or old age, an  applicant  is  dependent  on  the
         assistance of his or her child, sibling or parent legally  resident
         in one of the Member States, or his or her child, sibling or parent
         legally resident in one of the Member States is  dependent  on  the
         assistant of the applicant, Member States shall  normally  keep  or
         bring together the applicant with that child,  sibling  or  parent,
         provided that family ties existed in the country  of  origin,  that
         the child, sibling or parent or the applicant is able to take  care
         of the dependent person and that the  persons  concerned  expressed
         their desire in writing."


 140. The last remaining relevant Article is set out at Article  7(3)  which
      stipulates that in considering an application under Article 8,  10  or
      16 of Dublin III, the determining Member State  is  only  required  to
      take into consideration evidence provided prior  to  the  decision  of
      another State to accept responsibility for a claim  for  international
      protection.

 141. Recital 17 is a general discretion which is transposed into the Dublin
      III Regulations in Article 17(1).

 142. The submissions made by Mr Bahja are that the Recital and  Article  16
      both  view  "siblings"  as  being  sufficiently  close  relatives  and
      therefore  they  fall  within  Article  16.   His   argument   follows
      thereafter that Article 9 should therefore be  read  more  broadly  to
      encompass "siblings".  However, as set out above, that  submission  is
      not supported by  the  wording  of  Article  16  which  is  in  wholly
      different terms to that of Article 9.  A careful  examination  of  the
      wording of the two Articles demonstrates that the  draughtsman  sought
      to distinguish between the types of family member  who  would  qualify
      under each of the respective Articles.  There is a  clear  distinction
      in Article 16  which  deals  with  dependent  persons  and  identifies
      circumstances of such dependence by an applicant or vice versa upon  a
      child, sibling or parent and a non-dependent and non-vulnerable person
      who falls under Article 9 when read with  the  definition  of  "family
      members" set out in Article 2(g).

 143. Under Article 16, in relation to siblings,  it  concerns  a  situation
      where the applicant is dependent  on  a  sibling  or  the  sibling  is
      dependent on the applicant (so long  as  the  relationship  previously
      existed) and that where there is such a sibling they  should  normally
      be kept together.  However under  Article  9  only  a  more  proximate
      relationship as defined under Article 2(g) will apply.  Mr Bahja  puts
      forward no submission as to why the drafting of Article 9 and  16  are
      formulated in this way and are therefore different.  His  argument  is
      that the proposals for  Dublin  IV  suggest  that  the  definition  of
      "family member" should be altered to include  wider  family  relatives
      and in particular a sibling.

 144. I have considered those  submissions  but  I  am  satisfied  that  the
      applicant does not nor cannot fall within Article 9 when seen  in  the
      context of Article 2(g).  She cannot demonstrate  a  proximate  family
      member as so defined; she does not have a spouse or an unmarried child
      who is a beneficiary of international protection.  Additionally, it is
      not advanced on her behalf that she can meet any of the conditions set
      out in Article 16.

 145. I cannot see any scope for reading Article 2(g) any wider than  it  is
      presently defined.  Whilst there is no definition of "siblings" within
      the Regulations I do not find that to be surprising as "sibling" is  a
      term of art and it is not necessary to define it further.

 146. Furthermore  I  can  see  no  force  in  the  argument  that  a  wider
      interpretation under Article 2(g) is supported to include a  "sibling"
      as supported in the decision of K v Bundesasylamt (Case -  245/11)(6th
      November 2012).  As set out earlier in this determination, that was  a
      decision which related to Article 15(2) of the Dublin  II  Regulations
      in the context of dependency.  Article 15(2) of  Dublin  II  has  been
      replaced by Article 16 and is intended to  deal  with  those  who  are
      dependent in particular circumstances  of  vulnerability,  (pregnancy,
      newborn child, ill-health, disability).  The Appellant cannot and does
      not fall within Article 16.  Whilst Article 15(2)  did  not  refer  to
      "family members" but "other relatives" Article 9, which is relied upon
      by the applicant, does not use the same terminology.

 147. It also seems to me that to consider any further proposals for  reform
      to Dublin III is  speculative  and  that  for  the  purposes  of  this
      claimant, I should apply the form of the Regulation that is  in  force
      and was in force at the material time.

 148. The alternative argument advanced by Mr Bahja is that in the  decision
      letter of 26th February 2016, the Secretary of State made a concession
      that the Appellant had "family  members"  in  the  UK  as  within  the
      definition of Article 2(g) of the Dublin III  Regulation.   He  argues
      that the applicant is entitled to rely on the wording of the  decision
      letter and that the concession is such that this alone  is  sufficient
      for the applicant to succeed and  demonstrating  that  the  conclusion
      reached that Article 9 does not apply in her case is unlawful.

 149. He submits that on this basis that once the  Secretary  of  State  has
      accepted that the applicant has a family member  who  is  entitled  to
      reside as a beneficiary of international protection, that that  Member
      State is responsible for examining the application  for  international
      protection.  Thus, he  submits,  that  there  is  no  discretion  when
      applying Article 9 on the basis of the  concession  found  within  the
      decision letter.

 150. Mr Harland by way of reply submits the decision letter  cannot  be  so
      construed and that if it is suggested that there  was  any  legitimate
      expectation on the applicant's behalf that she could rely on a  family
      member as defined in Article 2(g), no such question  arises  from  the
      wording within the decision letter.  He submits  the  decision  letter
      does not provide any expectation or promise that she will  be  treated
      by the Secretary of State as  if  Article  9  applied.   In  his  oral
      submissions, he submitted that even if  it  could  be  said  to  be  a
      concession, it could be withdrawn as this was not a case in  which  it
      could properly be said that the applicant  was  granted  any  form  of
      benefit from the decision letter of 26th February and that she was  in
      the same position as she was before.  In any event, Mr Harland submits
      that the decision letter of  23rd  November  2016  made  it  plain  at
      paragraph 2 of that letter that there was no  intention  of  any  such
      concession.

 151. I have set out earlier in this judgment  the  relevant  parts  of  the
      decision letter of 26th February and in particular paragraphs  16  and
      17 which are in issue between the parties.

 152. Insofar as the submission is based on any "legitimate expectation"  on
      the applicant's part, I am satisfied that the decision letter and  its
      wording does not offer any such legitimate expectation that the family
      members that she seeks  to  rely  upon  are  "family  members"  within
      Article 9.  Applying the principle in R  (Nadarajah)  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 1363 per Laws  LJ  there
      is no evidence of a  "clear,  unambiguous  statement  of  practise  or
      promise  for  which  it  would  be  contrary  to  principles  of  good
      administration for the minister to resile, absent good reasons  to  do
      so."

 153. I cannot read the decision letter to provide any such promise that the
      applicant would be treated as if Article 9 applied.   Nor  can  it  be
      reasonably said that there was any such concession.  Had there been, I
      am satisfied that it would have been set out in clear and  unambiguous
      terms, namely, that the Secretary  of  State  intended  to  treat  her
      relatives and in particular her half-sibling to fall within Article  9
      notwithstanding the definition in Article 2(g).

 154. I also consider that the argument advanced on behalf of the  applicant
      ignores paragraph 17 of the decision letter where  it  refers  to  the
      extended family members (which includes aunts, cousins and in-laws) as
      members of the "extended family" rather than  "family  members"  under
      Article 9.  The architecture of the European Regulations,  going  back
      to the  Directive,  is  to  distinguish  between  family  members  and
      extended family members.  Here the Secretary of  State  is  using  the
      vocabulary of "extended family members" and is a reference to the fact
      that she expressly does not accept that  there  are  "family  members"
      within the definition of Article 2(g).  I do not consider  that  there
      was any concession in the decision letter of 26th February  2016;  the
      family relatives either are or they are not  "family  members"  within
      Article 2(g).

 155. Furthermore, I consider that if there had  been  any  such  concession
      that the applicant's half-sibling or any of her other  family  members
      fell within Article 9, that the Secretary of State would not have gone
      on to consider whether Article 8 applied. There  would  have  been  no
      reason to reach the conclusion at paragraphs 18 and 19 that in view of
      the applicant's circumstances that the Secretary of State decided  not
      to certify a human rights claim. The effect of this was that she had a
      challenge to the Secretary of State's decision on Article 8 grounds as
      set out in the decision of R (on  the  application  of  ZAT)  v  SSHD,
      (Article 8 ECHR - Dublin Regulations, interface, proportionality)  IJR
      [2016] UKUT at [49] and confirmed in SSHD v ZAT [at ZAT]  [2016]  EWCA
      Civ at [66] whereby it is said that the Dublin regime does not operate
      to the exclusion of the human rights regime  but  exists  side-by-side
      with it.

 156. In conclusion, I reject the submission that the decision  letter  made
      any concession and that the Appellant could therefore rely on  Article
      9.  I observe in passing that in the  letter  of  22nd  February,  the
      applicant's solicitors make no reference to  Article  9  or  that  the
      family members that were  in  the  United  Kingdom  fell  within  that
      Article.

 157. The fact that the Upper Tribunal Judge when granting  permission  made
      reference to there being a "arguable concession", does not  mean  that
      this Tribunal, after hearing full argument  is  bound  by  that.   The
      judge in granting permission identified what was an arguable point but
      no more than that.

 158. As to any argument that the decision  maker  failed  to  consider  any
      residual discretion under Article 17, I  consider  that  the  decision
      letter should be read with that of 21st January.  I have already found
      that the decision letter  of  that  date  did  consider  any  residual
      exercise of discretion for the reason that I have set out.  Whilst  it
      is true that following that decision, further information was provided
      it was of a limited nature.  The statements of the family members gave
      no details in substance of any relationships.   It  was  not  apparent
      from those statements, that  none  of  them  had  previously  met  the
      applicant including her  half-sibling  and  that  the  extent  of  any
      relationship was in the context  of  visiting  her  in  short  periods
      whilst she was in detention, which was the position at the date of the
      decision under challenge.   There  was  no  evidence  put  before  the
      Secretary of State either to bring family relatives  together  on  any
      "humanitarian grounds".

 159. I do not read the decision letter as one in which the  decision  maker
      was not aware of the discretion to hear the  claim  under  Article  17
      despite the other Member State having accepted to take back  the  take
      back request but that the Secretary of State was  not  satisfied  that
      the circumstances were such to  exercise  discretion  in  her  favour.
      That is made more explicit in the decision not to certify her claim on
      Article 8 grounds which would have the  effect  of  not  removing  the
      applicant from the UK while she had a claim outstanding under  Article
      8  relying  on  her  family  relationships  within  the  UK.  This  is
      consistent with the decision on CK ( as cited).

 160. Consequently the Secretary of State when taking the decision  on  26th
      February, and having taken into account the material made  a  rational
      and lawful decision to refuse the claim under the  Dublin  Regulations
      (whether Article 9 or whether under the general  discretionary  clause
      under Article 17) but had recognised that such a claim should  not  be
      certified.

 161. In those circumstances it is not  necessary  to  address  any  further
      submissions made concerning the withdrawal of the concession or indeed
      the decision letter of  23rd  November  2016  and  its  contents  when
      considering Article 9.

 162. Even if I were wrong in that respect,  the  decision  letter  of  23rd
      November at paragraph 4 provides support for the earlier decision made
      and that the Secretary of State, having taken into  consideration  all
      the circumstances of the case (and the letters  from  the  applicant's
      sister and other  relatives)  that  there  are  no  good  reasons  for
      exercising the discretion under Article 17 to hear the  claim  in  the
      UK.  Mr Bahja seeks to challenge the decision on the  basis  that  the
      Secretary of State failed to consider any humanitarian purposes or any
      family re-unification.

 163. However the terms  of  Article  17(2)  makes  reference  to  "bringing
      together  any  family  relatives  on  humanitarian  grounds  based  in
      particular on family or cultural  considerations."   In  the  evidence
      provided  to  the  Secretary  of  State  no  such  grounds  have  been
      articulated or identified in the context of the circumstances  of  the
      applicant and her family members.  They had not  met  her  until  they
      visited her in custody and there were  no  family  or  other  cultural
      considerations advanced on her behalf.

 164. Furthermore Mr Bahja does not identify any policy or any  guidance  as
      to how the discretion should be exercised.  Whilst he argues that  the
      Secretary of State was wrong to take account of the public interest in
      ensuring that any asylum claims are heard in  the  country  where  the
      applicant first claimed  asylum  (see  paragraph  4  of  the  decision
      letter) in my judgment, such a factor was properly considered  by  the
      Secretary of State in exercising any discretion to determine the claim
      under Article 17 or otherwise.  This is recognised  implicitly  within
      the Dublin Regulations the stated aim to provide a method:
         "... based on objective, fair criteria both Member States  and  for
         the person concerned.  It should, in particular make it possible to
         determine rapidly the Member State responsible, so as to  guarantee
         effective access to the procedure for  determining  refugee  status
         and  not  compromise  the  objective  of  the  rapid   process   of
         applications for international protection" (see Recital 5).


 165. For these reasons I am not satisfied that  it  has  been  demonstrated
      that the decisions of the Secretary of State were unlawful, irrational
      or unreasonable and thus the application for judicial review should be
      dismissed.

 166.  I dismiss the application for judicial review.

 167. I will deal with any other ancillary matters  when  this  judgment  is
      handed down, including any application for anonymity.  The parties are
      invited to agree a draft order to be lodged 48 hours  before  judgment
      is handed down (to include costs) and in the absence of such an  order
      they will be required to attend.
POSTSCRIPT:




 168. After sending a  draft  judgment  to  the  parties  in  February  and
      providing for a later time for hand down of it, both parties provided
      preliminary written submissions relating to a  new  decision  of  the
      Fifth Chamber of the  CJEU  CK  and  Others  [2017]  EUECJ  C-578/16.
      Neither party had been able to obtain an authorised  translated  copy
      of that decision and on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State,  it  was
      argued that the Tribunal should not finalise  this  decision  on  the
      question of justiciability of Article 17(2) until  the  decision  was
      available.  In those circumstances, the parties were invited to  send
      any further written submissions along with a properly translated copy
      of the decision CK.  Both parties  subsequently  complied  with  that
      direction at the end of March.


169. I confirm that I have considered those submissions in the light of  the
    decision and in the light of the issues in this case.


170. The request for the preliminary ruling in the decision of CK  concerned
    the interpretation of Articles 3(2) and 17(1) of  Dublin  III,  Article
    267 TFEU and Article 4 of the Charter  of  Fundamental  Rights  of  the
    European Union and four questions were referred to the Court of Justice
    (see paragraph 46).


171. In answer to the first question, as to whether Article  17(1)  must  be
    interpreted as meaning that the question of the application by a Member
    State, of the discretionary clause is governed solely by  national  law
    and the interpretation given to it by the constitutional court  of  the
    Member State, or whether it is question of interpretation  of  EU  law,
    the CJEU ruled  that  the  discretionary  clause  under  Article  17(1)
    implies an interpretation of EU  law  within  the  meaning  of  Article
    267(3) of the TFEU ( see paragraphs 52-54).


172. The conclusions of the CJEU when  considering  the  second,  third  and
    fourth questions are set out at paragraph  96.  In  essence,  the  CJEU
    ruled that the transfer of an asylum seeker within the framework of the
    Dublin III Regulation can only take place in conditions  that  preclude
    the transfer for resulting in a  real  risk  of  the  person  suffering
    inhuman or degrading treatment ( within the meaning of Article 4 of the
    Charter). The CJEU also ruled that the provisions of Dublin III must be
    interpreted and applied with respect to the fundamental rights  in  the
    Charter, namely, Article 4 which relates to the prohibition of  inhuman
    or degrading treatment (as provided in Article 3 of the ECHR),  and  in
    accordance with Article 52(3) of the Charter,  its  meaning  and  scope
    must be the same as conferred by the ECHR. Even if there are no grounds
    for believing that there are systemic failures in the asylum  procedure
    and reception conditions, a transfer can entail a real risk of  inhuman
    or  degrading  treatment  within  the  meaning   of   Article   4,   in
    circumstances where the transfer of the applicant, who has particularly
    serious physical/mental health conditions, would lead to  their  health
    deteriorating. Therefore where an applicant provides objective evidence
    showing the seriousness of the consequences of transfer, in the context
    of an effective remedy set out in Article 27, the authorities  and  the
    courts of the Member States cannot ignore that evidence. A Court  would
    have to consider the legality of a decision to transfer because such  a
    decision may lead to inhuman or degrading treatment of that person.


173. The court disagreed with the  Advocate  General's  opinion  as  to  the
    interpretation of Article 3(2) of Dublin  III  and  Article  4  of  the
    Charter for the reasons set out at [93] and [94]  in  which  the  court
    distinguished the decision in Abdullahi.  It is also right to note that
    the court at [94] referred to  its  earlier  observations  set  out  at
    paragraphs [56-65] concerning the nature of the Dublin  III  Regulation
    and that  it  "differed  in  essential  respects  from  the  Dublin  II
    Regulation", and in particular that the provisions of Dublin  III  must
    be interpreted and applied in a manner consistent with the  fundamental
    rights guaranteed by the Charter  (see  paragraph  [59]).   Whilst  the
    court did not explicitly say so, those observations were akin to  those
    made in the decision of Ghezelbash to which I have referred earlier  in
    this judgment.


174. Thus the court, disagreeing with the Advocate General's  opinion  found
    that even if there are no systemic failings in the reception conditions
    of a receiving Member State, the transfer of an  asylum  seeker  within
    the framework of the Dublin III  Regulation  can  only  take  place  in
    conditions which exclude the possibility of transfer which  may  result
    in a real or proven risk of the person concerned suffering  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment (Article 4) (see paragraph 96).


175. That conclusion does not bear on  the  question  that  I  have  had  to
    decide earlier in this judgment.


176. The Secretary  of  State  relies  on  paragraph  [97]  to  support  her
    argument that Article 17 is not justiciable.  Paragraph [97]  reads  as
    follows:-


         "Article 17(1) of that Regulation, read in the light of  Article  4
         of  the  Charter,  cannot   be   interpreted   as   requiring,   in
         circumstances such as those at issue in the main proceedings,  that
         Member State to apply that clause."


    However, the Fifth  Chamber  does  not  give  any  reasoning  for  that
    conclusion.  Mr Harland on behalf of the  Secretary  of  State  in  the
    written submissions asserts that the conclusion is made  clear  by  the
    reasoning of the Advocate General and that as  the  court  adopted  his
    conclusion, it should be thought to have adopted his reasoning  as  set
    out at paragraph [62-7].  However in my judgement, the reasoning of the
    CJEU in CK does not lead to the  conclusion  that  Article  17  is  not
    justiciable. The Court did not adopt  the  reasoning  of  the  Advocate
    General. Even if it could be said that the  Advocate  General  provided
    such reasoning  at  paragraphs62-67,  the  Advocate  General  in  those
    paragraphs considered the argument advanced by the  applicants  in  the
    main proceedings that the exercise of Article 17(1) was  mandatory  (my
    emphasis) where the applicant runs a real  risk  of  being  subject  to
    inhuman or degrading treatment.  The Advocate General set out  at  [62]
    that Article  17(1)  cannot  serve  as  an  obligation  to  examine  an
    application for international protection and gave four reasons for this
    set out at paragraphs [63-66] of his decision.


177.  In my judgment, by saying that there was no obligation,  the  Advocate
    General was explicitly considering the applicant's argument  (based  on
    the circumstances of the applicant in CK)  that  the  consideration  of
    Article 17(1) was mandatory.    However, the absence of  an  obligation
    on the part of the Slovenian authorities in CK did not necessarily mean
    that the Member State did not have a choice or discretion  to  consider
    whether Article 17 should be exercised (which would  allow  the  Member
    State to hear the claim themselves).  Thus, when read with  Article  27
    (in this context an effective remedy guaranteed by Article  47  of  the
    Charter) and  where  circumstances  are  raised  which  relate  to  the
    exercise of discretion, then a failure to exercise that discretion  can
    be challenged on rationality grounds (in  the  present  case  it  is  a
    challenge to Article 17(2) not Article 17(1)).


178.  Whilst  the  written  submissions  make  reference  to  the   Advocate
    General's answer to question 4, that question was not answered  by  the
    Advocate General who found on the particular circumstances of the  case
    that such a question was hypothetical and therefore  inadmissible.   It
    is right that the Advocate General did set out the  arguments  advanced
    by the Commission, Slovenia and the UK government that the  examination
    of an application for international protection on the basis of  Article
    17(1) is an option for the Member State concerned and not a  right  for
    the Applicant (see paragraph 70) the Advocate General did not reach any
    conclusive view on  this  (see  paragraphs  [73]  and  [74])  and  more
    importantly nor did the CJEU.


179. Consequently I do not consider that the interpretation of  CK  is  that
    which is reflected in the submissions  advanced  by  the  Secretary  of
    State and prefer those of the applicant  on  this  issue.  Consequently
    those submissions do not affect the decision  I  have  reached  on  the
    issue of the interpretation of Article 17.


180. However even if I were wrong in my interpretation of Article 17(2),  it
    is plain from this judgment that such an interpretation does not affect
    the outcome of the decision I have made,  as  the  case  fails  on  its
    facts.  It would also not preclude any further  arguments  advanced  by
    either party in relation to CK or reliance on any other cases that have
    a bearing  on  the  justiciability  issue,  including  cases  that  are
    presently the subject of  appeal  relating  to  Article  28  and  cases
    presently before the CJEU.     ~~~0~~~~






