

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/2456/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                            20 February 2017


                                  The QUEEN
                   (ON The application OF neenisha FAWAZ)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                               - - - - - - - -

Ms M Dogra of Counsel, instructed by Marsh & Partners Solicitors appeared
on behalf of the Applicant.

Mr E Metcalfe, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -



    JUDGE hanson: The history of  this  matter  is  not  in  dispute.   The
    original  claim  for  judicial  review  was  issued  on  4  March  2016
    challenging an impugned decision  which  rejected  further  submissions
    made by the applicant as not amounting to a  fresh  claim  pursuant  to
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.   The  date  of  that  original
    earlier decision is 28 January 2016.


2.   The applicant has received a number of further supplementary  decisions
    as a result of which she was given leave to amend her grounds of  claim
    pursuant to an order of Upper Tribunal  Judge  Smith  on  22  September
    2016.  By the terms of Upper Tribunal Judge Smith's order  the  amended
    grounds were to substitute in their entirety the grounds submitted with
    the 4 March 2016 application.

3.   The amended grounds seek  to  challenge  the  latest  decision  on  her
    application, that made on 25 July 2016, again  refusing  to  treat  the
    applicant's further submissions as a  fresh  claim.   The  only  remedy
    sought in the amended grounds was an order quashing the decision of  25
    July 2016.

4.   Permission to bring judicial review  proceedings  was  refused  on  the
    papers but was granted at a renewed  oral  hearing  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Peter Lane, in an order sealed on 17  November  2016  in  limited
    terms, namely in relation to the assessment by the  decision  maker  of
    the applicant's claim outside the Rules pursuant to Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

5.   I have been shown this morning the full text of a letter  sent  to  the
    applicant's solicitors by the Secretary of State dated 28 December 2016
    in which the respondent offered 1) to withdraw the impugned decision of
    25 July 2016, 2) to reconsider further the applicant's claim for  leave
    and 3) to make an offer in relation to costs that would be discussed at
    the appropriate stage of these proceedings.

6.   I am satisfied, as Ms Dogra gave a full,  comprehensive  and  plausible
    response when  the  issue  of  the  applicant's  actual  knowledge  was
    discussed with her at the outset of the proceedings that the  applicant
    has been fully aware of the consequences  in  law,  in  public  law  in
    particular, of such  an  offer  being  made  by  the  Government  Legal
    Department.

7.   The consequence of the remedy in the amended grounds being  limited  to
    an order quashing the decision of 25 July 2016 is that if  that  remedy
    was granted to the  applicant  all  that  would  happen  is  that  that
    decision would effectively disappear, it would have no  legal  standing
    and the Secretary of State would have to reconsider the  matter  afresh
    as there would then be an outstanding application upon which  a  lawful
    decision was awaited.

8.   The reality of the offer of 28 December 2016 is that the withdrawal  of
    the impugned decision by the Secretary  of  State  gave  the  applicant
    exactly what she was seeking to achieve by having  the  order  quashed.
    The offer on 28  December  2016  to  reconsider  the  matter  gave  the
    applicant exactly what she would have achieved had  the  decision  been
    quashed today albeit that it was made some three months ago.

9.   The question of whether a claim is academic  is  not  a  question  that
    ends if  permission  to  bring  judicial  review  is  granted.   It  is
    established public law practice supported  by  jurisprudence  that  the
    obligation stands upon both parties to any case and the  Tribunal  when
    considering a matter, even if permission  was  granted  at  an  earlier
    date, to consider whether proceedings have become academic.  Indeed, in
    the case of R (on the application of Korkmaz) v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2012] EWHC 1163 (Admin) at paragraph 21  the  High
    Court found that a challenge to a decision that has been  overtaken  by
    events, i.e. a remedy sought has already been granted, is a matter that
    has become academic.

10.  In R (on the application of AG (Pakistan)) v Secretary of State  [2011]
    EWCA Civ 998, a Court of Appeal case, at paragraphs 7 to  9  the  court
    found that adjourning a judicial review application  where  the  matter
    raised had become wholly academic and where it  was  difficult  to  see
    what practical relief could currently be given was inappropriate  again
    because the matter had become academic.   They  were  cases  that  were
    similar in some respects to the chronology and structure of this  case.
    Whilst the case may not have been academic prior to 28 December 2016 at
    that date it clearly became an academic claim.

11.  I will read for the benefit of the applicant,  who,  I  appreciate,  is
    not a lawyer, guidance on  hypothetical  academic  issues  and  utility
    contained in the Judicial Review Handbook written  by  Michael  Fordham
    QC, Sixth Edition, where he sums up the  principles  arising  from  the
    various cases that have been reported in relation to  this  matter  and
    where he states as follows:

         "Courts do not like holding moots.  One  of  the  great  values  of
         public law is in clarifying and guiding respectively that even that
         function is recognised as a function which arises out of deciding a
         specific dispute requiring  resolution.   In  general  judges  need
         persuading that there is a right to  entertain  a  judicial  review
         challenge where the sole issues are  or  have  become  academic  or
         hypothetical.  Sometimes it will be in the public interest to grasp
         the nettle rather than having  the  uncertainties  of  yet  further
         litigation in the future.  The position on appeal may be  different
         too since there will be a binding judgment which may  be  erroneous
         and need considering even though it may have become academic to the
         parties."

12.  Two points  in  relation  to  that.   Firstly,  these  are  not  appeal
    proceedings and so the  principles  applicable  to  appeals  where  the
    matters a court can consider are substantially wider than  the  limited
    public law grounds in judicial review, which  makes the reference to an
    appeal of no general application to this  matter,  and  secondly,  that
    although the applicant has expressed anger,  and  I  put  it  in  those
    terms, at the way she has been treated by the Secretary of State making
    what are three decisions which on the face of  them  do  appear  to  be
    affected by similar errors her claim does not give rise to  any  public
    law issue or public matter of interest that would be of benefit to  the
    wider community or others in her position, that may warrant this matter
    being entertained further by this Tribunal.

13.  It was no doubt explained to the applicant that judicial  review  is  a
    discretionary last resort remedy, discretionary meaning that it  is  at
    the discretion of the court or Tribunal as to what they do with  regard
    to an application within the bounds of public law. The  term  'of  last
    resort' meaning that it is a remedy available if  no  other  reasonable
    lawful option appears to present itself.

14.  In this case, as at 28 December 2016, such an option was presented  and
    made available by the Secretary of State. Allowing a reasonable  period
    of time and allowing for the Christmas and the New  Year  closures  and
    although I mentioned 7 January earlier I think that would be  a  little
    unfair, it is the finding of this Tribunal that as from 14 January 2017
    the applicant not only received but had sufficient time to consider the
    Secretary of State's offer which as from  that  date  she  should  have
    appreciated and may well have been advised made the claim one that  was
    hypothetical or academic on the facts and in  law.  On  that  basis,  I
    refuse the relief sought.~~~~0~~~~



NOTE: it was indicated in the later discussion relating to  costs  that  the
    applicant had responded to the respondents offer in a  letter  dated  6
    January 2017 indicating an  awareness  of  the  issues  before  the  14
    January 2017 date referred to above.
