

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/2544/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                             1 December 2016


                                  The QUEEN
                   (ON The application OF GAGANDEEP SINGH)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                          THE HON. MR JUSTICE WARBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr Zane Malik, instructed by Malik Law Chambers Solicitors appeared on
behalf of the Applicant.

Ms Rebecca Murray, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared
on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    MR JUSTICE WARBY:


 2. The applicant, Gagandeep Singh, is 41 years old.  He was born in  India
    and entered the UK in 2004 and, according  to  him,  has  resided  here
    continuously since that date.  In the summer of  2015  he  applied  for
    leave to remain on the basis of his private and family life.

 3. On 15 December 2015 the Secretary of State refused his application  and
    certified it as  clearly  unfounded  pursuant  to  Section  94  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4. In this judicial review claim the applicant challenges  the  lawfulness
    of that decision.  Permission to move for judicial review  was  granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara after a hearing on 27 July 2016.

 5. Stated broadly, the issue is whether the Secretary of State  was  wrong
    to conclude  that  the  appellant's  human  rights  claim  was  clearly
    unfounded.  A refusal to uphold an arguable claim should be  tested  by
    way of appeal before an Immigration Judge in the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The effect of certification under Section 94 is that no such appeal can
    be brought and the only  route  by  which  such  a  decision  could  be
    challenged is by a judicial review such as this one.

 6. The approach that  must  be  taken  by  the  Secretary  of  State  when
    considering whether to certify under Section 94, and the approach to be
    taken by the court upon judicial review of  that  decision,  have  both
    been the subject of review and restatement in the  recent  decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in FR (Albania) [2016] EWCA Civ 605, to which  both
    Counsel have referred me.

 7. I have been referred in particular to the following.

      a) Paragraph 48, where Ms  Murray  highlights  the  reference  to  the
         statement of Lord Justice Laws in Begbie, that there is a  spectrum
         or sliding scale of review, more or less intrusive according to the
         nature and gravity of what is at stake.

      b) Paragraph 53 which  summarises  Lord  Phillips'  judgment  in  L  v
         Secretary of State [2003] EWCA Civ. 25 at [56] and [57]

      c) Paragraph 54 citing Lord Phillips' words from paragraph 58 of L, to
         paragraph 58 citing Lord Phillips in ZT (Kosovo) at [23] and

      d) Paragraph 60, citing Lord Hope to the following effect:

         "A reviewing court must consider how an appeal would be  likely  to
         fare before an Adjudicator as the body responsible for deciding any
         appeal, and ... must assess the judgment which would  or  might  be
         made by an Adjudicator on appeal.  ...  It may  become  clear  that
         the quality of the claim is such that the facts of the  case  admit
         of only one answer.  But the process  ...  is  essentially  one  of
         review."

 8. Mr Malik emphasises and I accept that the court's function is to assess
    essentially the same question that the Secretary of State  herself  has
    to consider.  An individual should not lightly be deprived of  a  right
    to mount a legal challenge to the merits of an administrative decision.
     Only if it is clear that such a challenge could not succeed could that
    be justified; and where human rights are concerned there is no room for
    manoeuvre or margin of appreciation to be brought into consideration.

 9. Mr Malik also refers me to the applicable guidance, which is  helpfully
    cited in paragraph 66 of F. He refers in particular  to  this  passage:
    "Credibility should not be taken into account when considering  whether
    to certify a claim unless  the  claim  is  so  incredible  that  it  is
    incapable of belief."  It is not suggested in this case, either in  the
    decision letter or in the submissions on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, that this is one of those cases where the claim is so incredible
    that any part of it should be rejected.

10. Mr Malik has also drawn my attention to paragraph 126 of  the  judgment
    in FR  where  the  court,  in  the  judgment  of  Lord  Justice  Davis,
    emphasised that in dealing with a human rights claim  there  is  a  two
    stage reasoning process in play.  Lord Justice Davis said this:

         "The style of drafting adopted in this case, although not of itself
         objectionable, should not be permitted to lend any encouragement to
         an approach: 'Because I have rejected the asylum claim therefore  I
         certify as clearly unfounded'.  That is  not  permissible:  and  in
         fairness the policy guidance recognises as much."

11. Finally, upon the law my attention  has  been  drawn  to  the  case  of
    Haleemudeen [2014] EWCA Civ 558  and  in  particular  to  paragraph  67
    where, addressing the question of proportionality, Lord Justice Beatson
    said:

         "The assessment of proportionality is not a pure question of law or
         fact.  ...  The  assessment  of  proportionality  involves  factual
         judgments which are often not  easy,  and  as  to  which  different
         Tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may reach different
         conclusions on the same case."

12. The facts of this case are not in dispute.  The applicant first  landed
    in the United Kingdom in 2004 with leave to enter as  a  student  which
    was valid until 31 October of 2005.  He was granted extensions of  this
    stay up to 11  May  2011,  those  extensions  being  wholly  or  mainly
    extensions to allow him to stay as a Tier 4 (General) Student.

13. Thereafter applications for extensions of stay were refused on  6  July
    2011, 27 November 2012, and 17 December 2013.   On  16  July  2015  the
    applicant made the application for leave to remain that is the  subject
    of the decision under challenge in this  case.   It  is  therefore  the
    position that since 11 May 2011 the  applicant  has  had  no  leave  to
    remain in this country.

14. His parents and brother are, it  is  common  ground,  present  in  this
    country with no extant leave to remain.  I have been  given  an  update
    today that they have recently been refused leave to remain, but that an
    appeal by them against that decision is pending and due to be heard  in
    May next year.

15. The applicant's application for LTR was advanced by means of  a  letter
    of representations written by the solicitors acting for the  applicant,
    and supported by a witness statement from him.  The key passage in  the
    witness statement refers to an accident which befell the applicant.  In
    2014 he fell from scaffolding and he describes  suffering  from  severe
    traumatic brain injury as a result.  He describes skull vault fractures
    and lumbar spine fractures and suffering from  epilepsy  and  low  back
    pain.  He says it was a scary period for him and  his  family:  "I  had
    lost hope in my recovery but thanks to the doctors, nurses,  my  family
    and friends I was able to have the support I needed  to  stand  in  the
    position I am today."

16. His witness statement describes the difficulties  that  he  encounters,
    and  activities  with  which  he  needs  assistance  such  as  bathing,
    dressing, mobility, cleaning, cooking, taking medicine on time,  having
    someone near him at all times during the day and night and  many  other
    tasks.  He goes on to say this:

         "7.  This level of support will not be available  to  me  in  India
             along with the  medical  treatment  and  assistance.   I  have
             appointment lined up to review my progress which  I  can  only
             attend if I am granted leave to remain in the UK.   I  request
             the Home Office to take into account my current condition  and
             grant me leave to remain so that I am able to  make  the  full
             recovery that I wish to with the help of my  loved  ones  near
             me.

         8.   It is not possible for me to go and live in India  without  my
             family's, relative and friends' support  I will have no  means
             of income, accommodation and  support.   There  is  nobody  in
             India to whom I can rely on as my whole family are residing in
             the UK."

17. The application was also supported by a medical report which is at page
    29 of the bundle before me. It is a report from the GP's surgery  which
    describes the accident and the consequences using  technical  language,
    but is in substance to the same effect as I have outlined. It  referred
    to lumbar spine fractures, and bilateral comminuted scapula  fractures,
    and confirmed the epilepsy and low back pain from which  the  applicant
    suffered. The injury was described as "severe traumatic brain injury".

18. There is a subsequent medical report referred to and  included  in  the
    bundle to which Mr Malik made reference.  It is dated 5 August 2016 and
    describes the difficulties the applicant encountered, including finding
    it difficult to sit for periods longer than five minutes, an  inability
    to put on his socks or to bend and pick  up  objects  from  the  floor,
    problems  in  understanding  speech   and   communicating   back,   and
    difficulties with memory.  It is however pointed out on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that that report was not  before  the  Secretary  of
    State at the time of the decision.

19. The decision letter addressed the claim to family life by reference  to
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules.  The Rule provides so
    far as is relevant that the requirements of  the  Rules  are  that  the
    applicant, at the date of application

         "...

         (vi) is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously  in  the  UK
                for less than twenty years  ...  but  there  would  be  very
                significant obstacles to the  applicant's  integration  into
                the country to which he would have  to  go  if  required  to
                leave the UK."

20. The decision that the applicant did not meet those criteria was set out
    on the same page.  The letter said as follows:

         "It is not accepted that there would be very significant  obstacles
         to your integration into India if you were required  to  leave  the
         UK.  This is because you have  spent  the  majority  of  your  life
         living there including your formative years and it is not  accepted
         that you will  have  lost  all  social  and  cultural  ties  there.
         Consequently you have failed to meet the requirements of  paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi).  ..."

21. The  decision  letter  went  on  to  consider  whether  the  particular
    circumstances  set  out  in  the  application  constituted  exceptional
    circumstances which might warrant consideration of a grant of leave  to
    remain outside the requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  said  as
    follows: "In support of your application you raised the fact  that  you
    are suffering from brain injury and epilepsy."  It went on to say  that
    that  had  been  considered  and  that  the  condition  was  not  life-
    threatening and according to evidence cited treatment was available for
    the condition in India.

22. The letter continued:

         "Consideration has been given to the difference in the standard  of
         medical  facilities  in  India  compared  to  that  available  here
         although it is accepted that the healthcare systems in  the  United
         Kingdom and that in India are unlikely to be equivalent  this  does
         not mean that your case is exceptional and does not entitle you  to
         remain here."

23. The letter continued:

         "It is noted that your family currently remain in the  UK  with  no
         valid leave to remain.  Therefore  there  is  no  reason  why  they
         cannot return to India with you to help and support you financially
         and emotionally."

    It was for those reasons that the decision letter recorded  that  leave
    outside  the  Rules  had  not  been  considered  appropriate  and   the
    application was refused.

24. The letter went on: "In addition, your human rights  claim  is  one  to
    which Section 94(3) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    applies."  The decision letter said that "after  consideration  of  all
    the evidence available" it had been decided that the claim was  clearly
    unfounded and certified under Section 94.

25. It explained why that was, namely that the applicant did not  meet  the
    requirements of leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE(1) and  had  not
    raised any circumstances considered to be exceptional.  It was recorded
    that the claim was considered to be clearly without substance and could
    not succeed on any legitimate view.

26. Two points are worthy of note  at  this  stage.   First,  the  decision
    letter does not take issue with any of the  essential  facts  that  are
    relied on in support of the human rights claim, that  is  to  say,  the
    existence and the nature of his medical conditions  and  the  needs  to
    which they gave rise.

27.  Secondly,  however,  there  is  no  dispute  that  not  only  was  the
    applicant's presence in the UK unlawful for most of the relevant times,
    so also was that of his family members  who  were,  on  the  undisputed
    facts, providing him with assistance here.

28. There are two main  issues  arising  from  the  grounds  of  challenge.
    First,  whether  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  might  find  that  the
    Secretary of State was wrong to conclude that the applicant  could  not
    show there would be very significant obstacles to his integration  into
    India, which I will call " the integration issue".

29. Secondly, whether a judge might find that the Secretary  of  State  was
    wrong to find that there were no exceptional circumstances warranting a
    grant of leave outside the Immigration Rules, which I shall  call  "the
    harshness issue".

30. The general principles that apply as a matter  of  law  are  now  well-
    established.  If the facts merit it  there  must  be  consideration  of
    whether, notwithstanding a failure to comply with the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules or a standard set by those Rules,  Article  8  is
    engaged and justifies a grant of leave outside those Rules.

31. One factor that comes into play in  decision-making  in  this  area  is
    whether any private and family life on which  reliance  is  placed  had
    been built up when the applicant's immigration status  was  precarious.
    That point is recognised in the jurisprudence but that is  not  perhaps
    central to decision in this case.

32. What I have been taken to by Mr Malik is the  recent  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Alusine
    Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813 in which attention was paid  to  the  proper
    interpretation of Section 117C(3) of the 2002 Act,  which  provides  as
    follows:

         "(3) In the case of  a  foreign  criminal  ...  who  has  not  been
                sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more,
                the  public  interest  requires   ...   deportation   unless
                Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where -

                ...

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  C's
                    integration into the country to which C is  proposed  to
                    be deported."

    Those last words are of course identical with one immaterial  exception
    to those of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), the exception being a reference to
    deportation.

33. Lord Justice Sales said this at paragraph 14:

         "In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's 'integration' into
         the country to which it is proposed that he be deported is a  broad
         one.  It is not confined to the mere ability to find a  job  or  to
         sustain life  while  living  in  the  other  country.   It  is  not
         appropriate to treat the statutory  language  as  subject  to  some
         gloss and it will usually be sufficient for  a  court  or  Tribunal
         simply to direct itself in the terms that Parliament has chosen  to
         use.  The idea  of  'integration'  calls  for  a  broad  evaluative
         judgment to be made as to whether the individual will be enough  of
         an insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the  society  in
         that other country is carried on and a capacity to  participate  in
         it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to
         be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to
         build up within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships
         to give substance to the individual's private or family life."

34. Mr Malik advances three principal submissions.  The first is  that  the
    Secretary of State's approach to the integration issue  is  irrational,
    in that it fails to adopt the broad evaluative assessment described  by
    Lord Justice Sales and in particular fails to engage with  the  medical
    issues.  I am not persuaded that there is any merit in that submission.

35. As I have recorded, the medical evidence on which the greatest reliance
    was placed  is  a  report  that  postdates  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision.  The sole medical  report  that  was  before  her,  dated  24
    February 2015, was relatively short  and  not  capable  of  making  any
    significant contribution to an  assessment  of  whether  the  applicant
    would suffer the kind of obstacles  referred  to  in  integrating  into
    Indian society.

36. The second submission is that there was clearly a possibility  in  this
    case  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  presented  with  this  case  for
    evaluation might  disagree  with  the  assessment  arrived  at  by  the
    Secretary of State. The third submission  is  that  in  this  case  the
    Secretary of State failed to recognise the need to  adopt  a  two-stage
    process in determining first of all whether the claim was to be  upheld
    and secondly whether it qualified as clearly unfounded.

37. Dealing with the last submission  first,  I  do  not  accept  it.   The
    wording that I have referred to seems to me to show clearly enough that
    the approach was one that in substance adopted  a  two  stage  process.
    Furthermore, one also has to bear in mind that these tests need  to  be
    applied to the particular facts of the case. In this case the  critical
    and pivotal ground of decision, as I read the decision notice, was that
    there was no reason to think that the applicant's family could not join
    him in India, if that was where he went, and provide the support  which
    he himself had described as so essential.

38. It seems to me that Ms Murray for the Secretary of State  is  right  to
    submit that this case all comes back to the family.  The  Secretary  of
    State has clearly turned her  mind  to  the  question  of  whether  the
    treatment that would be involved in return to India met  the  threshold
    of seriousness required by Article 3.  She has concluded, and it is not
    contested, that the condition described is not  life-threatening.   She
    has addressed her mind to the  question  of  whether  medical  care  is
    available for the condition in India.  She  goes  on  to  consider  the
    applicant's family life and concludes  essentially  that  there  is  no
    reason why  the  applicant  and  his  family  cannot  return  to  India
    together.

39. That conclusion rests essentially on the fact that  the  relevant  ties
    are with the family and will remain with the  family  if  they  are  to
    return with him to India, there being no reason why  they  should  not.
    The nub of it appears to be that the position, so far as the family  is
    concerned, would be the same there as it would be here.

40. Turning to the harshness  issue,  it  is  accepted  by  Mr  Malik  that
    treatment is available in India.  What he says was missing was  proper,
    broad consideration of how this applicant would be able to re-establish
    a life in India without any contacts.  He  emphasises  the  passage  in
    paragraph 8 of the  witness  statement  which  I  have  already  cited,
    submitting that the matter has to be approached on the basis that there
    simply is nobody in India on whom this applicant could rely.

41. The answer in the end is the same: that those on  whom  this  applicant
    would have to rely would be the members of his family on whom he relies
    here, and there is no material difference (for  the  purposes  of  this
    part of the claim) between the situation he faces at the  present  here
    and the situation he would face in India.

42. In my judgment it is plain that the Secretary of  State  was  right  to
    conclude that no First-tier Tribunal Judge could  possibly  uphold  the
    human rights claim advanced by this claimant and therefore the judicial
    review claim must be dismissed.

Costs

43. I will award  the  summarily  assessed  costs  in  the  sum  of  �4,084
    including VAT.

Application for Permission to appeal to Court of Appeal

44. In the absence of an application for permission to appeal I  say  this.
    I do not consider  that  it  is  arguable  that  I  was  wrong  in  the
    conclusions that I have arrived at.

~~~0~~~~
