
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                JR/2940/2016


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                               Given orally at Field House:  21st april 2017



                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                              mr rajkumar mani
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                               - - - - - - - -

Mr P Turner, Counsel, instructed by law Lane Solicitors, appeared on  behalf
of the applicant.

Miss S  Broadfoot,  QC,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department,
appeared on behalf of the respondent.


      - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                       APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

      - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - - -


JUDGE PETER LANE:   This  is  an  application  for  judicial  review  by  Mr
Rajkumar Mani of the respondent's decisions of 27th November 2015  and  18th
January 2016  to  curtail  his  leave  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom.
Permission to bring judicial review proceedings  was  granted  on  24th  May
2016 by Upper Tribunal Judge Jacobs.

1.    The essential immigration history of the applicant is set out  in  the
    skeleton argument of Mr Turner, who appears for him.  From that we  see
    that the applicant, an Indian national, was born, he says, in 1978  and
    in 2010 entered the United  Kingdom  with  leave  as  a  student.   His
    subsequent application for leave in that capacity was refused in  2013,
    but an appeal against that refusal was successful.  In essence,  it  is
    said on his behalf that between March 2003 and June 2011 the  applicant
    has been in the United Kingdom with various forms of leave to remain as
    a student.

2.    On 27th November 2015 the defendant curtailed  the  applicant's  leave
    on the ground that deception  had  been  used  in  connection  with  an
    application.  The refusal was said to be taken under paragraphs 323 and
    322 of the Immigration Rules.

3.    In January 2015, the respondent reconsidered her earlier decision  and
    gave the applicant a  further  fourteen  days  leave  to  remain.  This
    followed the respondent's acknowledgement that an  incorrect  paragraph
    had been cited in the earlier letter curtailing leave.  On 18th January
    2015, however,  the  applicant  received  a  further  letter  from  the
    respondent, which had the effect of curtailing those fourteen days with
    immediate effect.

4.    The decision upon which both parties and the Tribunal concentrated  is
    that of 18th January 2016.  At page  60  of  the  bundle  we  find  the
    operative part of that letter.  It reads as follows:-

      "For the purposes of your application dated  28  September  2012,  you
         submitted a TOEIC  certificate  from  Educational  Testing  Service
         ('ETS') to your sponsor in order for them to  provide  you  with  a
         Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies.  According  to  information
         provided  to  the  Home  Office  by  ETS,  you  obtained  a   TOEIC
         certificate as a result of a  test  that  you  took  at  Portsmouth
         International College on 21 March 2012.

      ETS has a record of your  speaking  test.   Using  voice  verification
         software, ETS is able to detect when a single person is undertaking
         multiple tests.  ETS undertook a check of your test  and  confirmed
         to the SSHD that there was significant evidence  to  conclude  that
         your certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use  of  a  proxy
         test taker.  ETS have declared your test to be 'Invalid' due to the
         aforementioned presence of a proxy tester who sat the test in  your
         place, and the scores have therefore been cancelled by ETS.

      On the basis of the information provided to her by ETS,  the  SSHD  is
         satisfied that your certificate was fraudulently obtained."

5.    The proceedings  in  this  judicial  review  have  not  been  entirely
    straightforward and need to be mentioned.  Prior to what was originally
    fixed to be the date of the substantive hearing, that  is  to  say  7th
    February  2017,  there   was   communication   between   the   parties'
    representatives.  This communication can be traced,  in  part,  in  the
    bundle prepared by the applicant's solicitors  and  in  part  in  three
    "clips", as the Tribunal describes them, of  e-mails  which  have  been
    supplied by Ms Broadfoot in connection with the  hearing  today.   From
    this, we see that the  Government  Legal  Department  enquired  of  the
    applicant as to his intentions, prior to the date of the  hearing.   It
    emerged from that enquiry that the applicant was intent upon seeking  a
    copy of the voice recording relating to the  applicant's  test.   There
    was some discussion in submissions about the significance or  otherwise
    of the  details  underlying  the  exchange  of  e-mails.   For  present
    purposes, however, it is necessary   to  say  no  more  than  that  the
    applicant's solicitors eventually made contact and were supplied by the
    solicitors acting for ETS with a copy of the relevant recording.

6.    Meanwhile, the  respondent  sought  an  adjournment  of  the  Tribunal
    hearing of 7th February, which was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Jordan.  He made a decision regarding the costs  of  that  hearing  and
    also  gave  directions  to  the  parties.   These   flowed   from   the
    respondent's intention to amend the detailed grounds of defence  so  as
    to make reference to certain material to  which  I  will  turn  in  due
    course.  Those amendments were made on 6th March 2017.  The  applicant,
    for his part, was given until 4th April 2017 to file amended grounds of
    application and supporting evidence.  It is of  some  significance,  Ms
    Broadfoot says, that no such amended grounds were filed.

7.    As I have said, the outcome of the request  by  the  applicant  to  be
    supplied with  the  voice  recording  is  that  such  a  recording  was
    supplied.  That led to a supplemental  statement  being  filed  by  the
    applicant, in which he took issue, amongst other things, with the  fact
    that the recording had been made available, even though it emerged from
    evidence filed by the respondent that, typically, such recordings  were
    only held for a period of 999 days.

8.    I shall return to that issue and its significance or otherwise in  due
    course. For the  moment  however,  it  is  necessary  to  look  at  the
    submissions made by the parties.

9.    Mr Turner's case is that the  passage  from  the  decision  letter  to
    which I have just made reference is legally insufficient to  constitute
    a valid decision in the circumstances of this case,  concerning  as  it
    does an allegation of dishonest conduct.  Mr Turner  submits  that  the
    passage does not constitute evidence.   He  accepts  without,  however,
    making any concessions as  to  the  culpability  or  otherwise  of  the
    applicant, that the respondent has  in  her  amended  grounds  and  the
    materials accompanying them, subsequently done, to paraphrase a "better
    job". But none of that, according to Mr Turner, can breathe  life  into
    or otherwise validate what he says are legally  flawed  decisions.   Mr
    Turner points out that  the  courts  on  a  number  of  occasions  have
    counselled against treating  judicial  review  as  a  kind  of  rolling
    process.  Concentration must always be placed upon the  decision  which
    is the subject of the challenge.

10.   For her  part,  Ms  Broadfoot  takes  the  respondent's  case  in  the
    following way. First, she submits that the decision, and in  particular
    the passages to which I have made reference, is not in any way  legally
    flawed.  The passage that one finds at page 60 of the bundle, where the
    extract from the letter of 18th January is set  out  is,  Ms  Broadfoot
    says, evidence in its own right.  It is evidence  that  the  respondent
    was entitled to rely upon.  There is no evidence adduced on  behalf  of
    the applicant to say that this passage is in any  sense  some  kind  of
    "cut and paste" device.

11.  In support of this primary submission, Ms Broadfoot prays  in  aid  the
    evidence of Rebecca Collings, which we find at page 154 of the  bundle.
    This statement, by an officer of  the  respondent,  is,  significantly,
    dated 23rd June 2014.  In other words, it pre-dates by some measure the
    decisions which  are  the  subject  of  the  present  proceedings.   It
    describes the actions of the respondent that followed the broadcast  of
    the Panorama programme in early 2014,  which  demonstrated  significant
    problems regarding the testing of immigrants in the English language in
    the United Kingdom.  Indeed, it is fair to say that the evidence looked
    at in the programme demonstrated that fraud on a wide scale appeared to
    be being committed.  What was happening in  many  cases  was  that  the
    formal English tests of candidates were not  being  answered  by  those
    candidates, but instead by proxies on their behalf.   Thus  we  see  at
    paragraph 28  of  Ms  Collings'  statement  that  ETS  said  any  tests
    categorised as "cancelled" - which later became known  as  "invalid"  -
    were ones which had the same voice for multiple test takers.  According
    to Miss Collings, on questioning by the respondent,  ETS  advised  that
    "they  were  certain  there  was  evidence  of  proxy  test  taking  or
    impersonation in those cases".  That is of significance in the  present
    case because the applicant's test is described as being invalid.

12.   There follows in the  statement  an  explanation  of  the  distinction
    between invalid tests and those categorised as "questionable". There is
    then a paragraph relied upon by Ms Broadfoot:-

      "34. A significant data matching process was  commenced  to  take  the
         results from ETS and match them (or not) to actual individuals with
         leave already granted or with applications pending.  From this,  we
         were able to segment  the  results  into  a  series  of  categories
         (including,  for  example,  pending  application  with  an  invalid
         result, pending application with a questionable  result)  and  make
         detailed plans for handling the cohorts,  recognising  though  that
         each case needed careful individual  consideration  to  ensure  the
         right outcome be reached."

13.   In the statement of Rachel Green, which followed in the  wake  of  the
    amended grounds of defence, we see reference to other matters that  are
    germane, in the sense that they relate to a period in time relevant  to
    the decision-making in the present proceedings.  In paragraph 6 we find
    the following:-

      "In a witness statement for the case of SM & Qadir, dated  3  February
         2016, my colleague Richard Green in  the  Performance  Reporting  &
         Analysis Unit (PRAU) also within the Home Office, confirmed how the
         evidence of an invalid TOEIC  test  result  provided  to  the  Home
         Office by ETS and which was produced in court before the  Tribunal,
         was obtained from the ETS lookup tool.  Mr Green explains  how  the
         data - information provided by ETS - matched  against  Home  Office
         systems.  Mr Green was responsible for making sure  that  the  data
         within the lookup tool was the most up-to-date available."

      The lookup tool was later improved upon but I say no more on that  for
    the moment.

14.   In the light of these matters, Ms Broadfoot submits - and I  accept  -
    that there was undoubtedly a legally sufficient sub-stratum of evidence
    before the respondent to entitle her as a matter of public law,  and  I
    emphasise that point, to conclude as  she  did  in  the  letters  under
    challenge in these proceedings.

15.   It was, in my view, wholly unnecessary as a  matter  of  law  for  the
    respondent to go into any more detail in her decision letter.  We  have
    to accept that the scale of the alleged  wrongdoing  disclosed  by  the
    Panorama  programme  and  subsequently  investigated  by  ETS  for  the
    respondent was very great.  It would, in the circumstances,  be  wholly
    unreasonable to expect the respondent in  each  case  to  go  into  the
    matter in any more detail than she did.  What is important is that  the
    decisions clearly explained to the applicant and others in his position
    why it was that the decision to curtail leave had been taken.

16.   That curtailment decision was  one  the  respondent  was  entitled  to
    reach.  It was based upon evidence in existence at the time that, as  I
    have said, was sufficient for public law purposes.  Mr Turner says that
    the investigations were not those of  the  respondent's  officers,  but
    rather appeared to have been undertaken by ETS.  That may be so, but it
    does not, in my view, affect the matter at all.   The  question  to  be
    answered is whether there was a rational basis for  the  respondent  to
    conclude as she did on the basis of such evidence as had  been  put  to
    her, whether by her own officers or by a  third  party,  such  as  ETS.
    Only if she can be described as acting  irrationally  in  a  Wednesbury
    sense would the position be otherwise.

17.   Although the matter is important for the applicant and the  fact  that
    it involves misconduct plainly informs the way which the respondent and
    indeed the Tribunal must proceed, I do not consider it  is  appropriate
    in these judicial review proceedings to seek to import the full panoply
    of  burdens  and  standards  of  proof  concerning  alleged  fraudulent
    conduct, such as we find in the Tribunal case law relating to  appeals.
    There is a clear  distinction,  underscored  by  the  Court  of  Appeal
    judgment in Giri [2015] EWCA Civ 784, among others, between, on the one
    hand, appeal proceedings and judicial review proceedings, on the other.
     It is plain that one of the consequences of the  changes  affected  by
    the Immigration Act 2014 has been drastically to reduce  the  scope  of
    appeals in the immigration field;  but  that  does  not  mean  judicial
    review in this area should undergo  some  form  of  transformation,  in
    order to plug any perceived gap.

18.   If authority were needed for what I have just said, one  finds  it  in
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal in the case of R (on the application
    of Mohibullah) [2016]  UKUT  00561  (IAC),  a  decision  of  the  IAC's
    President, Mr Justice McCloskey.  At  paragraphs  62  and  63  of  that
    judgment we find the following, which I happily accept and respectfully
    endorse:-

         "(62)    Which of these is  the  appropriate  standard  of  review?
               This is the stark choice to be confronted, bearing  in  mind
               our analysis and conclusion  above  that  in  substance  and
               reality the curtailment of leave action  taken  against  the
               applicant  was  underpinned  by  the  Secretary  of  State's
               unshakeable and unwavering conviction that he had engaged in
               deception  in   procuring   his   TOEIC   English   language
               qualification.   The  applicant  argues  that  his  judicial
               review challenge falls to be determined by reference to  the
               standard of the precedent fact of  deception.   We  consider
               that the applicant's argument founders on the  rock  of  the
               Giri decision, which points firmly to  the  conclusion  that
               the Wednesbury principle, rather than proof of the precedent
               fact of deception,  provides  the  appropriate  standard  of
               review in this context.

         (63)     The next question,  logically,  is  whether  the  impugned
               decision of the Secretary of State is vitiated by Wednesbury
               irrationality?  As  emphasised  in  recent   Supreme   Court
               decisions such as Keyu v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
               Department [2015] UKSC  69,  the  Wednesbury  principle,  in
               cases not involving the  assertion  of  fundamental  rights,
               continues to entail an acutely elevated threshold.  It has a
               heavy emphasis  on  (merely)  supervisory  judicial  review.
               Applying the formula adopted by Richards LJ in Giri, we  are
               satisfied  following  careful  scrutiny   that   while   the
               information available to the Secretary of State was far from
               abundant, and bearing in mind when the impugned decision was
               made  viz   it   preceded   the   significant   developments
               (evidential and otherwise) in the 'ETS saga' heralded by the
               decisions in Gazi and SM and Qadir, the assessment that  the
               Applicant had engaged in deception based on the notification
               from ETS  lay within the spectrum of rational decisions open
               to the hypothetical reasonable decision maker."

19.   There is however, a further string to Ms Broadfoot's bow,  with  which
    I need to deal, albeit somewhat more briefly, given my primary finding.
     In essence, Ms Broadfoot submits that the materials  produced  by  the
    respondent in the course of these proceedings, following  the  abortive
    hearing in February 2017, are of such weight that it must be  the  case
    that a tribunal or court, looking at the matter now, would be compelled
    to apply section 31(2A) of the Senior Courts  Act  1981,  the  relevant
    words of which are that the court etc is to withhold relief  if  it  is
    "highly likely that the outcome for the applicant would not  have  been
    substantially different if the conduct complained of had not occurred".
     In other words, the respondent submits that even if, which she denies,
    the passage cited at page 60 of the bundle was legally insufficient  at
    the time, the materials we now have make it abundantly plain  that  the
    respondent had a rational reason for concluding that the applicant  had
    been guilty of improper conduct in connection  with  his  test  at  the
    Portsmouth test centre.

20.   In this regard, one turns again to the  witness  statement  of  Rachel
    Green, looking not just at  the  passage  to  which  I  made  reference
    earlier, but to its totality, and in particular to the  exhibits  which
    one finds attached to  it.   These  show  that  what  went  on  in  the
    Portsmouth test centre at exactly  the  time  that  the  applicant  was
    taking his test there can best be described as highly  problematic  and
    more realistically described as strong evidence  of  "industrial-scale"
    fraud.  One draws this  conclusion  from,  amongst  other  things,  the
    materials comparing, on the one hand, what happened in  the  Portsmouth
    test centre and what happened  at  the  indubitably  properly  run  and
    entirely  legitimate  operation  being  undertaken   by   the   Pearson
    organisation.  The graphs  explained  in  the  document  at  RG9  dated
    January 2017 are striking in this regard.  In short,  remarkably  large
    numbers of people were achieving remarkably consistently higher  scores
    in Portsmouth than they were in the centre run by Pearson.

21.   As Ms Broadfoot volunteered, it is possible  to  envisage  that  other
    views of this evidence  might  be  taken  than  the  one  I  have  just
    described. That is, however, not  the  point.   Rather,  the  point  is
    whether no reasonable Secretary  of  State  could  place  any  material
    reliance  on  this  material.  Quite  understandably,  that  is  not  a
    submission that Mr Turner  has  come  anywhere  near  making  in  these
    proceedings and it is not one which would have found favour, if he had.
    Accordingly, Ms Broadfoot's secondary submission also succeeds.

22.   I turn, finally, to the issue of the letter of  20th  April  2017  and
    the significance or otherwise of the reference made in the respondent's
    materials to voice recordings typically being stored  by  ETS  for  999
    days.  In his supplemental witness statement, the applicant queries the
    fact that a recording said to relate to his test but  admitted  by  the
    applicant not to be of his  voice  had  emerged  as  a  result  of  the
    enquiries made on his behalf by his solicitors.   He  does  so  on  the
    basis that he has seen in the witness statements relied upon now by the
    respondent that, typically, ETS would only hold such material  for  999
    days.

23.   The respondent's letter of 20th April 2017,  which  Mr  Turner  and  I
    have only very recently seen, purports to take this matter on board and
    deals with it at paragraph 10.  There, we find that  the  practice  was
    only one which was "typically" undertaken by ETS.  In other  words,  it
    was not an inflexible rule. More particularly, following  the  Panorama
    programme, it is plain from paragraph  10  that  the  ETS  organisation
    decided, entirely understandably, not to begin disposing of  recordings
    relating to the kinds of incidents or purported incidents described  in
    the programme.

24.   I do not consider that this letter has  the  character  for  which  Mr
    Turner contends.  He says, firstly, that  it  is  new  evidence  and  I
    should ignore it.  But even if one ignores the letter, it  is  manifest
    from the materials to which I have made reference that  the  respondent
    still had a rational basis for concluding as she did.  The introduction
    of the recording came as a result of the  understandable  wish  on  the
    part of the applicant to obtain it and there would in  my  view  be  no
    mileage whatsoever in  any  suggestion  that  the  tape  is  unreliable
    because it has emerged later than 999 days after it was  said  to  have
    been brought into being.

25.   Mr Turner's second submission about the letter of 20th April  is  that
    it constitutes a further decision of the respondent  and  supports  his
    client's case.  I reject that submission also.  It is  plain  from  the
    terms of the letter that it is not intended in  any  way  to  take  the
    place of the earlier decisions.  It is merely dealing with matters that
    arose in the course of these present proceedings.  It does not cast any
    adverse light upon the decisions that are under challenge.

26.   Accordingly,  for  these  reasons,  and  notwithstanding  Mr  Turner's
    valiant efforts to the contrary,  this  application  must  fail  and  I
    therefore dismiss it.
