







                                                                JR/3697/2016




                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice





                       The Queen on the application of

                                     RM
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


                 Decision of Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor:


               The application for judicial review is GRANTED


On this application for  judicial  review  following  consideration  of  the
documents lodged by the parties and having heard Mr R  Toal,  instructed  by
Wilson Solicitors LLP, on  behalf  of  the  applicant  and  Ms  C  Rowlands,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  respondent,
at a hearing on 24 March 2017.


Anonymity Direction

I make an anonymity order, pursuant to Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   Unless  the  Upper   Tribunal   or   other
appropriate  Court  or  Tribunal  orders  otherwise,  no  report  of   these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or  indirectly
identify the applicant.  This prohibition applies to,  amongst  others,  all
parties and their representatives.






                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1) This is a decision on an application for judicial review  lodged  on  5
    April 2016 and brought with the  permission  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Coker (23 November 2016).

 2) There are two decisions  under  challenge.  The  first  ("the  transfer
    decision") is a decision taken by the Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department ("SSHD") on 30 November 2015 (but not served until 23  March
    2016), which displays the following features:

 i) Notification to the applicant that the Secretary of State has  declined
    to examine her asylum application;

ii) Certification of the aforementioned  asylum  application,  pursuant  to
    paragraphs 4 and  5  of  Part  2  of  Schedule  3  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004; and

iii) Identification of the Secretary of  State's  intention  to  remove  the
    applicant to France (the applicant not being a citizen of France, but a
    citizen of the Democratic Republic of the Congo).

 3) The second decision is dated the 22 March  2016  (served  on  23  March
    2016) and headed "Removal Directions". This decision provided notice to
    the applicant that her removal to France was to take  place  on  the  6
    April 2016.

 4) Centre stage  in  these  proceedings  is  Council  Regulation  (EC)  No
    604/2013 ("Dublin III").  The cornerstone of the applicant's  challenge
    is underpinned by two matters:

 i) The applicant's factual assertion that, having made an application  for
    asylum in France (in April 2013), she subsequently left  the  territory
    of the Member States of the  European  Union  ("EU")  and,  thereafter,
    resided outwith the EU for a period exceeding three months prior to re-
    entering (the point of re-entry being the United Kingdom); and,

ii) That the SSHD had misrepresented the position to the French authorities
    by stating that the applicant had not asserted that she  had  left  the
    territory of  the  Member  States,  subsequent  to  making  her  asylum
    application in France.

Factual Matrix

 5) The facts underlying the challenge by  the  applicant  are  essentially
    uncontroversial, save in the limited respect  identified  in  paragraph
    4(i) above.

 6) The applicant is  a  national  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
    ("DRC"), born in 1979.  She claimed asylum in France on 23  April  2013
    and was then fingerprinted.  She  asserts  that  she  is  a  victim  of
    trafficking.  The applicant claims to have left France and returned  to
    the DRC on 22 December 2014, as  a  consequence  of  her  asylum  claim
    having been refused.  She further asserts that she left the DRC  on  10
    May 2015 and travelled to the United Kingdom.

 7) The SSHD does not believe the applicant's claim to  have  left  France,
    travelled to the DRC and to have thereafter travelled from the  DRC  to
    the United Kingdom. What is beyond dispute is  that  the  SSHD  has  no
    record of the applicant's arrival in the United Kingdom  and  that  the
    applicant claimed asylum on  27  October  2015  at  Bourneville  police
    station.

 8) A check had been undertaken on the EURODAC database and in  consequence
    the SSHD ascertained that the applicant had previously  claimed  asylum
    in France.

 9) In an "Initial Interview" which took place around midday on 28  October
    2015 the applicant stated, inter alia, that she arrived in  the  United
    Kingdom on 25 October 2015, having left DRC on 24 October 2015. She had
    then travelled from DRC to an unknown destination using  Air  Ethiopia,
    changed planes and thereafter travelled to the UK.

10) During  a  "Third  country  case  -  travel  history  interview",  also
    conducted by the SSHD on 28 October 2015 (starting at 19.00 hours), the
    applicant was notified of the outcome of  the  search  on  the  EURODAC
    database and she subsequently accepted that she had claimed  asylum  in
    France. The applicant further asserted that:  (i)  she  had  stayed  in
    France for eighteen months having arrived there from Greece,  (ii)  she
    had thereafter returned to DRC (arriving on 22  December  2014),  (iii)
    she had left the DRC on 10 May 2015 and (iv)  that  she  had  travelled
    directly to the United Kingdom from the DRC using a red  passport  that
    had been provided to her by an agent.

11) On 9 November 2015, the SSHD  made  a  formal  request  to  the  French
    authorities to 'take back' the applicant (pursuant to Article (1)(b) of
    Dublin III),  using  the  appropriate  form  (found  in  Annex  III  of
    Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 118/2014).

12) The early sections of the completed form  are  unremarkable,  recording
    the applicant's personal information. However, the same cannot be  said
    of the box headed  "Previous  procedures".   In  answer  to  the  first
    question therein (question 12 of the form) the SSHD noted the  fact  of
    the applicant's international protection claim in France  (made  on  23
    April 2013) and that it was not known whether a decision had been taken
    by France on that application.

13) Question 13 then asks: "Does the  applicant  state  that  he  left  the
    territory of the Member States?"  In answer to this the SSHD ticked the
    box marked "No". This, of course, was inaccurate.

14) The form ends with a blank space headed "Other useful information".  As
    completed, this space contains ten  paragraphs  (albeit  some  of  them
    being formed of only one sentence) of information the  SSHD  presumably
    thought would be useful to the French authorities.  By far the  longest
    of  these  paragraphs  relates  to  the  applicant's  travel   history.
    Consistent with the information disclosed in  answer  to  question  13,
    there is no reference within this section to the applicant's  assertion
    to have left France and to have travelled to the DRC prior to coming to
    the United  Kingdom.  The  relevant  paragraph  summarises  the  travel
    history provided by the applicant during her "Initial  Interview"  i.e.
    that she arrived in the  United  Kingdom  on  25  October  2015  having
    initially travelled by Air Ethiopia to an  underknown  destination  and
    thereafter  changed  planes.  However,  even  this  summary  omits  the
    applicant's assertion, made during her  "Initial  Interview"  that  the
    aforementioned journey had begun in the DRC.

15) On 20 November 2015, the French authorities notified the SSHD of  their
    agreement to take charge of the applicant, pursuant to Article 18(1)(d)
    of Dublin III.  Ten days  later  the  SSHD  made  the  decisions  under
    challenge which, as identified above, were not served on the  applicant
    until 23 March 2016.

16) The applicant's legal representatives served a pre-action  protocol  on
    the SSHD, by facsimile on 1 April 2016 (although this letter is dated 4
    April the Home Office "GCID Case Record Sheets" confirm  receipt  on  1
    April). They annexed documents purportedly supporting  the  applicant's
    contention to have left the territory of  the  Member  States  for  the
    period claimed. As already identified, these proceedings were issued on
    the following day. This led to the cancellation of the  directions  for
    the applicant's removal.

17) A response to the pre-action  letter  was  drafted  on  15  April  2016
    incorporating, inter alia, a consideration  of  the  applicant's  human
    rights 'claim'. The following passage of importance is to be  found  at
    [11] of this letter:

         "You have stated in your letter that the United Kingdom has made no
         attempt to inform the French authorities that your client claims to
         have left France to travel back to Kinshasa in 2014.  We have  been
         informed by the French authorities that  they  are  satisfied  that
         your client was in France between December 2014 and  January  2015.
         This implies that your client could not have returned  to  Kinshasa
         as she claims."

    Immediately  thereafter  reasons  are  provided  as  to  why  the  SSHD
    maintains the rejection of the applicant's assertion to  have  returned
    to Kinshasa as claimed.

18) It is useful at this stage to set out the file notes made on the SSHD's
    "GCID - Case Record Sheet" on 4 April and 5 April 2016:

         "...04-Apr-2016

         In the correspondence from  the  legal  representatives  they  have
         stated that we did not inform the French  authorities  amount  [RM]
         returning to France (sic).

         I have checked her TCU Travel History and she has stated that after
         being in France she flew to Kinshasa and then went  from  there  to
         the United Kingdom.

         Her asylum claim in France is  in  2013  she  claims  she  went  to
         Kinshasa in 2014...

         ...05-Apr-2016

         The applicant stated in  her  travel  history  interview  that  she
         returned to Kinshasa  on  22/12/14  and  remained  there  for  four
         months, but this  information  was  not  disclosed  to  the  French
         authorities when the take back request was made.  I  spoke  to  ...
         (Head of Dublin Unit in France) and  he  informed  me  that  he  is
         satisfied that between December 2014 and January 2015 the applicant
         was still in France.  This implies that she could not have returned
         to Kinshasa and remained there as she  claims.  Removal  should  go
         ahead as planned."

Grounds

19) As ultimately formulated the applicant brings two grounds of  challenge
    to the SSHD's decision to transfer her to France,  and  not  to  accept
    that she left the territory of the Member States of the European  Union
    for a period exceeding three months after last being  in  France.   The
    challenge to the directions for the applicant's removal  to  France  is
    now academic, given that the applicant was not removed on 6  April.  It
    is also consequential upon the success of the  challenge  made  to  the
    transfer decision.

20) The first ground brings a challenge to the  SSHD's  factual  conclusion
    that the applicant did not leave the territory of the Member States  of
    the European Union for a period exceeding three months after last being
    in France. The applicant's primary case is that the SSHD was  wrong  in
    her conclusion in this regard. In the alternative, and as  a  backstop,
    it is asserted that such conclusion was irrational. The  second  ground
    brings a challenge to the process by which this conclusion was reached.



Legal Framework

Council Regulation No 604/2013 (Dublin III)

21) Recital 19 to Dublin III provides:

         "In order to guarantee effective protection of the  rights  of  the
         persons concerned, legal safeguards and the right to  an  effective
         remedy in respect of decisions regarding transfers  to  the  member
         state  responsible  should  be  established,  in   accordance,   in
         particular, with Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Rights of
         the European Union. In order to ensure that  international  law  is
         respected, an effective remedy against such decisions should  cover
         both the examination of the application of this Regulation  and  of
         the legal and factual situation in the member state  to  which  the
         applicant is transferred."

22) Given the thrust of the applicant's  legal  challenge,  reference  must
    also be made to Articles 3(1), 3(2), 7,  13(1),  18(1)(d),  19,  23(1),
    23(3), 23(4) and Article 27 of Dublin III which provide:


         "CHAPTER II
         Article 3: Access to the procedure for examining an application for
         international protection


         1.       Member States shall examine any application for
             international protection by a third-country national or a
             stateless person who applies on the territory of any one of
             them, including at the border or in the transit zones. The
             application shall be examined by a single Member State, which
             shall be the one which the criteria set out in Chapter III
             indicate is responsible.
         2.       Where no Member State responsible can be designated on the
             basis of the criteria listed in this Regulation, the first
             Member State in which the application for international
             protection was lodged shall be responsible for examining it.


         CHAPTER III
         Article 7: Hierarchy of criteria


         1. The criteria for determining the member state responsible  shall
             be applied in the order in which they  are  set  out  in  this
             Chapter.
         ...
         3. In view of the  application  of  the  criteria  referred  to  in
             Articles  8,  10  and  16,  member  states  shall  take   into
             consideration any available evidence regarding  the  presence,
             on the  territory  of  a  member  state,  of  family  members,
             relatives or any other family relations of the  applicant,  on
             condition that such evidence is produced before another member
             state accepts the request to take  charge  or  take  back  the
             person concerned, pursuant to Articles 22 and 25 respectively,
             and  that  the   previous   applications   for   international
             protection of the applicant have not yet been the subject of a
             first decision regarding the substance."


         Article 13: Entry and/or stay


         1.       Where  it  is  established,  on  the  basis  of  proof  or
             circumstantial  evidence  as  described  in  the   two   lists
             mentioned in Article 22(3) of this Regulation,  including  the
             data referred to in  Regulation  (EU)  No  603/2013,  that  an
             applicant has irregularly crossed the  border  into  a  Member
             State by land, sea or air having come from  a  third  country,
             the  Member  State  thus  entered  shall  be  responsible  for
             examining the application for international  protection.  That
             responsibility shall cease 12 months after the date  on  which
             the irregular border crossing took place. ...


         CHAPTER V
         Article 18: Obligations of the Member States responsible


         1. The Member State responsible  under  this  Regulation  shall  be
             obliged to:
         ...
             (d) take back, under the conditions laid down in Articles  23,
             24, 25 and 29, a third-country national or a stateless  person
             whose  application  has  been  rejected  and   who   made   an
             application in another Member State or who is on the territory
             of another Member State without a residence document.


         Article 19: Cessation of responsibilities
         ...
         2.       The obligations specified in  Article  18(1)  shall  cease
             where the Member State responsible  can  establish,  when  re-
             quested to take charge or take back an  applicant  or  another
             person as referred to in Article 18(1)(c) or (d), that the per-
              son concerned has left the territory of the Member States for
             at least three months,  unless  the  person  concerned  is  in
             possession of a valid residence document issued by the  Member
             State responsible.
            An application lodged after the period of absence referred to in
             the first subparagraph shall be regarded as a new  application
             giving rise to a new  procedure  for  determining  the  Member
             State responsible. ...


         CHAPTER VI
         Article 22 : Replying to a take charge request


         1.       The  requested  Member  State  shall  make  the  necessary
             checks, and shall give a  decision  on  the  request  to  take
             charge of an applicant within two months  of  receipt  of  the
             request.
         2.        In  the  procedure  for  determining  the  Member   State
             responsible elements  of  proof  and  circumstantial  evidence
             shall be used.
         3.       The Commission  shall,  by  means  of  implementing  acts,
             establish, and review periodically, two lists, indicating  the
             relevant elements of  proof  and  circumstantial  evidence  in
             accordance with the criteria set out in points (a) and (b)  of
             this paragraph. Those implementing acts shall  be  adopted  in
             accordance with  the  examination  procedure  referred  to  in
             Article 44(2).
            (a) Proof:
             (i)   this   refers   to   formal   proof   which   determines
             responsibility pursuant to this Regulation, as long as  it  is
             not refuted by proof to the contrary;
             (ii)  the Member States shall provide the  Committee  provided
             for in Article 44  with  models  of  the  different  types  of
             administrative documents,  in  accordance  with  the  typology
             established in the list of formal proofs;
            (b) Circumstantial evidence:
             (i)  this refers to  indicative  elements  which  while  being
             refutable may be sufficient, in certain  cases,  according  to
             the evidentiary value attributed to them;
             (ii)   their   evidentiary   value,   in   relation   to   the
             responsibility for examining the application for international
             protection shall be assessed on a case-by-case basis.
         4.       The  requirement  of  proof  should  not  exceed  what  is
             necessary for the proper application of this Regulation.
         5.       If there is no formal proof, the  requested  Member  State
             shall acknowledge its  responsibility  if  the  circumstantial
             evidence is coherent, verifiable and sufficiently detailed  to
             establish responsibility.


         Procedures for take back requests


         Article 23: Submitting a take back request when a  new  application
         has been lodged in the requesting Member State
         ...
         4.       A take back request shall be made using  a  standard  form
             and shall include proof  or  circumstantial  evidence  as  de-
             scribed in the two lists mentioned  in  Article  22(3)  and/or
             relevant elements from the statements of the person concerned,
             enabling the authorities of  the  requested  Member  State  to
             check whether it is responsible on the basis of  the  criteria
             laid down in this Regulation.


         Article 27: Remedies


         1.       The applicant or another person as referred to in  Article
             18(1)(c) or (d) shall have the right to an  effective  remedy,
             in the form of an appeal or a review,  in  fact  and  in  law,
             against a transfer decision, before a court or tribunal.
         2.  Member States shall provide for a  reasonable  period  of  time
             within which the person concerned  may  exercise  his  or  her
             right to an effective remedy pursuant to paragraph 1. ...

Charter of Fundamental Rights ("the Charter")

23) Article 47 of the Charter provides, in relevant part:


         "Article 47: Right to an effective remedy and to a fair trial


         Everyone whose rights and freedoms guaranteed by  the  law  of  the
         Union are violated has the right to an effective  remedy  before  a
         Tribunal in compliance  with  the  conditions  laid  down  in  this
         Article.


         Everyone is  entitled  to  a  fair  and  public  hearing  within  a
         reasonable time by an independent and impartial Tribunal previously
         established by law.  Everyone shall have the possibility  of  being
         advised, defended and represented. ..."

GROUND 1

The parties' respective cases

24) As identified above, by her first ground the  applicant  brings  direct
    challenge to the SSHD's factual conclusion that she did not  leave  the
    territory Member States of the European Union for  a  period  exceeding
    three months after last being in France. The applicant's  primary  case
    is that the SSHD was wrong  in  the  conclusion  she  reached.  In  the
    alternative, and as a backstop, it is asserted that such conclusion was
    irrational.

25)  The  intertwining  elements  underpinning  the  former  assertion  are
    conveniently pr�cised in paragraph 25 of Mr Toal's skeleton argument:

         "The A's case is that the remedy provided by Article 27(1) requires
         the Tribunal in these proceedings:

         "a.      to determine whether, as a matter of fact, the A left  the
             territory of the Member States for  more  than  three  months,
             i.e. between December 2014 and May 2015; and

         b. to decide that issue on the basis of the evidence placed  before
             the Tribunal, including  evidence  that  was  not  before  the
             Secretary of State when she made her decision."

26) The underlying  rationale  deployed  by  Mr  Toal  in  support  of  the
    submissions identified above can be summarised thus:

 i) There is no obstacle as a matter of principle or law  to  the  Tribunal
    determining factual and legal issues  in  the  context  of  a  judicial
    review (R (A) v Croydon London Borough Council 1 WLR 2557);

ii) A plain reading of Article 27(1) of Dublin III leads to the  inexorable
    conclusion that the Tribunal is  obligated  to  review  the  legal  and
    factual basis of the SSHD's conclusion that the applicant had not  left
    the territory of the EU Member States  for  a  period  exceeding  three
    months;

iii) Article 47 of the Charter of Fundamental Freedoms of  the  EU  protects
    the applicant's  right  to  an  effective  remedy.   The  right  to  an
    effective remedy prohibits the application of procedure rules and rules
    of evidence that render virtually impossible or  excessively  difficult
    the exercise of rights conferred by Community law.   A  rule  excluding
    reliance by the applicant on  post  decision  evidence  would  make  it
    excessively difficult for her to secure her Community law rights.

iv) Whilst Article 7(3) of Dublin III imposes restrictions on evidence that
    may be considered in certain circumstances, those circumstances do  not
    extend to an assessment under Article 19(2).

 v) The issue of whether the applicant left the  territory  of  the  Member
    States for more than three months prior to entering the UK  is  one  of
    precedent fact (see Article 19(2));

vi) Dublin III specifies clear and objective criteria by which decisions as
    to the Member State responsible are to be made.  They are not  criteria
    that include or depend on the  opinion  or  judgment  of  a  particular
    authority.  The issue is whether the applicant has been absent from the
    EU for at least three months, not whether she has been absent for  more
    or less than three months in the SSHD's opinion.  There is therefore no
    room for any deference to be given to a particular authority.

vii) Requiring the Tribunal to consider the best and fullest evidence  would
    promote the objective of effective implementation of European Union law
    expressed in Article 197(1) of  the  Treaty  of  the  Function  of  the
    European Union;

viii) If the applicant is unable to establish that  the  UK  is  responsible
    for her asylum claim and she  is  returned  to  France  then  Directive
    2013/32/EU  (the  Recast  Procedures  Directive)  will  apply  in  such
    circumstances.  Given that her  asylum  application  has  already  been
    refused in France, a further protection application might be treated as
    inadmissible.

27) The SSHD responded on this ground as follows:

 i) It is accepted that Article 27(1) of Dublin III is  on  its  face,  and
    read in isolation, opaque.

ii) Reading Dublin III as a whole and in light of relevant  case  law,  the
    Tribunal should determine this application for judicial review  on  the
    basis of traditional public  law  principles,  not  undertaking  a  re-
    assessment of the relevant facts either on the basis of the information
    that was before the SSHD or on the basis of information  that  had  not
    been produced to the SSHD at the date she made her decision[1].

iii) It is Article 7(3) of Dublin  III  and  not  Article  27  thereof  that
    dictates what evidence the  Court  or  Tribunal  can  look  at  in  its
    consideration of the application of Article 18(1)(d) and Article 19;

iv) The overarching objective of the Dublin  system  is  to  speed  up  the
    handling of  claims  in  the  interests  of  both  asylum  seekers  and
    participating states (see Ghezelbash);

 v) The essence of the principle  of  effectiveness  required  by  European
    Union law  is  that  national  law  should  not  make  it  "practically
    impossible or excessively difficult" for a person aggrieved to exercise
    European Union law rights (see Unibet [2007] ECR I-2271 at [4]);

vi) Once responsibility has been accepted, there is no ongoing right in the
    context of Dublin III for the applicant  to  seek  to  provide  further
    evidence, or any  obligation  on  the  SSHD  to  consider  it  (see  AA
    (Somalia) v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1540 at [23] to [27]);

vii) Article 27 of Dublin III is, in any event, limited by what is  said  in
    Article 22 thereof as to the type of evidence that can be taken account
    of when consideration is being given to the determination of the Member
    State responsible -  Article  22,  in  combination  with  Annex  II  of
    Commission Implementing Regulation No. 118/2014, lists exhaustively the
    type of evidence that is capable of being probative and indicative;

viii) Even on the  evidence  now  produced  by  the  applicant,  she  cannot
    establish that she left the territory  of  the  Member  States  of  the
    European Union for the period asserted or at all.

Conclusions and Reasons - Ground 1

28) Article 3 of Dublin III dictates that, "Member states shall examine any
    application for international protection". The objective of Dublin  III
    is to establish a clear and workable method based  on  objective,  fair
    criteria both  for  the  Member  States  and  for  asylum  seekers  for
    determining the  Member  State  responsible  for  examining  an  asylum
    application. In practical  terms,  the  overarching  objective  of  the
    Dublin system is to speed up the handling of asylum applications in the
    interests of both  asylum  seekers  and  participating  states  (R  (NS
    (Afghanistan)) v SSHD [2013] QB 102).

29) In furtherance of  its  overarching  objective,  Dublin  III  restricts
    examination of an asylum application to  one  EU  member  state  -  the
    responsible state being determined by the application of  the  criteria
    set out in Chapter III thereof.   Chapter  III  contains  criteria  for
    determining the member state responsible and  the  hierarchy  of  those
    criteria, the starting position being that the member state the  asylum
    seeker  first  entered  is  responsible  for  determining  the   asylum
    application.

30) By the second subparagraph of Article 19(2) of  Dublin  III  (found  in
    Chapter V thereof) an asylum application lodged in a member state by an
    asylum seeker who has been absent from  the  territory  of  the  Member
    States  for  at  least  three  months,  shall  be  regarded  as  a  new
    application giving rise to a new procedure  for  determination  of  the
    member state responsible.

31) A significant feature of Dublin III,  which  was  not  present  in  its
    predecessors, is found in Article 27; the provision of a right  for  an
    asylum seeker to challenge a transfer decision in a court or tribunal.

32) In Ghezelbash the CJEU concluded that Article 27(1) must be interpreted
    as meaning that an asylum seeker is entitled to plead, in an appeal  or
    review against a transfer decision, the incorrect application of one of
    the criteria for determining responsibility laid down in Chapter III of
    Dublin III.  It had not been permissible under Dublin II  to  challenge
    the equivalent provisions therein (Abdullahi v Bundesasylamt  [2014]  1
    WLR 1895 (CJEU)).

33) In its later decision of Karim v Migrationverket [2017] 1  C.M.L.R.  7,
    the Grand Chamber, when faced with a factual scenario akin to  that  in
    the instant case, concluded:

         "[26] ... in order to satisfy itself that  the  contested  transfer
         decision was adopted following a proper application of the  process
         for determining the Member State  responsible  laid  down  in  that
         regulation, the court dealing with an action challenging a transfer
         decision must be able to examine  the  claims  made  by  an  asylum
         applicant who invokes an infringement of the rule set  out  in  the
         second subparagraph of art. 19(2) of that regulation.

         [27]... an  asylum  applicant  may,  in  an  action  challenging  a
         transfer decision made in respect of him, invoke an infringement of
         the rule set out in the second subparagraph of art. 19(2)  of  that
         regulation."

34) The first issue for determination in the  instant  proceedings  is  the
    scope of the remedy to be afforded to the applicant.

35) The applicant's case, put in its simplest form, is that  Article  27(1)
    of Dublin III makes mandatory the requirement for a court  or  tribunal
    charged  with  determining  a  challenge  to  a  transfer  decision  to
    establish for itself the relevant facts underpinning such decision  and
    that it must do so based on all of the evidence before it, even if that
    evidence was not available to the primary decision maker (the  SSHD  in
    the instant case) when the transfer decision was made.

36) Article 27(1) of Dublin III must be read in light of recital 19,  which
    identifies that an "effective remedy in respect of decisions  regarding
    transfers to the member state responsible  should  be  established,  in
    accordance,  in  particular,  with  Article  47  of  the   Charter   of
    Fundamental Rights of the European Union." Taken together Article 27(1)
    and recital 19  are  intended  "to  ensure,  in  particular,  that  the
    criteria for determining the member  state  responsible  laid  down  in
    Chapter III of the Regulation are  correctly  applied"  (Ghezelbash  at
    [44]).

37) Broken down into its component parts, Article  27(1)  makes  obligatory
    the provision by Member States of a mechanism for asylum applicants  to
    challenge transfer decisions made  pursuant  to  Articles  18(1)(c)  or
    18(1)(d) of Dublin III. That mechanism of challenge  must  be:  (i)  an
    effective remedy; (ii) before a court of  tribunal;  (iii)  by  way  of
    appeal or review; and, (iv) in both fact and in law.

38) Components (i) and (ii) can be considered together. Although it is  for
    each member state to establish its own system  of  legal  remedies  and
    procedures, EU law requires states to do  so  in  a  way  that  ensures
    respect for the  right  to  effective  judicial  protection.  The  well
    trodden, and fundamental, principle of effective judicial protection is
    enshrined Article 47 of the Charter, and reflected in Articles 6  &  13
    of the Human Rights Convention (see Tariq v  Home  Office  [2011]  UKSC
    35).

39) The irreducible  minimum  requirements  flowing  from  Article  47  are
    twofold. The rules governing  actions  for  safeguarding  rights  which
    individuals derive from EU law must not: (i) be  less  favourable  than
    those  governing   similar   domestic   actions   (the   principle   of
    equivalence); and, (ii) must not make  it  impossible  in  practice  or
    excessively difficult to exercise  rights  conferred  by  EU  law  (the
    principle of effectiveness) (see Unibet (London) Ltd v Justitiekanslern
    (Case C-432/05) [2008] All ER (EC) 453; [2007] ECR I-2271).

40) It is not asserted, nor could it be, that the principle of  equivalence
    is breached by the remedy (judicial  review)  the  United  Kingdom  has
    chosen to put in place for asylum applicant's seeking  to  challenge  a
    transfer decision made pursuant to Dublin III.

41) As regards  the  principle  of  effectiveness,  judicial  review  is  a
    flexible remedy capable of meeting any demands put upon  it  (see  R  v
    SSHD ex parte Khawaja [1984] AC 74 and R(A) v  Croydon  London  Borough
    Council  [2009]  UKSC  8,  [2009]  1  WLR  2557).   Save   in   limited
    circumstances,  judicial  review  of  a  public  authority's   decision
    concerns considerations of whether  that  decision,  or  the  procedure
    leading thereto, was  irrational,  illegal  or  made  in  the  face  of
    procedural irregularity/procedural  unfairness  ("traditional  judicial
    review grounds").

42) Mr  Toal  submits  that  in  the  instant  scenario  the  principle  of
    effectiveness is  breached  if  the  Tribunal  fails  to  exercise  its
    jurisdiction so as to encompass within it an  independent  fact-finding
    role because, it is said, excluding reliance on post decision  evidence
    would make it excessively difficult for  asylum  applicants  to  secure
    their Community law rights. I reject this submission.

43) First, albeit in a different scenario,  I  observe  that  the  European
    Court of Human Rights has considered the  'effectiveness'  of  judicial
    review (in the United  Kingdom)  as  a  remedy.  In Bensaid  v  United
    Kingdom (2001) 33 EHRR 10, a "health" case in which in  which  it  was
    claimed that removal would breach articles 3 and 8 ECHR, the  following
    was said at [56]:

         "The Court is satisfied that the domestic courts gave  careful  and
         detailed scrutiny to claims  that  an  expulsion  would  expose  an
         applicant to the risk of inhuman and degrading  treatment  ...  The
         Court is not convinced ... that the fact that this  scrutiny  takes
         place against the background of the criteria  applied  in  judicial
         review  of  administrative  decisions,   namely   rationality   and
         perverseness, deprives the procedure of its effectiveness."

44) Returning to the present context, at the  heart  of  the  justification
    underpinning the claimed requirement for the  Tribunal  to  admit  post
    decision evidence is the assumption that it is  excessively  difficult,
    within the limited timeframe available  under  the  Dublin  III  regime
    prior to the transfer decision being made,  for  asylum  applicants  to
    produce the necessary evidence in support of a claim  that  the  second
    paragraph of Article 19(2)) applies.

45) I do not accept that such an  assumption  is  justified.  There  is  no
    evidence before me to support the making of such an assumption and,  in
    reality, each case will be highly fact sensitive. In any  event,  there
    are in my conclusion sufficient safeguards in place in the  application
    of traditional judicial review principles, for example the  requirement
    for the decision-making process to be procedurally fair, to lead me  to
    the conclusion that the provision of such a remedy  does  not,  in  the
    present context, breach the principle of effectiveness.

46) Moving on to components (iii) and (iv) of the remedy set out in Article
    27(1), i.e. that it must be in the form of "an appeal or a  review,  in
    fact and in law", Mr Toal submits that the use of the words  "review...
    in fact" denote a requirement for something more than  the  application
    of traditional judicial review principles to  the  factual  assessments
    made  by  the  primary  decision  maker.  Once  again,  I  reject  this
    submission.

47) On its face the wording of Article 27(1)  is  clear,  a  review  is  an
    appropriate redress procedure  and  a  full  appeal  procedure  is  not
    required. In my conclusion,  the  expression  "review...in  fact"  says
    nothing about the intensity or extent of the review that must be put in
    place by the Member States.  It is entirely possible  for  a  court  or
    tribunal to examine  (or  review)  the  facts  on  which  the  transfer
    decision was based, without undertaking a primary fact finding exercise
    for itself.

48) Although both parties relied upon the terms of Article 7(3)  of  Dublin
    III in support of their respective positions as to the intensity of the
    review to be undertaken by a court or tribunal  when  consideration  is
    being given to a challenge to the correct  application  of  the  second
    paragraph of Article 19(2), I see nothing in the text of  Article  7(3)
    that materially bears on the issue in this case.

49) Article 7(3) provides that for the purposes of a consideration of those
    matters identified in Articles 8, 10 and 16 a  Member  State  can  only
    take account of evidence produced prior to the  acceptance  of  a  take
    back or take charge request; however, no reference is made  therein  to
    Article 19(2) and for this reason alone Ms Rowlands' submission  as  to
    the relevance of Article 7(3) falls for rejection.

50) It is the absence of a reference to Article 19(2) within  Article  7(3)
    that Mr Toal relies upon, asserting that such absence is indicative  of
    the fact that there is no temporal restriction  on  the  production  of
    evidence when the application of Article 19(2) is being considered.

51) Article 7(3) relates only to the procedure, and criteria, to be applied
    in the consideration of whether to make a transfer decision.  As  such,
    even if inference could be drawn from the silence in Article 7(3) as to
    any temporal restriction on evidence relating  to  a  consideration  of
    Article 19(2) - and I do not accept that it can be - the  tentacles  of
    such an inference  cannot  extend  beyond  the  date  of  the  transfer
    decision, as Mr Toal submitted they should.

52) For all the reasons given above, and having considered Article 27(1) of
    Dublin III in the context of the wording of the Regulation as a  whole,
    its general scheme, its objectives and  its  context,  I  conclude,  as
    Advocate  General  Sharpston  did  in  Karim  (at  [AG44])  that   the,
    "intensity of any appeal or review process is  not  laid  down  in  the
    [Dublin III] regulation and must therefore be  a  matter  for  national
    procedural rules...".

53) I am satisfied that adherence of the Tribunal to traditional principles
    of judicial review does not, either in this case or more  generally  in
    challenges brought to decisions made in relation  to  the  second  sub-
    paragraph of Article 19(2), result in a breach of either Article 27  of
    Dublin III or Article 47 of the Charter.

54) Anticipating the possibility that the Tribunal would conclude as above,
    Mr  Toal  pursued  the  alternative  submission  that  under  'national
    procedural rules' there is a requirement for the Tribunal to  undertake
    an independent fact-finding exercise  based  on  all  of  the  evidence
    before it, including the post decision evidence.

55) Underpinning this limb of the Mr Toal's submissions  is  the  assertion
    that the issue of whether the applicant was outside  the  territory  of
    the Member States for a period exceeding three months prior to entering
    the United Kingdom is one of precedent fact.

56) It is uncontroversial that in judicial  review  proceedings  where  the
    challenged power that  the  decision  maker  purports  to  exercise  is
    dependent on the prior establishment of a (precedent) fact,  the  court
    will, if called upon to do so in case of dispute, itself  rule  whether
    such fact is established to the requisite standard. In doing so it  can
    admit post-decision evidence in so far as it relates  to  this  limited
    issue (see for example R(A) v Croydon London Borough Council  [2009]  1
    WLR 2557 (SC)).

57) On Mr Toal's submission the SSHD's power to make a transfer decision in
    the context of Dublin III is dependent on the establishment on the fact
    that the applicant was not outwith the territory of the  Member  States
    for a period exceeding  three  months  prior  to  entering  the  United
    Kingdom. Although not determinative of the issue  under  consideration,
    it is difficult to comprehend how the existence of a power divested  in
    the SSHD can sensibly be dependent on  the  prior  establishment  of  a
    negative.

58) More significantly, however, is my view that Mr Toal's submission  does
    not align itself with the structure  and  application  of  Dublin  III.
    There are three stages to the process leading to a  transfer  decision,
    to be undertaken by a member state in  which  an  asylum  applicant  is
    present (i.e. the United Kingdom in the instant case).

59) First, it is for that member state to determine for itself which member
    state is responsible for considering the asylum applicant's claim. This
    assessment is to be undertaken based on the criteria in Chapter III  of
    Dublin III. The "second subparagraph of [Article] 19(2) of Dublin  III]
    establishes the framework within which [the] process  [of  establishing
    the member state responsible] must be conducted" (Karim at [23]).

60) Second, if it is concluded that another member  state  is  responsible,
    the member state in which the asylum applicant is present  may  make  a
    take back or take charge request to this second member  state  (in  the
    instant case, France). After making the necessary  checks  this  second
    member state (France) must decide either  to  accept,  or  reject,  the
    request made of  it.  A  failure  to  decide  within  the  time  limits
    specified  within  Dublin  III  is  treated  as  being  "tantamount  to
    accepting the request". In the case of dispute between the  two  member
    states the matter may be referred to a 'conciliation committee',  which
    will impose a  final  and  irrevocable  solution  in  relation  to  the
    disputed issue.

61) A transfer decision (the third stage) can only be made  by  the  member
    state in which the asylum applicant is present (the UK) where there has
    been an actual, or deemed, acceptance by another member state  (France)
    to the take back/take charge request, or if such a  solution  has  been
    imposed by a conciliation committee.

62) On this analysis, it is plain that the  structure  and  application  of
    Dublin III does not support the contention that the power of  a  member
    state  to  make  a  transfer  decision  is  dependent  on   the   prior
    establishment of the matters identified in Article 19(2);  rather,  the
    power to make a transfer decision in relation to  an  asylum  applicant
    present on the territory of a member state is dependent on  the  actual
    or deemed acceptance by another member state of a take back/take charge
    request made in relation to that applicant, or if such a  solution  has
    been imposed by a conciliation committee.

63) In the  instant  case,  there  is  no  dispute  that  France  responded
    affirmatively to the take back request  made  by  the  United  Kingdom.
    Consequently, in conclusion the SSHD had power  to  make  the  transfer
    decision.

64) For all the reasons given  above,  I  conclude  that  it  is  for  this
    Tribunal to determine the challenge  made  to  the  lawfulness  of  the
    SSHD's transfer decision, on traditional public law principles. For the
    purposes of ground 1  that  requires  determination  of  the  issue  of
    whether the applicant has established, on the evidence before the SSHD,
    that the SSHD's conclusion that she was not outwith  the  territory  of
    the Member States of the EU for a period exceeding three  months  prior
    to her entry into the United Kingdom was rational,  in  the  Wednesbury
    sense.

65) I have set out at [9] and  [10]  above  a  summary  of  the  discrepant
    evidence provided by the applicant during the two interviews  conducted
    with her in the UK on the 28 October 2015.  The SSHD also had available
    to her, at the date the transfer decision was made, the  acceptance  by
    the French authorities on 20 November 2015 of  the  take  back  request
    made by the SSHD on 9 November 2015.

66) I conclude, based on the evidence that was available to the  SSHD  when
    she  made  the  transfer  decision,  that  such  decision  was  plainly
    rational.

    GROUND 2

    The parties' respective cases

67) Centre stage in ground 2 is the inaccurate information provided by  the
    SSHD in the take back request made to the French authorities on  the  9
    November 2015. In  particular,  it  is  to  be  recalled  that  it  was
    incorrectly stated therein that the applicant had not asserted that she
    had "left the territory of the Member States" subsequent to her  having
    claimed asylum in France.

68) The applicant submits that this is "a striking failure by the Secretary
    of State to comply with the procedural requirements  of  Article  23(4)
    [of Dublin III]", the consequences of which are that: (a) the applicant
    had been deprived of the opportunity  for  the  French  authorities  to
    corroborate her account of having left  the  territory  of  the  member
    States as claimed; and,  (b)  the  SSHD  wrongly  attached  weight,  or
    irrational weight, to the fact that  the  French  authorities  accepted
    responsibility for taking charge of the applicant's  asylum  claim,  in
    support of her conclusion that France was the responsible member state.



69) It is further asserted  by  the  applicant  that  the  Tribunal  should
    disregard, or attach little weight, to the  evidence  produced  by  the
    SSHD of a post-decision exchange between the Dublin Unit in the  United
    Kingdom and the Head of the Dublin Unit  in  France  -  there  being  a
    dearth of evidence before the Tribunal as to the exact  nature  of  the
    information that was provided by the United Kingdom authorities  during
    such exchange.

70) In response, it was accepted by the SSHD, for  the  first  time  during
    oral submissions, that her failure to provide  the  French  authorities
    with the appropriate information in the  request  of  9  November  2015
    constituted a failure to comply with the requirements of Article  23(4)
    of Dublin III. It was asserted, however, that this failure  should  not
    lead the Tribunal to quash the transfer decision because:

 i) Article 23(4) is not justiciable;

ii) Dublin III does not identify any consequences of a  states  failure  to
    comply with the requirements laid down in Article 23(4);  and,  in  any
    event;

iii) Given that: (i) the SSHD has now provided the French  authorities  with
    the relevant information (which should be inferred from the GCID  notes
    produced to the Tribunal); and, (ii) the French  authorities  responded
    to provision of such information confirming that the applicant  was  in
    France in December 2014 and January 2015, the failure  to  comply  with
    article 23(4) is now academic.

Conclusions on Ground 2

71) I accept, as Ms Rowlands submits, that Dublin III does not provide  for
    any consequences for a failure  to  comply  with  the  requirements  of
    Article 23(4) in the making of a take  back/take  charge  request.  If,
    however, by submitting that Article 23(4)  is  not  justiciable  it  is
    being asserted that the failure to comply with its requirements is  not
    a matter that can be taken  into  consideration  when  determining  the
    lawfulness of the transfer decision, I disagree.

72) A judicial review of the transfer decision, guaranteed by Article 27(1)
    of Dublin III (and Article 47 of the Charter), requires  an  assessment
    of the lawfulness of the grounds upon which such a decision  is  taken.
    This, in my conclusion, must incorporate matters of procedure and those
    matters which may impact on the probative value to be given to evidence
    before the decision-maker. The procedural requirement in Article  23(4)
    falls within this category. Furthermore, as previously identified,  the
    intensity and scope of the appeal or review of a transfer decision is a
    matter to be determined by national procedures. Taking  account  of  an
    irrelevant matter, or attaching irrational weight to an aspect  of  the
    evidence, in the making of a decision (as Mr Toal puts the  applicant's
    case) clearly fall within the scope of the Tribunal's  jurisdiction  to
    determine a challenge  to  such  decision  on  traditional  public  law
    grounds.

73) In my conclusion, the transfer decision, which is expressed by the SSHD
    in writing in her decision letter of the 30 November 2015,  is  legally
    flawed for the reasons identified by Mr Toal.

74)  The  process  by  which  it  was  reached  is  flawed  by   procedural
    irregularity, that being the failure  to  comply  with  the  procedural
    requirement set out in Article 23(4) of Dublin III. Alternatively,  and
    this is the flip side of the same coin, the SSHD's decision letter does
    not disclose whether the acceptance of  responsibility  by  the  French
    authorities  was  treated  as  a  relevant  matter  when  the  ultimate
    assessment of whether to make a transfer decision was being undertaken.
    It is a reasonable inference that it was viewed as  supportive  of  the
    conclusion that France is the responsible state, and as undermining the
    applicant's assertions that she had left France and  travelled  to  the
    DRC as claimed, particularly in the  absence  of  any  reasons  in  the
    decision letter or a witness statement  from  the  decision  maker  (or
    indeed any other relevant Home Office official) bearing on the issue of
    the  relevance  attached  to  the  French  authorities'  acceptance  of
    responsibility.

75) I further conclude that there can be no question but that  the  mistake
    made by SSHD  in  her  take  back  request  was,  in  its  context,  of
    sufficient  possible  consequence  to  render  the  SSHD's   subsequent
    transfer decision unlawful.

76) Judicial review is, though, a discretionary remedy.

77) When considering the exercise of discretion, it is important to observe
    that this is not a case to which section 31(2A) of  the  Senior  Courts
    Act 1981 ("1981 Act") applies, for the following reasons. Section 84(1)
    of the Criminal Justice and Courts Act 2015 ("2015 Act") introduced the
    new section 31(2A) into the 1981  Act.  Consequently,  the  High  Court
    must, save for reasons of exceptional public interest, refuse relief on
    an application for judicial review if it appears to  the  court  to  be
    highly likely that the outcome for the applicant would  not  have  been
    substantially different if the conduct complained of had not  occurred.
    This applies to applications for judicial review brought in  the  Upper
    Tribunal by virtue of  section  15(5A)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007  ("2007  Act")).  However,  as  a  consequence  of
    paragraph 6 of The Criminal Justice and Courts Act  2015  (Commencement
    No. 4 and  Transitional  Provisions)  Order  2016  (SI  2016/717),  the
    requirements set forth in section 15(5A) of the 2007 Act are limited to
    cases in which the application for permission to bring judicial  review
    proceedings was received by the Upper Tribunal on, or after,  8  August
    2016. This is not such a case.

78) I must, therefore, consider the exercise of my discretion  on  a  basis
    outwith the regime identified above, and do so by asking myself whether
    the SSHD would have reached the same decision had she not  fallen  into
    error. At this stage of the proceedings the SSHD submits that I  should
    take account of the communication between the UK and French authorities
    on 4 or 5 April 2016. I agree that this is so. Ms Rowlands asserts that
    the transfer decision should  not  be  quashed  because  the  error  in
    providing  misleading  information  to  the  French   authorities   was
    rectified in a subsequent communication with the  head  of  the  Dublin
    Unit in  France  -  the  French  authorities  stating  that  they  were
    satisfied that the applicant had been in France in  December  2014  and
    January 2015. The only information regarding this communication  is  to
    be found in a file note on the "GCID - Case Record Sheet" dated 5 April
    2016 (see [18] above). Reference is also made to the  communication  in
    the response to the pre-action protocol letter, of the  15  April  2016
    (see [17] above).

79) Even though only limited information  can  be  gleaned  from  the  Case
    Record Sheet, and that there is no  witness  statement  from  the  Home
    Office official who undertook  the  abovementioned  communication,  had
    this been the only additional evidence relevant to the determination of
    whether I should exercise my  discretion  in  favour  of  quashing  the
    SSHD's decision, I would have declined to do so. I can, however, see no
    reason why account should not also be taken at this stage  of  all  the
    evidence before me capable of bearing on the SSHD's  discretion  as  to
    whether to make a fresh transfer decision, should  the  decision  under
    challenged be quashed, including evidence produced  by  the  applicant.
    Whilst this evidence is primarily in the form of witness statements, it
    also includes other 'circumstantial evidence'[2]  such  as  a  laissez-
    passer said to relate to  a  journey  made  by  the  applicant  between
    Kinshasa and Brazzaville on 1 April 2015, which is in the name that the
    applicant is known to  the  French  authorities  by.  Although  in  her
    skeleton argument Ms Rowlands subjects this evidence to forensic attack
    there has, thus far, been no rounded assessment of it by the SSHD.

80) Looking at the evidence in the round and in  its  proper  context  i.e.
    that any decision must be made  within  the  framework  established  by
    Dublin III, I conclude that it is appropriate to exercise my discretion
    so  as  to  quash  the  transfer  decision  made  by  the   SSHD,   the
    manifestation of which is reduced to writing in the letter  of  the  30
    November 2015.

81) This application for judicial review is allowed.












                                    Order

   1. This application for judicial review is allowed;
   2. The decision of 30 November 2015 declining to consider the applicant's
      claim for asylum; issuing a certificate under Asylum  and  Immigration
      (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, Schedule 3, paragraph  4  and
      proposing to remove the Applicant to France is quashed;
   3. For reasons given orally -  the  respondent  is  to  pay  75%  of  the
      applicant's costs of, and incidental  to,  these  proceedings,  to  be
      assessed if not agreed;
   4. There be detailed assessment of the applicant's publicly funded costs;
   5. Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal is refused. The respondent
      did not seek permission to  appeal  and,  having  considered  all  the
      circumstances of the case, I conclude that it is  not  appropriate  to
      grant permission.

Signed:
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor









Applicant's solicitors:
Respondent's solicitors:
Home Office Ref:
Decision(s) sent to above parties on:
----------------------------------------------------------------------------
-----------------------------------------------------------
 Notification of appeal rights

A decision by the Upper Tribunal on an application for judicial review is  a
decision that disposes of proceedings.

 A party may appeal against such a decision to the  Court  of  Appeal  on  a
question of law only. Any party who wishes to appeal  should  apply  to  the
Upper Tribunal for permission, at the  hearing  at  which  the  decision  is
given. If no application is made, the Tribunal must nonetheless consider  at
the hearing whether to give or refuse permission to appeal (rule  44(4B)  of
the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

If the Tribunal refuses permission, either in response to an application  or
by virtue of rule 44(4B), then the party wishing to  appeal  can  apply  for
permission from the Court of Appeal itself.

-----------------------
[1] A submission made orally. At paragraph 34 of  the  Detailed  Grounds  of
Defence the SSHD had previously submitted that: "The Tribunal can  make  its
own decision on the evidence that was before the decision maker."
[2] Of the type identified in Annex II of Regulation 118/2014

