












                                                                JR/3633/2016


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice






 The Queen on the application of Yashoda Burja Thapa and Sarmila Burja Thapa
                                                                  Applicants
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr D Ball, of Counsel, instructed by Howe  &  Co
Solicitors, on behalf of the  Applicant  and  Mr  D  Mitchell,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on 17 February 2017.

      Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

  1. This claim, dated 4 April 2016, challenges the  respondent's  decision
     to grant the applicants' 33 months limited leave to enter  as  opposed
     to Indefinite Leave to Enter (ILE). The date of the impugned  decision
     is the 6 January 2016.
  2. Permission to bring judicial review was granted on the papers by Upper
     Tribunal Judge Rintoul on 28 June 2016 on all grounds  "on  the  facts
     and in the absence of an acknowledgment of service".
  3. A detailed chronology is set out at [9] of the applicants' grounds and
     paragraph 3 of the respondents Detailed Grounds of Defence.  There  is
     no dispute between the parties in relation to the same and which shows
     the following:



|14/01/1980|Applicants' father, Prem Raj Burji enlisted in the      |
|          |British Army (Gurkha Regiment).                         |
|09/07/1987|First applicant was born                                |
|11/07/1989|Second applicant was born                               |
|05/05/1992|Applicants' sibling, Pabitra Kumari Thapa, born.        |
|13/01/1995|Father discharged                                       |
|08/11/2009|Father granted Indefinite Leave to Enter (ILE)          |
|20/05/2010|Applicants' mother, Yam Kumari Burja Thapa, granted ILE |
|24/11/2010|Applicants' sibling Pabitra granted ILE                 |
|18/12/2010|Father arrives in the UK                                |
|30/04/2012|Applicants' mother arrives in the UK with Pabitra       |
|07/10/2013|Applicants applied for leave to enter the UK outside the|
|          |Immigration Rules                                       |
|12/12/2013|Applicants were refused leave to enter with a right of  |
|          |appeal                                                  |
|19/02/2015|Applicants' appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was       |
|          |allowed on human rights grounds                         |
|22/09/2015|The SSHD's application for permission to appeal to the  |
|          |Upper Tribunal was refused                              |
|06/01/2016|The applicants were issued with leave to enter outside  |
|          |the Rules for 33 months valid from 06/01/2016 until     |
|          |06/10/2016 by an Entry Clearance Officer.               |
|09/03/2016|The applicants issued pre-action letter to SSHD,        |
|          |received by the SSHD on 14/03/2016                      |
|16/03/2016|The SSHD sent her response to the applicants' pre-action|
|          |letter                                                  |
|04/04/2016|Applicants lodged this claim for judicial review        |
|          |                                                        |






  4. The applicant's Grounds assert that:


           a. The  respondent's  decision  is  unlawful,  unreasonable  and
              disproportionate as  it  failed  to  take  into  account  the
              guidance on  indefinite  leave  outside  the  Rules  and  the
              specific nature of the historic injustice; and
           b. The applicant has a legitimate expectation.


  5. I say at the outset that the assertion by Mr Ball, on  behalf  of  the
     applicants, that every overage dependant of a former Gurkha soldier is
     entitled to a  grant  of  indefinite  leave  to  enter  or  remain  is
     incorrect. It is a proposition not supported by  the  case  law  which
     recognises that even those who may be so  entitled  on  the  basis  of
     dependency upon their father, and ability  to  satisfy  the  necessary
     criteria set out in the respondent's policies/guidance/IDIs, can still
     be refused leave or granted a limited period of leave.
  6. This case is  not  about  challenging  the  respondent's  decision  in
     relation to the grant of leave, as there is no dispute concerning  the
     applicants' entitlement to some form of leave following  the  decision
     of the First-tier Tribunal who allowed  their  appeals  on  Article  8
     grounds, it is a challenge to the duration and  nature  of  the  leave
     granted.

  7. Mr  Ball  submitted  that  the  respondent's  policies  indicate  that
     indefinite leave  to  remain  would  be  granted  in  the  absence  of
     exceptional circumstances.  Mr  Ball  submitted  that  the  respondent
     failed to set out what in this  matter  amounts  to  such  exceptional
     circumstances and the only element that it is submitted would  satisfy
     this term is the historic injustice, which favours the applicants, and
     which is relevant to the finding regarding Article 8 ECHR. In relation
     to the family circumstances, the 'historic wrong', and the applicants'
     fathers previous service as a member of the Brigade  of  Gurkhas,  the
     respondent appears to  accept  these  are  exceptional  circumstances,
     leading to it being asserted that the respondent has,  therefore,  not
     correctly applied her policy to the facts of this case.
  8. Mr Ball submitted that the applicants are prejudiced by the nature  of
     the limited leave granted to them, as they will have to apply again in
     the future before they are entitled to a grant of ILR,  which  may  be
     harder for them to succeed with on the basis that any family life they
     may have in the United Kingdom with their parents may no longer exist.
     I observe in relation to this argument that this puts  the  applicants
     in no worse a position than any other individual granted a  period  of
     limited leave under the staged settlement approach to ILR. It  is  not
     necessarily the case that the applicants will have to  rely  upon  the
     same protected right at a later date that they relied on  relation  to
     the application leading to the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal,
     as they may have established other family  or  private  lives  at  the
     relevant time.  Whether a person is entitled to ILR is a fact specific
     assessment at the time any application is made  at  which  point  such
     entitlement must be made out. It has  not  been  shown  that  this  is
     unfair to the applicants or prejudices their position such as to  make
     the decision unfair or arguably irrational.
  9. The applicants seek to rely upon several documents as the  sources  of
     the  policy/guidance  it  is  submitted   supports   their   arguments
     including:


               . Diplomatic Service Procedures, Chapter 29, paragraph 29.13.


               . Settlement Entry  Clearance  Guidance  -  Chapter  12  para
                 12.16.
               . IDI Chapter 15, section 2A, para 13.2 - June 2009.
               . IDI Chapter 15, section 2A, para 13.2 - March 2010.
               . IDI, Chapter 15, Section 2A, Annex K - January 2015.
               . IDI, chapter 1, Section 14 - leave Outside the Rules.
               . Asylum Policy Instructions Discretionary Leave.


 10. It is important to remember that the impugned decision was made by  an
     Entry Clearance Officer for, as recognised  in  UG,  NT,  RM,  and  YP
     (Nepal) v Entry Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 58,  the  policy  in
     the IDIs may not be applicable to applications  for  entry  clearance.
     Such sources may only have effect in relation to applications made 'in-
     country' which, if applicable, does not arguably assist the applicants
     in challenging the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.
 11. In relation to the respondent's policy for leave outside the rules, it
     is accepted the applicants will face difficulties under the policy  as
     their father could not settle under the HM Forces rule and they  could
     not meet the requirements numbered 1, 2, or  3  of  the  2006  policy,
     although this was replaced by SET 12 in June 2009.  This  was  revoked
     and replaced by the Immigration Directorate Instruction in March 2010.



 12.  The  respondent's  policies  provide  a  route  for  settlement   for
     dependants and in relation to that dated March 2010, states  "Children
     over the age of 18 and other dependent  relatives  will  not  normally
     qualify for the exercise of discretion in line with the main applicant
     and will be expected to qualify for leave to enter or remain in the UK
     under the relevant provisions of the  Immigration  Rules  for  example
     under paragraph 317, or under the provisions of Article 8 of the Human
     Rights Act. Exceptional circumstances may be considered on a  case-by-
     case basis. For more information on the exceptional  circumstances  in
     which discretion may be exercised see section 13.2". That  section  of
     the policy states "Dependants over the  age  of  18  are  foreign  and
     Commonwealth  HM  Forces  members  (including  Gurkhas)  who  are  not
     otherwise covered in this guidance would normally need to qualify  for
     settlement in the UK under a specific  provision  of  the  Immigration
     Rules. In exceptional circumstances discretion  may  be  exercised  in
     individual cases where the dependent is over the age of 18." Reference
     in that section to dependent adult children  of  serving  foreign  and
     Commonwealth HM Forces members is not applicable  as  the  applicants'
     father is a former member of the Brigade of Gurkhas and not a  serving
     member.
 13. In relation to a person seeking leave to enter outside the Immigration
     Rules, the Tribunal has been referred to the  Immigration  Directorate
     Instructions,  Chapter  14  dated  April  2006  and  specifically   to
     paragraphs 3.1 and 3.2 which are in the following terms:  (LOTR  being
     shorthand for 'Leave outside the Rules')

           3.1   Limited LOTR


                 An application  for  LOTR  under  any  of  the  immigration
                 concessions must be strictly considered in  line  with  the
                 relevant policy instructions. If it is  decided  that  LOTR
                 should be granted, then limited leave should be granted for
                 a specified period  for  the  necessary  duration  of  stay
                 required. Likewise, where it  is  decided  to  grant  leave
                 because of particular  compelling  reasons,  limited  leave
                 should only be granted in accordance  with  the  individual
                 circumstances of the case, again  only  for  the  necessary
                 duration of stay required.


                 The  granting  of  limited  LOTR  should  not  convey   any
                 expectation of further leave  or  eventual  settlement.  As
                 soon as the period of limited LOTR comes  to  an  end,  the
                 person will be expected to leave the UK unless  he  applies
                 to extend his leave, or has an  entitlement  to  remain  on
                 some other basis.

            3.2  Indefinite LOTR

                 Most persons applying to stay in the  United  Kingdom  will
                 require leave for only a specific, limited period (see para
                 3.1. above). However, there may be a very limited number of
                 instances where  it  is  considered  appropriate  to  grant
                 indefinite   LOTR   because   the   particular   compelling
                 circumstances of the individual case are such  that  it  is
                 almost  certain  that  there   will   be   no   change   in
                 circumstances within five years.


 14. It is not disputed on behalf of the respondent that the power to grant
     indefinite leave outside the Rules exists but it  was  not  considered
     appropriate on the facts of this case to do so. It  is  accepted  that
     efforts to obtain a detailed explanation from the decision maker  have
     not borne fruit, with the response from the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
     being that he or she had been instructed to grant a period of  limited
     leave to enter of 33 months.


 15. The grant of leave for 33 months is said to have  been  in  accordance
     with the respondent's guidance at the  relevant  time  for  those  who
     succeeded with an appeal on human rights grounds. This  statement  has
     not been shown to be an incorrect reflection of  the  relevant  policy
     instructions referred to in paragraph 3.1.
 16. The respondent's case is that such a grant  was  proportionate  as  it
     allowed the applicants to continue their family  life  in  the  United
     Kingdom giving effect to the First-tier  Tribunal  decision  that  the
     interference with that family life caused by the refusal of  leave  to
     enter was not proportionate. The First-tier Tribunal's decision was in
     accordance with the case law and policy  designed  to  deal  with  the
     historic injustice point that had previously arisen in  Gurkha  cases.
     The policies are designed  to  stop  families  who  may  otherwise  be
     prevented from continuing a family life that they  have  enjoyed  from
     losing the same as a result  of  the  historic  injustice  issue.  The
     applicants' appeals were allowed by the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
     grant of leave to enter outside the Rules  deals  with  this  specific
     issue, as it has allowed the applicants to enter  the  United  Kingdom
     and continue their family life together. Such period  of  leave  shall
     continue to 6 October 2018 during which time the  applicants  will  be
     able to work or study. The only prohibition or  limitation  upon  them
     appears to be that they are not permitted to seek recourse  to  public
     funds, although the First-tier Tribunal found that the family is self-
     sufficient in relation to maintenance  and  accommodation,  indicating
     this is not a live issue.
 17. Mr Ball submitted that the respondent has  fettered  the  exercise  of
     discretion and not considered the policy on leave outside  the  Rules,
     especially as no consideration had been  given  to  the  reference  to
     there being no change in the applicants' circumstances within the five-
     year period. Although there is no specific reference to  this  element
     in the limited explanation for the period of grant, a normal  practice
     is that reasons are not given if leave is granted. The applicants  are
     adults and the basis of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
     clear. The First-tier judge was satisfied that family life  recognised
     by article 8 existed within this family unit at that time. That family
     life is said  to  arise  as  a  result  of  the  applicants  remaining
     dependent upon their father and not having formed independent lives of
     their own. As noted, the first applicant was born on 9 July  1987  and
     the second applicant on 11 July  1989  and  so  are  aged  29  and  28
     respectively now.  It is reasonable to assume they will wish to get on
     with their respective lives which may  include  forming  relationships
     and setting up their own homes. What  was  not  shown,  based  on  the
     evidence before the decision maker, was that  it  was  almost  certain
     that there will be no change in their circumstances within five years.
     The wording of paragraph 3.2 is very specific. Whilst not  ruling  out
     the possibility of ILR it introduces a  high  threshold  of  it  being
     "almost certain". It has not  been  made  out  on  the  basis  of  the
     information before the decision maker, or  submissions  made  to  this
     Tribunal, that this is a case in which this element  arguably  assists
     the applicants in their challenge.
 18. It was submitted that the core of this case is the historic  injustice
     argument. There have been a number of Tribunal decisions  in  relating
     to that specific element some of which were relied upon by the parties
     during their submissions.
 19. It is not disputed as a general statement of law that  adult  children
     may be able to show family life recognised by Article 8  if  they  are
     dependent on their parents;
    See Kugathas v the Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2003]
    INLR 170,  Ghishing (family life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012]  UKUT
    160 (IAC) and Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 630.
 20. It is also important to  remember  the  purpose  behind  the  policies
     relating to overage Gurkha children. In Gurung v SSHD [2012] EWHC 1629
     it was held that the true underlying purpose of the policy  concerning
     Gurkhas was not to make it  easier  for  adult  dependants  of  former
     Gurkhas  to  settle  in  the  UK  and  accordingly,  the   application
     challenging the rationality of that policy had to be  dismissed.  This
     Tribunal finds that the purpose of the  policy  is  to  keep  families
     together and to  prevent  separation  as  a  result  of  the  historic
     injustice applicable to former members of the Brigade of Gurkhas.
 21. In relation to the historic wrong argument, in R (on  the  application
     of Sharmilla Gurung and others) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8 it  was  held
     that the historic injustice suffered by Gurkhas was only one factor to
     be weighed against immigration control under Article  8.  It  was  not
     necessarily determinative. If a Gurkha could show that,  but  for  the
     historic injustice, he would have settled in the UK at a time when his
     dependent (now) adult child would have been able to accompany him as a
     dependent minor child, that was a strong reason for  holding  that  it
     was disproportionate to permit the adult child to join his family now.


 22. In Patel, Modha and Odedara v ECO (Mumbai)  (2010)  EWCA  Civ  17  the
     Court of Appeal recognised that one could set out to compensate for  a
     historical wrong, but one could  not  reverse  the  passage  of  time.
     Where children had grown up and embarked on lives of  their  own,  the
     bonds which constituted family life  would  no  longer  be  there  and
     Article 8 would have no purchase.  However, what might  constitute  an
     extant family life fell well short  of  what  constituted  dependency.
     Many adult children might  still  have  a  family  life  with  parents
     settled in the UK, not by leave or by force of  circumstance,  but  by
     long delayed  right.  That  was  what  gave  the  historical  wrong  a
     potential relevance to Article 8 claims.  That did not make the ECHR a
     mechanism for turning back the clock, but it did make  the  historical
     wrong potentially relevant to the application of Article 8(2).  If, by
     the time the adult children sought entry they were no longer  part  of
     the family life of the BOC who had finally secured citizenship in  the
     UK,  the  threshold  of  Article  8  would  not  be  crossed  and  the
     proportionality of excluding them would not be an issue.  If they came
     within the protection of Article 8(1) however, the balance of  factors
     determining proportionality for the purposes of Article 8(2) would  be
     influenced by the historical wrong, perhaps decisively.
 23. In Ghising and others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong;  weight)  [2013]
     UKUT 00567 (IAC) it was held that (i) In finding that the weight to be
     accorded to the historic wrong in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was  not
     to be regarded as less than that to be  accorded  the  historic  wrong
     suffered by British Overseas citizens, the Court of Appeal  in  Gurung
     and others [2013] EWCA Civ 8 did not hold that, in  either  Gurkha  or
     BOC cases, the effect of the historic wrong is to reverse or otherwise
     alter the burden of proof that applies in  Article  8  proportionality
     assessments;  (ii)  When  an  Appellant  has  shown  that   there   is
     family/private life and the decision made by the Respondent amounts to
     an interference with it, the burden lies with the Respondent  to  show
     that a decision to remove is proportionate (although Appellants  will,
     in practice, bear the responsibility of adducing  evidence  that  lies
     within their remit and about which the  Respondent  may  be  unaware);
     (iii) What concerned the Court in Gurung and others was not the burden
     of proof but,  rather,  the  issue  of  weight  in  a  proportionality
     assessment. The Court held that, as in the case of BOCs, the  historic
     wrong suffered by Gurkha ex-servicemen  should  be  given  substantial
     weight; (iv) Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is  engaged
     and, but for the historic wrong, the Appellant would have been settled
     in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the outcome of  the
     Article 8 proportionality assessment in an Appellant's  favour,  where
     the matters relied on by the SSHD/ ECO consist solely  of  the  public
     interest  in  maintaining  a  firm  immigration  policy;  (v)  It  can
     therefore be seen that Appellants in Gurkha (and BOC) cases  will  not
     necessarily succeed, even though (a) their family life engages Article
     8(1); and (b) the evidence shows they would have come  to  the  United
     Kingdom with their father, but for the injustice  that  prevented  the
     latter from settling here earlier.  If the  Respondent  can  point  to
     matters over and above the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm
     immigration policy, which argue in favour of removal or the refusal of
     leave to enter, these matters must be given appropriate weight in  the
     balance in the Respondent's favour. Thus, a  bad  immigration  history
     and/or criminal behaviour may still  be  sufficient  to  outweigh  the
     powerful factors bearing on the Appellant's side of the balance.
 24. These cases go to the core issue that  the  historic  wrong  prevented
     families who may have wanted to come to the United  Kingdom  and  live
     together, had they been permitted to do so on the  retirement  of  the
     former member of the Brigade of Gurkhas, from doing so.  This  can  be
     remedied in some cases by a grant  of  leave  following  the  guidance
     provided in these cases and the relevant policies/IDIs.
 25. The decision-maker was clearly aware of the facts as set  out  in  the
     First-tier Tribunal decision  and  the  reason  why  that  appeal  was
     allowed. As noted in Patel, Modha and Odedara, the historic wrong does
     not make the Convention a mechanism for turning  the  clock  back  but
     does make both the history and  its  admitted  injustices  potentially
     relevant as to the application of article 8 (2).  [14].  That  is  the
     context in relation to which the historic wrong argument  is  applied.
     What the Courts do not say in any of the  cases  dealing  with  Gurkha
     appeals, and what the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not  do  in  the
     applicants' appeals, is give any direction or guidance in relation  to
     what period of leave must be given in the event a person  is  entitled
     to succeed under article 8 (2) based on an  historic  wrong  argument.
     That is left to be considered by the respondent  on  a  fact  by  fact
     basis in accordance with published policies.
 26. A further relevant case is that of IT (Sierra Leone)  v  Secretary  of
     State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 787.  Pill  LJ,  in  the
     lead judgement, stated:


           14. The point has arisen in an application for  judicial  review
           of a decision of the respondent to granted  discretionary  leave
           to remain in the UK for three years  along  with  a  refusal  to
           grant ILR in R (Islam Shahid) v Secretary of state for the  Home
           Department  [2004]  EWHC  2550   (Admin).   Gibbs   J   put   it
           appropriately at paragraph 45:


                 "In my judgement, even taking the understandable  criticism
                 made of the Secretary of State by the  [immigration  judge]
                 at their highest, they  do  not  render  the  Secretary  of
                 State's  decision  to  grant  discretionary   rather   than
                 indefinite leave irrational.  It  is  certainly  true  that
                 there is no particular reason to think that the  claimant's
                 circumstances will change in the next two or three years so
                 as adversely to affect consideration of his case under  the
                 policy. But I cannot see that that is in itself a reason to
                 grant indefinite leave to remain. As I have said, a  change
                 in circumstances is at least a significant possibility."




           Gibb J added, at paragraph 47:


                 "The application of the Secretary of State's [then] policy,
                 together with the decision itself, makes it likely that  in
                 the absence of any substantial change of circumstances  the
                 claimant will in due course qualify for indefinite leave to
                 remain. If he,  for  any  reason,  in  future  receives  an
                 unfavourable decision from the Secretary of  State  despite
                 no substantial change of circumstances he will be  entitled
                 to a human rights appeal against that decision. However, as
                 I have said, the policy itself indicates a  presumption  in
                 favour  of  the  claimant   being   permitted   to   remain
                 indefinitely in this country  provided  that  there  is  no
                 substantial  change  of  circumstances  or  reason  to  the
                 contrary."


           15. Following a successful  article  8  appeal,  the  respondent
           cannot remove the appellant but it is for her to decide  whether
           to exercise her discretion to grant leave to remain and, if  so,
           for how long. It was for the respondent, and not  the  Tribunal,
           to decide the length of leave to remain. If a further attempt to
           remove were to be  made,  the  article  8  submission  could  be
           repeated, as contemplated in Islam  Shahid.  There  was  nothing
           irrational in limiting leave to remain to 3 years. Events  might
           occur during  that  period  which  would  seriously  damage  the
           appellants claim that he should be  permitted  to  remain  under
           article 8 grounds.


 27. In R (on the application of Norjabee Alladin) and others  v  Secretary
     of State for the home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1334,  the  Court  of
     Appeal set out the issues in paragraph 1  of  their  judgment  in  the
     following terms:


           "the principal  issue  in  these  two  appeals  is  whether  the
           decisions of the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
           ("the Secretary of State") to give limited (discretionary) leave
           to remain ("DLR") as  opposed  to  indefinite  leave  to  remain
           ("ILR") are unlawful because they were given in  breach  of  the
           Secretary of State's  duty  under  Section  55  of  the  Borders
           Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009."


 28. Whilst it is accepted that section 55 is not relevant to this case,  a
     challenge to a decision to grant a period of limited  leave  which  is
     said to be in breach of a positive obligation upon the respondent,  is
     similar to the nature of the challenge this Tribunal is considering.
 29. In giving the lead judgment Floyd LJ stated at paragraph 58 and 59:




           58.   That said, however, I should not grant a  judicial  review
                 in the present case unless the appellants can show  a  real
                 prospect that the Secretary of State might, if directed  to
                 retake the decisions according to the guidance, come  to  a
                 different decision. Put another way,  have  the  appellants
                 demonstrated that the error of law on which they  rely  (be
                 it following an inflexible policy or failing to have regard
                 to the section 55 duty) is a material one?


           59.   There can, in my judgment, be no doubt that the  Secretary
                 of State  is  entitled  in  principle  to  adopt  a  staged
                 approach  to  settlement.  Even  where  children  are   the
                 applicants, it does not follow that the Secretary of  State
                 is bound, on the  first  application,  to  grant  ILR.  The
                 considerations outlined in the  evidence  of  Mr  Gallagher
                 amount to factors which are worthy  of  consideration,  and
                 deserve  to  be  placed  in  the  balance  after  the  best
                 interests and welfare of the children have been considered.
                 It follows that an applicant who  wishes  to  persuade  the
                 Secretary of State to grant leave for a period longer  than
                 that provided for by the staged settlement policy has to do
                 more than point to the fact that she is a child."


 30. In this case, it is arguable that having benefited from  the  historic
     injustice argument when the First-tier Tribunal  was  considering  the
     proportionality of the decision, the applicants need to do  more  than
     just rely on the fact that they  are  dependent  relatives  of  former
     member of the Brigade of Gurkhas. No such  element  was  made  out  in
     either the information given to the First-tier Tribunal  or  following
     the appeal been allowed.
 31. The published guidance relating to grants of leave outside  the  Rules
     does not prevent the Secretary of State considering whether  to  grant
     ILR if certain circumstances exist, but none were shown  to  exist  on
     the basis of the available evidence. The published guidance does  make
     unlawful a grant of a limited period of leave, per se.
 32. The challenge to the grant has not been shown to be  contrary  to  the
     provisions of public policy or the Immigration Rules and is  therefore
     arguably only susceptible to challenge  on  Wednesbury  grounds.  This
     introduces a standard of reasonableness. A reasoning  or  decision  is
     Wednesbury unreasonable, or irrational, only if it is so  unreasonable
     that no reasonable person acting reasonably could have made  it.  This
     is a different and stricter test than merely showing that the decision
     was unreasonable. On the facts  of  this  case,  the  applicants  have
     failed to establish that the respondent's decision  is  irrational  or
     unlawful.
 33. In relation to the second ground, that of legitimate expectation,  the
     characteristics of legitimate expectation depend upon the context  and
     category of case being considered but include  (i)  clear  promise  or
     settled practice (ii) engendering an expected advantage, (iii) whether
     procedural or substantive.
 34. In relation to the argument that the legitimate expectation arises  by
     comparison with other directly equivalent cases of adult dependants of
     Gurkha veterans who had their appeals allowed on human rights  grounds
     by the Tribunal and who were then granted indefinite leave  to  enter,
     as now endorsed in the 2015 policy, it has not been established on the
     basis of the information made available to this tribunal that there is
     a pattern of conduct undertaken by the Secretary of State when dealing
     with such cases to grant ILR such as  to  create  a  valid  legitimate
     expectation that others within the same category will have  a  similar
     status conferred upon them.  Insufficient  evidence  was  provided  to
     support this contention. If the applicants are able  to  benefit  from
     the 2015 policy, it is always open to them make such application which
     can be further considered by the Secretary of State.
 35. The respondent relies upon the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  R
     (on the application of Niazi)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  home
     Department [2008] EWCA Civ 755 in which Laws LJ confirmed that the law
     recognises three categories of legitimate expectation:

           a. If the public policy has distinctly promised to consult those
              affected or potentially affected by a change of policy,  then
              ordinarily it  must  consult  (according  to  Laws  LJ.,  the
              "paradigm cases" of procedural expectation);
           b. if, without any promise, the public authority has established
              a policy distinctly and substantially  affecting  a  specific
              person or group  who  in  the  circumstances  was  in  reason
              entitled  to  rely  on  its  continuance  and  did  so,  then
              ordinarily it must consult before affecting any  change  (the
              "secondary case" of procedural expectation");
           c. the public authority has distinctly promised to  preserve  an
              existing policy for a specific person or group who  would  be
              substantially affected by the change,  then  ordinarily  must
              keep its promise ("substantive" legitimate expectation"


 36. The underlying problem with the legitimate expectation argument is the
     need to show that the grant  of  33  months  limited  leave  to  enter
     amounts to an act so unfair as to perpetrate an  abuse  of  power.  In
     relation to the facts  known  to  the  decision  maker,  and  to  this
     Tribunal, such an abuse of power has not been made out and  no  clear,
     unambiguous and unqualified representations that ILR would be  granted
     have been shown to exist.
 37. It is accepted that there will no doubt be individuals  who  may  have
     ordinarily been eligible for a grant of 33 months limited LOTR but who
     have been granted indefinite leave on the same basis. The  appellants,
     at paragraph 15 of their Reply, refer to two examples but  it  is  not
     made out that such a small sample amounts to an established course  of
     conduct on the part of the respondent  giving  rise  to  a  legitimate
     expectation.
 38. Mr Ball made a specific disclosure application which  was  refused  by
     Upper Tribunal  Judge  Remington  on  the  1  February  2017  for  the
     following reasons:


           "In the circumstances and further to Rule 5(3) of  the  Tribunal
           Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 I refuse  the  application
           for disclosure of the number of grants for Indefinite  Leave  to
           Enter grants versus Limited Leave to Enter, to adult  dependents
           of Gurkha veterans in the last six years. The request  was  made
           to the Entry Clearance Manager only on the 28 October  2016  and
           remains outstanding. They do not appear to have been any chasing
           letters.  Secondly,  the  purpose  of  this  request,  the  real
           significance and how this would assist in these  proceedings  as
           opposed to being a research exercise, is not adequately made out
           in the application, particularly in the light  of  the  relevant
           Policy and Guidance on Leave Outside the Rules which  refers  to
           the 'compelling  circumstances  of  the  individual  case'.  All
           applications and Grants of Leave will be fact specific".


     The reasoning reflects the criteria for granting leave which confers a
     discretion  upon  the  Secretary  of  State  to   regulate   decisions
     concerning leave outside the Immigration Rules. It  was  submitted  on
     the respondent's behalf that the "legitimate expectation" relied  upon
     by Mr Ball would effectively fetter the  respondent's  decision-making
     in favour of the uniform  grant  of  indefinite  leave  to  all  adult
     dependant Gurkha children. This will be so and the  assertion  by  the
     applicants that this is the reality of  the  position,  regardless  of
     such consequence, I find is a proposition that has not been  shown  to
     have arguable merit.
 39. As stated above, the historic injustice argument is not  determinative
     of a period of grant of leave.  Guidance regarding grants  of  ILR  is
     just that, guidance. It is not made out that  the  respondent  is  not
     entitled  to  have  a  staged  structure  before  a  person   acquires
     settlement, in those cases in which it has not been shown  appropriate
     to grant ILR in the first instance.
 40. It has also not been shown that the impact of  the  grant  of  limited
     LOTR  is  such  that  makes  the  same  arguably  disproportionate  or
     irrational or that there is any legal obligation or necessity  on  the
     facts of this case for any other form of leave to be granted.  It  has
     therefore not been  shown  that  there  is  any  basis  on  which  the
     applicants  have  established  a  viable  challenge  to  the  impugned
     decision on public law grounds.


                       [pic]
            Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson




        Dated:    10 April 2017

      \







