

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                                                                JR/3717/2016


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                  Heard on: 13 December 2016





                      the queen (ON THE application OF)
                           MOHAMMAD HARIS PARACHA
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr Z Malik, Counsel instructed by AWS Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr J Anderson, Counsel, instructed by the Government Legal Department
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                         APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -


JUDGE RIMINGTON:  The applicant in this  judicial  review  claim,  with  the
permission of Judge Kamara, challenges the Secretary of State's decision  of
5 February 2016,  an  administrative  review  which  maintained  an  earlier
decision of 22 December 2015 to refuse his application for leave  to  remain
as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant.

Background

 1. The applicant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 7 September 1987 and was
    granted leave to enter the United Kingdom as a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)
    Migrant on 14 June 2012 until 14 October 2015.  He was engaged with his
    family business, Kafi Group Pakistan established  in  1982  which  has,
    according to the applicant grown to be a very  large  enterprise.   The
    company deals in various commodity exports such as rice wheat and sugar
    and supplies a variety of companies including superstores in the United
    Kingdom.

 2. The applicant, made an application for further leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) Migrant on 9 November 2015 and  that  application
    was refused under the Points Based System by the Secretary of State  on
    22 December 2015 for two reasons.  First he was not entitled to  points
    for the "required investment made  in  the  UK  business"  because  the
    accounts submitted by him did not show the investment made  by  him  in
    his own name as required by paragraph 46-SD (b) of Appendix  A  to  the
    Immigration Rules.  Secondly, he was not entitled  to  any  points  for
    "creation of jobs in the UK" because the evidence submitted by  him  in
    this respect did not comply with the requirements in paragraph 46 -  SD
    (h)     of     Appendix     A     to     the     Immigration     Rules.




 3. The judicial review claim was issued on 5 April 2016 on four grounds.

    Ground (i) - the Secretary of State acted unlawfully  in  holding  that
    the requirement of paragraph 46-SD (b) of Appendix A to the Immigration
    Rules was not met.

    Ground (ii) - the Secretary of State acted  unlawfully  in  failing  to
    have any regard to her evidential flexibility policy.

    Ground (iii) - the Secretary of State acted contrary to paragraph 245AA
    of the Immigration Rules.

    Ground (iv) - the Secretary of State's failure  to  consider  departing
    from the Immigration Rules was unlawful in public law.

 4. For clarity I have set out  a  section  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision of 22 December 2015:

         "You have claimed points on the basis that  you  have  created  the
         equivalent of two new full-time paid jobs for people settled in the
         UK and that these jobs have each existed for at least 12 months.

         As evidence  of  this,  you  have  supplied:  accountant's  letter,
         identity documents, P45, P11, wage slips, and RTI documents.

         Paragraph 46-SD(h) of Appendix A of the Immigration Rules lists the
         specified that is required to demonstrate the creation of jobs.

         The evidence that  you  have  submitted  above  is  not  acceptable
         because

                . Evelyn Marie Jane Osborne 226 hours calculated

                . Mosbah Abdes Salam 1170 hours  were  calculated  from  the
                  wage slips but could not be counted as no hourly rate  was
                  provided as required under paragraph 46-SD(h)(iii)

                . Uzma Syed 1020.76 hours calculated  (July  0  ct  14  wage
                  slips/RTI missing)

                . Sheree Danielle Garside 0  hours  calculated  as  no  wage
                  slips were supplied as required under 46SD(h)(ii)

                . Mark Philip Day no hours were calculated  as  no  identity
                  documents were provided as required  under  paragraph  46-
                  SD(iv) of the Immigration Rules

                . Ayesha Khan Lodhi no hours were calculated as no  identity
                  documents were provided as required under paragraph  46-SD
                  (iv) of the Immigration Rules.

        Therefore, the required 3120 hours worked over a  24  month  period
        was not met.

        We have therefore been unable to award  points  for  Attributes  in
        accordance with Appendix A.

        Therefore you do not satisfy the requirements  of  the  Immigration
        Rules for this category and it has  been  decided  to  refuse  your
        application for Leave to Remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant
        under paragraph 245DD of the Immigration Rules as you do  not  meet
        the requirement at paragraph 245DD(b) and under Appendix A.

        In  making  the  decision  to  refuse  your  application  we   have
        considered paragraph 245AA which explains the actions that  we  may
        take if specified documents are not submitted with an application.

        The Immigration Rules for evidential flexibility only cover missing
        documents from a sequence of documents that have been provided with
        the application, such as one bank statement missing from a  series,
        or missing information from documents  which  have  been  provided.
        Therefore in line with paragraph 245AA(b), as the missing specified
        document does not fall within a series of documents that  you  have
        provided, we have reached a decision based on the evidence provided
        in the application."

 5. There followed the Administrative Review decision under challenge.  The
    relevant Immigration Rules were indeed set out  in  the  administrative
    review decision and paragraph 46-SD(h) of the Immigration Rules a  that
    time read as follows:

         "(h) If the appellant is required to score points for job  creation
             in Table 5 or 6, he must provide the following:

             (i)  evidence to show the applicant is reporting  Pay  As  You
                  Earn (PAYE) income  tax  appropriately  to  HM  Revenue  &
                  Customs (HMRC), such  as  printouts  of  Employee  Payment
                  Records, Real  Time-Full  Payment  Submissions  (either  a
                  series of individual  monthly  submissions  including  the
                  first submission or summaries), or original HM  Revenue  &
                  Customs P45 or P46, which either together or  individually
                  show the total payments made to the  settled  workers,  as
                  well as the tax deducted and date which the  started  work
                  with the applicant's business; and

             (ii) duplicate payslips or wage slips for each settled  worker
                  for whom points  are  being  claimed,  covering  the  full
                  period of  the  employment  for  which  points  are  being
                  claimed; and

             (iii)    confirmation of the  hourly  rate  for  each  settled
                  worker used to claim points, including any changes in  the
                  hourly  rate  and  the  dates  of  the  changes,  enabling
                  calculation of the hours of work created for each  settled
                  worker; and

             (iv) documents which show the employee  is  a  settled  worker
                  such as the biometric data page of a  passport  containing
                  photograph and personal details of the employee, and where
                  the worker is an overseas  national,  a  copy  of  any  UK
                  Government stamp or endorsement within  the  passport,  or
                  the employees full birth certificate, showing the name  of
                  at least one parent; and

             (v)  if the applicant was a director of a company, a  printout
                  from Companies House of the company's filing history  page
                  and of the applicant's personal appointments history,  and
                  showing the date of his appointment as a director of  that
                  company, to confirm that he was a director of the  company
                  that employed the settled worker  at  the  time  that  the
                  settled worker was employed; or

             (vi)  if  the  applicant  was  self-employed,  the   specified
                  documents  in  (c)  above  showing  the  dates  that   the
                  applicant became self-employed, the names on the  Employee
                  Payment Record and bank account, and the  address  of  the
                  business;

 6. The Administrative Review decision of 5 February  2016  considered  the
    points raised  in  the  Administrative  Review  application  under  the
    heading "claimed misapplication of the rules or policy".  This decision
    also upheld the rejection of the application under  paragraph  46-SD(b)
    and maintained the refusal under paragraph 46-SD(h) of the  Immigration
    Rules setting out as follows:

         "In your Administrative Review application you have stated that you
         have provided all the possible  specified  evidence.   However,  as
         stated in the original refusal letter, you  were  missing  numerous
         specified documents in relation to your employees.

         On this issue in your Administrative Review  application  you  have
         stated that some of the missing specified documents arose from your
         unsatisfactory working relationship with your employee  Miss  Aysha
         Khan Lodhi.  However, the onus lies with you therefore, it is  your
         responsibility to manage your Leave to Remain  application,  should
         you wish do this throughout your qualifying period or right  before
         your leave expires.

         As stated in the original refusal decision letter,  you  failed  to
         satisfy the requirements of  paragraph  46-SD(b),  (h)(ii)(iii)(iv)
         because you have not provided the specified documents as  explained
         above.  Furthermore, you do not qualify for leave to  remain  under
         paragraph 245CD(b) because you have not been awarded a  minimum  of
         75 points under paragraphs 35 to 53 of Appendix  A.   Therefore  we
         have maintained the original decision."

 7. Following the  filing  of  the  judicial  review  claim,  however,  the
    Secretary of State conceded, however, that the refusal under  paragraph
    46-SD(b)  had  been  rejected  incorrectly  but  maintained  that   the
    rejection under paragraph (h) was a rational and lawful decision.

 8. It was not in contention between the parties that the required hours to
    be shown were 3,120 hours over a 24 month period.  As can be seen  from
    the decision letter of the Secretary  of  State  there  were  no  hours
    counted for Mr Salam (Mohbah Alam) (1170 claimed hours)  as  no  hourly
    rate was provided and there were no  identity  documents  provided  for
    Sheree Garside, Mark Day or Ayesha Khan Lodhi contrary to paragraph 46-
    SD(iv).  Identity documents were produced for Ms Garside  but  the  PAP
    response pointed out that no payslips were provided for  her.   It  was
    asserted that 3168 hours in relation to the  remaining  employees  were
    duly evidenced. The applicant therefore claimed 226  hours  for  Evelyn
    Osborn, 1179 hours for Mohbah Alam, 1020 hours for Uzma Syed,  90  hour
    for Mark Day and 662 hours for Aysha Khan Lodhi.  There was no  dispute
    over the hours for Osborn and Syed.   Documents  for  Day  and  Garside
    were provided with the Administrative Review but there was no  evidence
    of payslips (according to the PAP response from the respondent) for  Ms
    Garside. She apparently was not relied on.  What is clear is  that  the
    hours of Ms Lodhi are critical.

 9. At the substantive hearing before me, Mr Malik submitted that this  was
    not a case were numerous documents  were  missing.   The  Secretary  of
    State had acted unlawfully  in  having  no  regard  to  her  evidential
    flexibility policy.  I was referred to SH Pakistan v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA
    Civ 426 which indicated that the policy was broader than the Rule under
    Paragraph 245AA.  Both representatives agreed  that  the  policy  which
    applied was that issued later on  12th  August  2014.   The  terms  had
    changed from those in the policy under consideration  in  SH  Pakistan.
    Mr Malik acknowledged that the policy under consideration  stated  that
    the caseworker must have  enough  reason  to  believe  the  information
    exists and that if the caseworker was not sure whether the  information
    existed, he must refer the matter to a higher  executive  officer.   Mr
    Malik  submitted  that  there  was  no  reason  to  believe  that   the
    information did not exist and the failure  to  even  address  this  was
    unlawful.

10. In relation to ground  (iii)  Mr  Malik  submitted  that  there  was  a
    complete failure to consider paragraph 245AA (d) and that  failure  was
    unlawful.   The information on hourly rates was verifiable from another
    document  within  the  evidence.   There  were  other  payslips   which
    identified  the  hourly  rate.  The  Secretary   of   State   gave   no
    consideration to Paragraph 245AA  (b).   He  submitted  there  were  no
    changes to the hourly rate.  Failure to have regard to Paragraph  245AA
    (b) was unlawful.   Further the request for identify documents was  not
    a requirement in itself.   The passport of Mr Day was submitted  before
    the Administrative decision although it was accepted that the documents
    of Ms Lodhi were not submitted.  Information in respect of Ms Lodhi had
    been supplied by the  accountants  giving  reference  to  Ms  Lodhi  as
    Pakistani with ILR.  The accountant also gave  her  National  Insurance
    number and her P45.  These were employer generated documents.  Mr Malik
    submitted that the Respondent could verify information from the HMRC,

11. Mr Malik submitted that in relation to ground (iv) there was a  failure
    by Secretary of State to consider exercising her discretion and  I  was
    referred  to  R  (on  the  application  of  Shaikh)  [2014]  EWHC  2586
    specifically paragraph 25.   This gave reasons as to when the Secretary
    of State should exercise her discretion. The applicant was not a person
    with a poor immigration history. He had merely been unable to  produced
    immigration documents and had explained this  because  he  had  a  poor
    working relationship with his employee and was not able to  obtain  her
    passport. There was no doubt that she had ILR  on  the  facts  of  this
    case.  In the circumstances all the other Immigration  Rules  had  been
    met and the Secretary of State was obliged to consider her  discretion.



12. In response Mr Anderson noted that the first ground had been  conceded.
    This did not avail the applicant if the remaining grounds were not made
    out. The essential point was that  employment  created  in  the  United
    Kingdom for the purposes of the Rules needed to be from settled workers
    within the meaning of the Rules. The onus to show that fell squarely on
    the applicant. I was referred to Nyasulu [2016] EWCA Civ 1145 paragraph
    17 which confirmed that the Points Based System is intended to  operate
    in a way which was simple predictable and  expeditious.    Mr  Anderson
    pointed out that even if the hours of Salam were  taken  into  account,
    the hours would still be short of what was required.  It could  not  be
    said that the hourly rate (said to be �6.86 per hour) would not  change
    within the payslips provided, as these were over a time period.   There
    needed to be evidence of change. It was not incumbent on the  Secretary
    of State  to  make  mathematical  calculations.   In  relation  to  the
    requirement to show settled worker the wording in  SD-(h)(iv)  referred
    to documents 'such as' .  Nothing in the documentation,  including  the
    accountant's letter indicated the source of the information as  to  the
    status of the members of staff.   The materials  from  the  accountants
    gave no basis for the information supplied and in any event post  dated
    the decision under challenge.   It was therefore irrelevant.    Nothing
    showed the settled status of the employee.

13. Mr Anderson  turned  to  the  Immigration  Rules  and  noted  that  the
    Identification document did not fall into the  category  identified  in
    Paragraph 245AA (b).    In relation to the identity documents paragraph
    245AA (b) was not relevant as no document had been supplied.    Turning
    to the evidential policy it was not possible to fillet it.  The  policy
    set out clearly where  the  Decision  maker  was  entitled  to  believe
    information existed. The applicant's failure to  provide  documentation
    'such as' biometric data or a page of the passport did not fall  within
    the terms of the policy.   SH Pakistan could be distinguished not least
    on the factual background.  The document  supplied  in  that  case  was
    merely in the wrong format. In any event  the  policy  there  differed.
    The policy here was in very different terms. In the previous policy the
    list of examples was not exhaustive; in the applicable policy  it  was.
    By contrast the current policy gave a specific list. The quotes  in  SH
    did not match the policy actually referred to. There may have  been  an
    error in cutting and pasting. There was  a  reason  why  the  Court  of
    Appeal would have approached the previous policy in the manner in which
    it did bearing in mind the terms of the previous policy.    That  said,
    it was obvious in that case that the applicant had a degree but it  was
    not the case here that it was obvious that the applicant could  supply,
    or that Ms Lodhi had, settled status documents.   The  policy  was  not
    applicable.

14. On ground (iv) it was a hopeless submission that fairness dictated that
    the Secretary of State should request further  information  given  what
    was said in Nyasalu. This was very far from the facts in Shaikh.

15. As ground (i)  was  conceded  I  turn  first  to  ground  (ii)  of  the
    challenge.  Mr Anderson's submissions have force.   For  convenience  I
    set out the two policies to outline the contrast between them.  It  was
    contended by the applicant that the Court of Appeal in SH (Pakistan)  v
    Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  426
    concluded that the Secretary of State's flexibility policy was still in
    existence  and  much  more  generous  than  paragraph  245AA   of   the
    Immigration Rules.  The policy on its own  required  the  Secretary  of
    State to consider requesting "missing evidence" or documents "if  there
    are minor errors of omissions on  a  valid  application  but  there  is
    enough evidence to show the application would  otherwise  be  granted".
    It further provides that "if there is still uncertainty  that  evidence
    exists, benefit is given to the applicant  and  you  must  request  the
    evidence".

16. The difficulty for the application of this policy with reference to the
    applicant is as identified in SH at paragraph 27 which stated that, "we
    are concerned with  the  particular  guidance  given  in  play  at  the
    material time.  We have not in terms addressed the later guidance which
    has amended it".

17. It is quite clear that SH (Pakistan)  was  referring  to  the  guidance
    issued on 12 March 2013 and which is very different from  the  guidance
    applicable to this applicant.  I take note of  Mr  Malik's  submissions
    but it is clear to me that although the version of Rule 245AA  in  play
    at the material time is reproduced in SH (Pakistan) the policy document
    considered  in  SH  Pakistan  was  that  of  March  2013.    Thus   the
    consideration at paragraph 21 that the guidance was very much wider  in
    the particular circumstances does not apply here.

18. As Mr Anderson pointed out the exceptions  under  the  policy  are  not
    broader than those set out in Regulation 245AA (b) as  referred  to  in
    paragraph 23 of SH (Pakistan).   Both  policies  have  an  introduction
    which states that "this guidance tells you about the use of  evidential
    flexibility when an application has missing  evidence  or  there  is  a
    minor error on an application" but the PBS  evidential  flexibility  in
    relation to March 2013 does not  separate  the  various  categories  of
    application and appear to give  examples,  being  non  exhaustive,  and
    states (with my underlining to aid clarity):

         "This page tells you about  requesting  additional  information  if
         there is missing evidence, or evidence that is not in an acceptable
         format.

         You  must  only   request   additional   information   in   certain
         circumstances which would lead to the approval of the application.

         Before requesting additional  evidence  you  must  have  sufficient
         reason to believe the information exists.   Examples  include  (but
         are not limited to):

                . Bank statements missing from a series

                .  Evidence  to  show  specific  qualifications  have   been
                  provided before (either from reviewing CID,  or  a  legacy
                  application, such as globe)

                . Evidence detailed on  a  confirmation  of  acceptance  for
                  studies (CAS)  or  certificate  of  sponsorship  (CoS)  is
                  missing

                . Named deposits on bank statements from an employer, but no
                  wage slips provided.

         For more information see related  link:  Evidential  flexibility  -
         documents which it may be appropriate to request for each tier.

         If you are not sure if the evidence exists, you  must  discuss  the
         issue  with  your  higher  executive  officer  (HEO),   or   senior
         caseworker (SW).  If  there  is  still  uncertainty  that  evidence
         exists, benefit is given to the applicant and you must request  the
         evidence.

         You must refuse  the  application  if  the  application  falls  for
         refusal even if the missing  information  was  provided,  or  minor
         error was corrected.  All grounds must be included,  including  any
         attributes where there was any missing evidence or minor errors.

         Additionally,  if  there  are  any  reasonable  doubts   over   the
         information currently held that would cause  you  to  seek  further
         verification, you must do  this  before  you  request  any  further
         evidence."

     19. The policy guidance from 12 August 2014 reads as follows:

         "This page tells you about  requesting  additional  information  if
         there is missing evidence, or evidence  is  not  in  an  acceptable
         format.

         You must only request additional information in circumstances  that
         would lead to the application being approved.

         Before you request additional evidence you must have enough  reason
         to believe the information exists.  This is limited to cases where:

                . Documents (for example bank statements) are missing from a
                  series

                .  Photocopies  of  the  required  documentation  have  been
                  received, or

                . A document is in the wrong format:

                    o 'wrong format' covers documents which contain all  of
                      the   substantive   information   required   by   the
                      Immigration Rules but aren't  laid  out  in  the  way
                      described  in  the  rules.   For  example,  where   a
                      specified   document   should   be    submitted    on
                      letterheaded paper.

         If you are not sure there  is  sufficient  reason  to  believe  the
         information exists, you must discuss the  issue  with  your  higher
         executive officer (HEO), or senior caseworker (SCW).

         You must refuse the application if it would fall for  refusal  even
         if the missing information was provided, or if a  minor  error  was
         corrected.  You must not request  any  missing  information  if  it
         cannot change the decision on the case.

         You must include all grounds for refusal in  the  decision  letter,
         including any attributes where there was evidence missing or  minor
         errors, noting that you have not requested missing  evidence  which
         is covered by the list above, as the  case would fall  for  refusal
         on other grounds."

20. It is clear that the later policy reads in  very  different  terms  and
    specifically states, "before you request additional evidence  you  must
    have enough reason to believe the information exists.  This is  limited
    to cases where" ... and gives three specific examples as above.

21. I do not accept  that  the  Secretary  of  State  acted  unlawfully  in
    rejecting the evidence in relation to the  hours  (because  the  hourly
    rate was not given) because the evidence flexibility policy as outlined
    above was clearly more restrictive than hitherto.   In addition,  there
    was an absence of documents which would lead the Secretary of State  to
    conclude that evidence in relation to the  immigration  status  of  the
    applicants under challenge, was in existence.  The policy confirms that
    the Decision maker must not  request  any  missing  information  if  it
    cannot change the decision on the case.

22. The documents must show the workers for  whom  hours  are  claimed  are
    settled workers.  As identified above paragraph 46-SD(h) identifies the
    type of documents which show the employee as a settled worker  such  as
    the biometric data page of a passport containing a photograph,  a  copy
    of a UK Government stamp or an endorsement within the passport  or  the
    employee's full birth certificate showing the  name  of  at  least  one
    parent.  With the words "such as"  incorporated  into  the  Immigration
    Rule it is clear that  there  must  be  some  official  document  which
    relates to the immigration status of the employee.  It  is  clear  that
    the documents in relation to Ms Ayesha Khan Lodhi were  not  submitted.
    Mr Malik took me to various documents within the bundle which  included
    documentation from the accountants Mac and Co Accountants  Limited  but
    this was merely a list of staff details with a reference to nationality
    next to the name of Ayesha Khan Lodhi  stating  "Pakistani  with  ILR".
    There were P45 documents and a P60  document  with  national  insurance
    numbers on for Ms Lodhi but nothing  in  the  form  of  a  document  to
    support her immigration status.   Indeed  the  letter  of  Mac  and  Co
    Accountants Limited dated 21 October 2015 states "this letter has  been
    issued on a specific request of Mr Harris Paracha" and was issued on 21
    October 2015 after the challenged decision.  The P45 and P60  are  both
    employer generated.

23. Mr Anderson made the point that the Rules specifically require that the
    employee's hours are supported by evidence of  the  employee's  working
    lawfully in the UK and that it would  normally  be  that  the  employer
    would have a record of the immigration status of the  employee.   There
    is no indication in  the  documentation  for  any  caseworker  to  have
    sufficient reason to believe the information existed in relation to  Ms
    Lodhi's status (or indeed any of the workers) and thus  the  evidential
    flexibility policy had any relevance at all.  This is  not  a  case  of
    documents missing from a series or evidence detailed on a  Confirmation
    of Acceptance for Studies or photocopies or a  document  in  the  wrong
    format as identified by the Policy of  August  2014.   This  is  not  a
    question as to whether to be sure that the evidence exists as there was
    no document in relation to immigration status produced at all.

24. Mr Malik made clear that his grounds  were  not  based  on  a  fairness
    challenge.  The Policy of August 2014 is  clear  that  'you  must  only
    request additional information in circumstances that would lead to  the
    application being approved'. On the evidence before  the  Secretary  of
    State she was rationally entitled  to  conclude  that  the  application
    would not be approved.

25. Mr Malik argued that if the terms of the Rule and the Policy  were  the
    same then the Policy would be redundant but it is open to the Secretary
    of State to draw the policy in the way she  deems  fit.   There  is  no
    obligation on the Secretary of State to assist an applicant  in  making
    an application as confirmed in the decision of Nyasulu [2016] EWCA  Civ
    1145 which set out at paragraph 17  as follows:

         "The Points Based System is intended to operate in a way  which  is
         simple,  predictable  and  expeditious:  see  EK  (Ivory  Coast)  v
         Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department   EWCA  Civ  1517,
         paragraph [59], per Briggs LJ; and Kaur v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 13, paragraph [41], per Burnett
         LJ.  It does not allow for any concept  of  a  'near  miss'  in  an
         application.  An application either satisfies the  relevant  points
         requirement or it does not: see e.g. Miah v Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department [2012] EWCA 261, [2013] QB 35, paragraph  [25];
         and Patel v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]  UKSC
         72, [2014] 1 AC 651, paragraphs [45]-[57].  The general public  law
         obligation of fairness has to be applied  in  the  context  of  the
         Points Based System having regard to these features of the  regime:
         see EK (Ivory Coast) at paragraph [31], per Sales LJ.  There is  no
         legal requirement  of  fairness  which  imposes  any  duty  on  the
         Secretary of State to explain the Immigration Rules to an applicant
         or to do anything further to help an applicant get her  application
         in order if there is something wrong with it.  On the contrary, the
         onus is clearly on the applicant to ensure that  her  documentation
         is in order and  to  check  that  she  is  submitting  the  correct
         materials as required by the relevant rule: see Alam v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department  [2012] EWCA Civ 960, [2012]  Imm  AR
         974 at paragraph [45], per Sullivan LJ; Rodriguez  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 2, at paragraph [100]
         per Davis LJ; and EK (Ivory Coast) at paragraph [29], per Sales LJ,
         and paragraph [59], per Briggs LJ."

26. In sum the hours of Ms Lodhi, as accepted by Mr Malik, were critical to
    the application and  in  the  absence  of  her  documentation  and  the
    obtaining of which was not assisted by the later Policy, the  Secretary
    of State was entitled to reject the application.  It is  not  made  out
    that the Secretary of State unlawfully applied her relevant Policy.

27. Ground (iii) related to the  failure  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    consider the specified information with reference  to  the  Immigration
    Rule, paragraph 245AA. I set out the Rule in force (as set out  in  the
    bundle) herewith.





       245AA Documents not submitted with applications

       (a) where Part 6A or any appendices referred to  in  Part  6A  state
       that specified documents  must  be  provided,  the  Entry  Clearance
       Officer, Immigration Officer or the Secretary  of  State  will  only
       consider documents submitted with the  application,  and  will  only
       consider documents submitted after the application  where  they  are
       submitted in accordance with subparagraph (b)
       (b) If the applicant has submitted specified documents in which:
             (i) some of the documents in a sequence have been omitted  (for
             example, if one bank statement from a series is missing)
             (ii) a document is in the  wrong  format  (for  example,  if  a
             letter is not on letterhead paper as specified); or
             (iii) a document is a copy and not an original document; or
             (iv)  a  document  does  not  contain  all  of  the   specified
             information;
       the Entry Clearance Officer, Immigration Officer or the Secretary of
       State may contact the applicant or his  representative  in  writing,
       and request the correct documents. The requested documents  must  be
       received at the address specified in the request  within  7  working
       days of the date of the request
       (c) Documents will not be requested where a specified  document  has
       not been submitted (for example an English language  certificate  is
       missing); or where the Entry Clearance Officer  Immigration  Officer
       or Secretary of  State  does  not  anticipate  that  addressing  the
       omission or error referred to in subparagraph (b)  will  lead  to  a
       grant because the application will be refused for other reasons.
       (d) If the applicant has submitted a specified document:
             (i) in the wrong format; or
             (ii) which is a copy and not an original document; or
             (iii) which does not contain all of the specified  information,
             but the missing information is verifiable from:
                  (1) other documents submitted with the application; or
                  (2) the website of  the  organisation  which  issued  the
                  document; or
                  (3) the website of the appropriate regulatory body;
       the application may be granted exceptionally,  providing  the  Entry
       Clearance Officer Immigration Officer or the Secretary of  State  is
       satisfied that he specified documents are genuine and the  applicant
       meets all the  other  requirements.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer
       Immigration Officer or the Secretary of State reserves the right  to
       request the specified original documents in the  correct  format  in
       all cases where (b) applies, and to  refuse  applications  if  these
       documents are not provided as set out in (b).

28. The Secretary of State declined to count the  hours  for  Mosbah  Abdes
    Salam on the basis that he had not provided on  his  payslips  for  the
    purpose of paragraph 46-SD(h)(iii) of Appendix  A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, the hourly rate.  This was not stated on all  of  his  payslips.
    Further to paragraph 245AA(b)(iv), the document did not contain all  of
    the specified information, but the Immigration  Rules  state  that  the
    Secretary of State "may" contact the applicant or his representative in
    writing and request the correct documents. I remind myself that this is
    a public law challenge rather than a precedent fact case but I  am  not
    persuaded that paragraph 245AA  (d)(iii)  applies  either  because  the
    missing information is not necessarily verifiable from other  documents
    submitted with the application because there was no indication that the
    hourly rate had not  changed  or  rather  anywhere  that  there  was  a
    constant hourly rate applying.  This is for the applicant to show,  not
    the Secretary of State.  On the evidence before the Secretary of  State
    there is no indication that she irrationally or  unlawfully  considered
    the evidence by misapplying Rule 245AA (d). As  under  the  policy  the
    application of Paragraph 245AA (c) indicates that documents will not be
    requested where a specified document has not been submitted and  it  is
    not anticipated that addressing the omission would  rectify  the  error
    because the application  would  be  refused  for  other  reasons.   The
    absence of the status documents would suggest  that  there  were  other
    reasons for the rejection.

29. The documents which show the employee as  a  settled  worker  were  not
    available for Ayesha Khan Lodhi.  Is it not a case in this regard  that
    the applicable Rules under 245AA(b) applies: as I  have  stated,  there
    was no document ever supplied of the  type  required,  in  relation  to
    settled status.   Paragraph 245AA(d),  states, "if  the  applicant  has
    submitted a specified document" but  in  this  instance  there  was  no
    'specified document' supplied.  The information as  to  settled  status
    that was allegedly missing was not "verifiable" from "other  documents"
    and to suggest that it was verifiable from the Secretary of State's own
    records and/or HMRC would suggest that the Secretary of State needs  to
    conduct an exercise that Nyasulu specifically states  is  not  a  legal
    requirement.  There is no legal  requirement  or  fairness  requirement
    which imposes any duty on the Secretary of State to

         "do anything further to help an applicant get  her  application  in
         order if there is something wrong with it.   On  the  contrary  the
         onus is clearly on the applicant to ensure that  her  documentation
         is in order and  to  check  that  she  is  submitting  the  correct
         materials as required by the relevant Rule."

30. There is no  obligation  on  the  Secretary  of  State  to  verify  the
    information.

31. When considering the lawfulness of the Secretary of State's approach  I
    have addressed whether, in the light of SH (Pakistan), at paragraph  24
    to whether there was plainly  enough  evidence  to  show  that  if  the
    appropriate certificate, and for these purposes it would have been  the
    immigration  status  document,  was  provided  the  application   would
    succeed.  On the evdience before the Secretary of State I find  it  was
    not.  SH Pakistan  is  distinguishable  on  the  facts;  there  was  no
    overwhelming evidence in this case to believe  that  identity  document
    did exist.  This is not a case of uncertainty which should be exercised
    in favour of the applicant in accordance with paragraph 24 and  it  was
    not the case that the only reasonable inference was that  the  document
    existed could be provided and would be  conclusive.   In  particular  I
    note that nothing to date has been provided to show that Ms  Lodhi  was
    indeed someone with settled status which would settle the  question  of
    whether information could be provided or not.

32. With reference to the applicable Rules under paragraph 245AA there  was
    no indication that the deficiency of  the  status  documents  would  be
    assisted in any way by  the  application  of  paragraph  245AA  (b)  or
    paragraph 245AA (d).

33. The material provided by the applicant simply does not  establish  that
    Ms Lodhi was a person settled in the UK or settled  worker  within  the
    meaning  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  when  the  application   was
    submitted.  That information was not verifiable from other  information
    submitted with the application and nor for the avoidance of doubt  does
    paragraph 245AA require the respondent to make her own enquiries of the
    HMRC.

34. The postdecision letters that  support  with  the  claim  for  judicial
    review are not relevant being postdecision material and fall far  short
    of what was required.  There is nothing to show the basis on which  the
    statements from the accountant and  the  employer  have  confirmed  the
    status of the employees in question and as  Mr  Anderson  submitted  no
    second-hand confirmation could satisfy what is required by paragraph 46-
    SD(iv).

35. I turn to ground (iv) which is the  Secretary  of  State's  failure  to
    consider departing from  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  in  turn  was
    considered to be unlawful.  In the case before me the applicant  simply
    failed to ensure that the material submitted with his  application  met
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules and the onus was on him to do
    so.  That onus is  established  in  case  law,  not  least  R  (on  the
    application of) Fu v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2010]
    EWHC 2922, paragraphs 20 and 22 and EK (Ivory Cost)  [2014]  Civ  1517,
    paragraph 33.   Bearing  in  mind  the  relevant  responsibilities  the
    exercise of discretion is to be used sparingly and is  not  necessarily
    to be exercised every time a decision is made.  Specifically the  court
    upheld in Shaikh  (R on the application of) v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2014] EWHC 2586 (Admin) at [25] the following:

         "What is seems to me they all come  down  to,  in  each  case,  are
         decisions on their own particular facts and circumstances as indeed
         was acknowledged by HHJ Waksman QC in Solaja v Secretary  of  State
         for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 3431, and in particular, in his
         observations at paragraph 23 of his judgment.  It is also right  to
         acknowledge here  that  he  remarked  at  paragraph  21  that  such
         residual discretion as the Secretary of State has:

             '...is not to be considered every time an application is to be
             made, and that the cases in which it should be considered  and
             exercised are bound to be rare'.

         Indeed, the  decisions  referred  to  me  indicate  that  it  is  a
         discretion that is likely to be sparingly  exercised.   Whether  or
         not it should be considered to be exercisable  is  matter  for  the
         Secretary of State, but Judge  Waksman,  in  coming  to  his  final
         decision on the facts of that particular case, closed his  analysis
         of the evidence and the arguments by saying:

             '"...Because there was no attempt to consider the exercise  of
             discretion where I find that there should have  been,  I  will
             uphold this claim, I will quash the decision and I will  remit
             it to the Secretary of State for reconsideration'.

         So it seems to me that the issue for me to decide is whether, there
         having been no attempt to consider the exercise  of  discretion  on
         the facts of this case, this is a case where there should have been
         considered the exercise of discretion."

36. This is a totally different  factual  underpinning  from  the  case  in
    Shaikh and indeed the judge considered that there should have  been  an
    exercise of discretion in that particular case for a number of  reasons
    not least in that case the application was considered invalid  for  the
    absence of signature.  That was simply an oversight.  In this case  the
    applicant knew full well of the requirements of the  Immigration  Rules
    and has failed to submit evidence on workers, on whom he relied to meet
    the Rules, were  settled  workers.   There  is  nothing  compelling  or
    exceptional to require the  respondent  to  consider  the  exercise  of
    residual discretion let alone that might plausibly lead to a  grant  of
    leave to remain or to depart from the immigration rules by the exercise
    of such discretion.  Each case is decided on its own  particular  facts
    and I am not persuaded that this is one of those rare cases  where  the
    consideration of exercise of discretion should have been undertaken.

37. The  applicant  may  have  had  a  good  immigration  history  but  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules are for  a  purpose  specifically
    when requiring confirmation  in  relation  to  the  settled  status  of
    workers.  There is one marked feature  of  this  case  which  contrasts
    sharply with that in Shaikh; the  applicant  in  Shaikh  could  readily
    rectify the omission but in this case the applicant has still failed to
    produce the required documents because of a dispute with his  employee.
    Nor was there any explanation why he  did  not  already  have  on  file
    details of her status permitting Ms Lodhi to work although that did not
    form part of the Secretary of State's approach.

38. Although I have considered the relevant  grounds  in  relation  to  the
    evidence of hours worked for Mr Salam, which I find  the  Secretary  of
    State was entitled to reject, I have concentrated on the application of
    the  evidential  flexibility  policy,  paragraph  245AA  and   residual
    discretion to absence of  status  documents  for  Ms  Lodhi.   This  is
    because of the fundamental nature of the  defect  in  the  application.
    For the reasons given above, I am not persuaded that  the  decision  of
    the Secretary of State can be impugned on public law  grounds  or  that
    the administrative review decision is similarly flawed.

39. I therefore dismiss the application.

40. The applicant will pay the respondent's  costs  of  these  proceedings,
    assessed at �6108, subject to any  representations  in  writing  to  be
    received not later than noon on Friday 3 March 2017.

    .

41. Either party may apply in writing for permission to appeal to the Court
    of Appeal, any such application to be received not later than noon on 3
    March 2017. In default, I refuse permission to appeal because I am  not
    satisfied that there is any error of law in the judgment I have given.


                  Helen Rimington
Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


Dated:   24 February 2017

