


                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                JR/4819/2016


                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR





                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LEWIS
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE

                                   Between

                     R (on the application of) ralalage
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                               - - - - - - - -

Mr. A. Jafar, Counsel (Direct Access) on behalf of the Applicant.

Mr. C. Thomann, Counsel,  instructed  by  the  Government  Legal  Department
appeared on behalf of the Respondent.


                            - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT
                           (Hearing: 10 May 2017)
                            - - - - - - - - - - -




JUDGE PETER LANE:



A. Introduction

1.    This is the judgment of the Tribunal. The applicant, a citizen of  Sri
    Lanka, applies for judicial review of the decision of  the  respondent,
    taken on 7 January 2016, to refuse the applicant's application, made on
    25 November 2015, for leave to remain in the United Kingdom as a Tier 2
    (General) Migrant  (skilled  worker).   Permission  to  bring  judicial
    review proceedings was refused on the papers by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Gill on 20 October 2016 but granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins, on
    oral reconsideration, which took place on 23 February 2017.

2.    The case involves the relationship between the system  of  immigration
    controls contained in the Immigration Act 1971, and related enactments,
    and the right of free movement under the European  treaties,  to  which
    (at the relevant time) effect was given in the United  Kingdom  by  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

3.    The applicant's immigration history, so far as it is relevant,  is  as
    follows.

4.    On 15 July 2007, the applicant entered the United Kingdom, with  leave
    as a student.  Further leave to remain in that capacity was granted  to
    him by the respondent in 2010.

5.    On 20 October 2011, the applicant applied for leave  to  remain  as  a
    Tier 1 (Highly Skilled Migrant - Post-Study).  Leave to remain in  that
    capacity was granted on 12 December 2011, for the period of a year.

6.    On 26 October 2013, around six weeks before his Tier 1  leave  was  to
    expire, the applicant applied to the respondent to  be  issued  with  a
    residence card as an extended family member of his uncle,  who  was  an
    EEA national exercising treaty rights in the  United  Kingdom.   On  12
    January 2014, the respondent refused this application.   The  applicant
    filed a notice of appeal against that refusal.  On 5 February 2015, his
    appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal.  Permission to  appeal
    against that decision was refused by the First-tier Tribunal and, on 30
    June 2015, by the Upper Tribunal.  At that point the  applicant  became
    appeal rights exhausted.

7.    On 27 July 2015, 27 days after becoming appeal rights  exhausted,  the
    applicant applied for leave  to  remain  under  the  Tier  2  (General)
    Migrant (skilled worker) provisions of  the  Immigration  Rules.   That
    application was refused by  the  respondent  on  5  October  2015.   An
    administrative review of that refusal was undertaken but, on 2 November
    2015, the respondent maintained the refusal.

8.    On 25 November 2015, the applicant made a new  application  for  leave
    to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant (skilled worker).  It  is  that
    decision (maintained on administrative review in February 2016)  which,
    as has already been said,  is  the  decision  under  challenge  in  the
    present proceedings.



B. Documentation

9.    It is necessary to refer to certain  documentation.   On  14  November
    2013, the respondent acknowledged the  applicant's  application  of  26
    October 2013 (made  via  Jein  Solicitors).   The  acknowledgement  was
    headed "Certificate of Application".  It  stated  that  the  respondent
    would make a decision on the application as soon as she could  and,  in
    any event, within the next six months.  The applicant was told  not  to
    telephone or make enquiries  about  the  progress  of  the  application
    before he heard  from  the  respondent  "unless  a  passport  or  other
    document is needed urgently, as  this  diverts  resources  from  making
    decisions".  The Acknowledgement document continued as follows:-

      "We advise your client not to make any non-urgent travel  plans  until
         we  have  decided  your  client's  application  and  returned  your
         client's passport(s) or travel document(s)."

10.    Overleaf, the respondent set out some questions and answers, for  the
    information of applicants.  In respect of applications based  on  being
    an extended family member, the Acknowledgement said as follows:-

      "In these circumstances there is no automatic right or entitlement  to
         live in the United Kingdom with an EU citizen  sponsor.   The  Home
         Secretary must consider whether, in all the  circumstances  of  the
         case, it would be right to issue a Residence Card  on  this  basis.
         This means that until we have determined that  you  qualify  as  an
         unmarried partner or as an extended  family  member  by  issuing  a
         residence document, you are not able to work on the basis  of  your
         relationship to your EU citizen sponsor.  Any right to work in  the
         meantime will depend on your having some alternative basis of  stay
         in the United Kingdom which does not prohibit access to  employment
         or self-employment".

11.   The reasons for refusal letter of 13 January 2014 said:-

      "In order to qualify for a  residence  card  as  the  extended  family
         member of an EEA national under Regulation 8(1) of the  Immigration
         (EEA) Regulations 2006, the Home Office requires evidence that  you
         are related as claimed to your EEA national sponsor.

         This department also requires evidence that you were dependent upon
         and, or residing with your sponsor prior  to  entering  the  United
         Kingdom and that since you entered  the  United  Kingdom  you  have
         continued to be dependent upon and, or residing with  your  sponsor
         in order to qualify under Regulation 8(2) of the Immigration  (EEA)
         Regulations 2006.

         ...

         You have not provided any evidence of your dependency on  your  EEA
         national sponsor at any time, either in Sri Lanka or in the  United
         Kingdom.   You  have  not  provided  any  evidence  that  you  were
         dependent  on  your  EEA  national  sponsor  immediately  prior  to
         entering the United Kingdom as required under  Regulation  8(2)(a),
         in addition, we have not received any evidence that you  have  been
         residing with or have been dependent upon your EEA national sponsor
         since entering the United  Kingdom  as  required  under  Regulation
         8(2)(c).

         It is noted that you originally entered the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         student and not on the basis that you were travelling with your EEA
         sponsor as you were dependant on them.  Your EEA sponsors  passport
         shows that your EEA sponsor has only entered Sri Lanka on  05  June
         2011 and then departed on 20 June 2011, the  passport  being  valid
         from 23 July 2009.

         You have provided various bank statements,  that  show  funds  have
         been transferred into your account.  However, according to  records
         you entered the United Kingdom in 2007, you have provided  evidence
         that funds were transferred in 2009.  Therefore, you have not shown
         you were dependent on your EEA sponsor for two years.

         It is also noted that your brother married an EEA  national  on  14
         June 2008, furthermore you could not have relied on the  provisions
         set out in the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
         2006 until that point.   To  conclude,  you  could  not  have  been
         dependent on the EEA national prior to entering the United  Kingdom
         as you were not related by law until 2008.

         You have provided evidence that you claim  to  have  been  residing
         with the EEA national since entering the United Kingdom.   However,
         the evidence you have submitted is  insufficient  to  suggest  that
         [you] are dependant on your EEA sponsor.  ...

         For the reasons stated above you have failed to provide  sufficient
         evidence that you were dependent upon and, or  residing  with  your
         sponsor prior to entering the United Kingdom  and  that  since  you
         entered the United Kingdom you have continued to be dependent  upon
         and, or residing with your sponsor.

         Therefore, it has been decided to refuse to issue the  confirmation
         that you seek with reference to Regulation 8(2) of the  Immigration
         (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006."

12.   The accompanying "Notice of Immigration Decision" told  the  applicant
    that:-

      "You have applied for a residence card as the extended  family  member
         of an EEA  national.   Your  application  has  been  considered  in
         accordance with Regulation 8 of the Immigration  (EEA)  Regulations
         2006 but there are insufficient grounds  for  issuing  you  with  a
         residence card.

         You do not have a basis of stay in the  United  Kingdom  under  the
         Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

         As you appear to have no alternative basis of stay  in  the  United
         Kingdom you should now make arrangements to leave.  If you fail  to
         make a voluntary departure a separate decision may  be  made  at  a
         later date to enforce your removal from the  United  Kingdom.   Any
         such decision  and  associated  appeal  rights  would  be  notified
         separately."

13.   There followed a statement that the applicant was entitled  to  appeal
    against the decision under section 82 of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 and regulation  26  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.  A pro  forma  notice  of  appeal  was
    enclosed.

14.   The decision of 7 January 2016 to refuse leave was taken by  reference
    to paragraph 245HD(p)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (see  paragraph  15
    below). The respondent's decision said:-

      "You have applied for leave to remain in the United Kingdom under  the
         Tier 2 (General) category but the Secretary of State  is  satisfied
         that you have failed to meet the  requirements  to  qualify  for  a
         grant of leave to enter  or  remain.   This  is  because  you  have
         overstayed in the United Kingdom for a period which is more than 28
         days.

         You are considered to have overstayed in the United  Kingdom  where
         you have remained beyond the latest of:

           (i)   The time limit attached to the period of leave granted, or



           (ii)  Beyond the period  that  your  leave  was  extended  under
                sections 3C or 3D of the Immigration Act 1971, or

           ...

         Your leave to remain expired on 12th December 2013 but you did  not
         submit a valid application for leave  to  remain  until  27th  July
         2015.  This was more than 28 days  after  the  date  your  previous
         leave to remain expired.  In addition, your leave was not  extended
         under any of the other provisions listed in the Immigration  Rules.
         Please be aware that your application for an EEA Residence Card  is
         not considered to be  a  valid  application  for  the  purposes  of
         section 3C and it did not extend your leave.

         In the light of this the Secretary of State has deemed that refusal
         is appropriate under paragraph 245HD(p).  You  do  not,  therefore,
         meet the requirements specified in the Immigration Rules  in  order
         to be granted leave under the Tier 2 (General) category."

    The decision also contained other information, including liability  for
    removal and information about the consequences of illegally staying  in
    the United Kingdom.




 C. Rules and legislation

   15. At this point, it is convenient to set  out  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules and primary and secondary legislation with  which  we
    are concerned:

       Immigration Rules

       245HD. Requirements for leave to remain

      To qualify for leave to remain as a Tier 2 (General) Migrant ... under
      this rule, an applicant must meet the requirements  listed  below.  If
      the applicant meets  these  requirements,  leave  to  remain  will  be
      granted. If the  applicant  does  not  meet  these  requirements,  the
      application will be refused.

      Requirements:

      ...

      (p) The applicant must not be in  the  United  Kingdom  in  breach  of
      immigration laws except that any period of 28 days  or  less  will  be
      disregarded.

      ...

      Immigration Act 1971

      3. General provisions for regulation and control

      (1) Except as otherwise provided by or under this Act, where a  person
      is not a British citizen-

        (a) he shall not enter the United Kingdom unless given leave to  do
        so in accordance with the provisions of, or made under, this Act;

        (b) he may be given leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  (or,  when
        already there, leave to remain in the United Kingdom either  for  a
        limited or for an indefinite period;

      .....

      3C. Continuation of leave pending variation decision

      (1) This section applies if-

        (a) a person who has limited leave to enter or remain in the United
        Kingdom applies to the Secretary of  State  for  variation  of  the
        leave,

        (b) the application for variation of leave is made before the leave
        expires, and

        (c) the leave expires without the application for variation  having
        been decided.

      (2) the leave is extended by virtue of this section during any  period
        when-

            (a)  the  application  for  variation  is  neither  decided  nor
        withdrawn,

             (b)  an  appeal  under  section  82(1)  of   the   Nationality,
        Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 could be brought ...

            (c) an appeal under that section against that decision,  brought
        while the appellant is in the United Kingdom, is pending ... or

             (d) an administrative review of the decision on the application
        for variation-

                    (i) could be sought, or

                    (ii) is pending

       (3) Leave extended by virtue of  this  section  shall  lapse  if  the
        applicant leaves the United Kingdom.

      ...

       24 Illegal entry and similar offences

      (1) A person who is not a  British  citizen  shall  be  guilty  of  an
      offence punishable on summary conviction with  a  fine  not  exceeding
      level 5 on the standard scale or with imprisonment for not  more  than
      six months, or with both, in any of the following cases:-

      ....

        (b) if, having only a limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
        United Kingdom, he knowingly either-

        (i) remains beyond the time limited by the leave;

      ...

      Immigration Act 1988

      (1) A person shall not under the principal  Act[1]  require  leave  to
      enter or remain in the United Kingdom in  any  case  in  which  he  is
      entitled to do so by virtue of an enforceable [EU]  right  or  of  any
      provision made under section 2(2) of the European Communities Act 1972

      (2) The Secretary of State may by order made by  statutory  instrument
      give leave to enter the United Kingdom for a  limited  period  to  any
      class of persons who are nationals of member States but  who  are  not
      entitled to enter the United Kingdom as mentioned  in  subsection  (1)
      above; and any such order may give leave subject to such conditions as
      may be imposed by the order.

      (3) References in the principal Act to  limited  leave  shall  include
      references to leave given by an order under subsection (2) above and a
      person having leave by virtue of such an order  shall  be  treated  as
      having been  given  that  leave  by  a  notice  given  to  him  by  an
      immigration officer ...







      Immigration and Asylum Act 1999

      10 Removal of certain persons unlawfully in the United Kingdom

      (1) a person  may  be  removed  from  the  United  Kingdom  under  the
      authority of the Secretary of State or an immigration officer  if  the
      person requires leave to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  but
      does not have it.

      ...

      The Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006

      'Extended family member'

      8. -(1) In these  Regulations, 'extended family member' means a person
      who is not a  family  member  of  an  EEA  national  under  regulation
      7(1)(a), (b) or (c) and who satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2),
      (3), (4) or (5).

      ...

      Issue of residence card

      17. ...

      (4) The Secretary of State may issue a residence card to  an  extended
      family member not falling within regulation 7(3) who  is  not  an  EEA
      national on application if-

        (a) the relevant EEA national in relation to  the  extended  family
        member is a qualified person or an EEA national  with  a  permanent
        right of residence under regulation 15: and

        (b) in all the circumstances it appears to the Secretary  of  State
        appropriate to issue the residence card.

      (5) Where  the  Secretary  of  State  receives  an  application  under
      paragraph (4) he shall  undertake  an  extensive  examination  of  the
      personal  circumstances  of  the  applicant  and  if  he  refuses  the
      application shall give reasons justifying the refusal unless  this  is
      contrary to the interests of national security.

      ...

      Appeal rights

      26. - (1) Subject to the following paragraphs of  this  regulation,  a
      person may appeal under these Regulations against an EEA decision.

      ...

                                 SCHEDULE 2

                         EFFECT ON OTHER LEGISLATION

      Leave under the 1971 Act

      1. - (1) In accordance with section 7 of the Immigration Act  1988,  a
      person who is admitted to or acquires a right to reside in the  United
      Kingdom under these Regulations shall not require leave to  remain  in
      the United Kingdom under the 1971 Act during any period  in  which  he
      has a right to reside under the 1971 Act under these  Regulations  but
      such a person shall require leave to remain under the 1971 Act  during
      any period in which he does not have such a right.

      ...




D. The applicant's submissions

16.   Mr Jafar, on behalf of the applicant, submits, first, that  the  words
    "immigration laws" in paragraph 245HD(p) should be interpreted  widely.
    In addition to covering the legal regime contained in the 1971 Act  and
    its Rules, wherein lawful presence in the United Kingdom for those  who
    are not British citizens is governed by the requirement to have  leave,
    in his skeleton argument, Mr Jafar contends that a person should not be
    regarded as being in the United Kingdom:-

         "in breach of immigration laws during any period when he or she  is
         in the United Kingdom, pursuing an  appeal  against  a  refusal  to
         issue a refusal of the respondent to issue a residence  card  under
         the  2006 (or, now, the 2016) Regulations".

 17.  Alternatively, Mr Jafar submits that  the  respondent  acted  unfairly
    towards the applicant.  The "Certificate of Application" of 14 November
    2013 gave the impression that the applicant was not expected  to  leave
    the United Kingdom, on the basis that he was an  overstayer,  since  he
    was specifically advised "not to make any non-urgent travel plans until
    we have decided your client's application ...".

18.   Mr Jafar's third submission is that  the  respondent  has  a  duty  to
    advise persons in the position of the applicant that, although they may
    make an application for a residence card under the EEA Regulations, the
    consequences of doing so may be such that  they  will  be  regarded  as
    overstayers, with all that entails.

19.   Although Mr Jafar's skeleton argument contained a submission that  the
    respondent's treatment of the applicant was unlawfully  discriminatory,
    he specifically withdrew this at the hearing.  Mr Jafar also  confirmed
    at the hearing that the applicant did not intend  to  pursue  any  ECHR
    Article 8 grounds.



E. Discussion

(a) The first submission

20.   A major difficulty for the applicant is  AS  (Ghana)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 133.  Beatson  LJ  stated
    the issue in that case as follows:-

         "4.      The question before us is whether  a  person  who  at  one
             stage was the spouse of an EEA citizen with a right  of  abode
             in the United Kingdom but no longer has that status and  right
             is to be treated as having leave either under the  Immigration
             Act 1971 or otherwise  after  his  application  for  permanent
             residence as the former spouse of  an  EEA  citizen  has  been
             rejected.

         5. It was submitted by Mr Kannangara on  behalf  of  the  appellant
             that it is to be so treated. He argued that this  was  because
             regulation 26 of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
             Regulations  2006  SI  2006/1003  ('the   2006   Regulations')
             provides rights of appeal  to  EEA  nationals  and  qualifying
             family members and that the provisions of or  made  under  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002  Act')
             have effect in relation to such an appeal  as  if  it  was  an
             appeal against an immigration decision under section 82(1)  of
             the 2002 Act.  He in substance argued that the position  of  a
             person who is appealing against the refusal of an  application
             for a claim to residence based on a right  under  any  of  the
             Community Treaties should be similar to that  which  a  person
             applying for a variation of leave is granted by section 3C  of
             the Immigration Act 1971, which extends his  leave  pending  a
             decision on that  application  and  any  appeal  against  that
             decision."

21.   Beatson LJ identified  two  enactments,  which  the  Court  of  Appeal
    evidently regarded as of particular importance; namely,  section  7  of
    the Immigration Act 1988 and paragraph 1 of  Schedule  2  to  the  2006
    Regulations (see paragraph 15 above).

22.   The Court held as follows:-

         "20.     It is clear, and it was accepted by Mr Kannangara, that  a
             person who has a right under  EU  law  to  be  in  the  United
             Kingdom does not require leave under the 1971 Act.  This  must
             include  rights  under  the  2004  Directive  and   the   2006
             Regulations. It is also clear from the decision of  the  Third
             Chamber of the CJEU in case C-325/09, Secretary of  State  for
             Work and Pensions v Dias (21 July 2011) [2011] 3 CMLR 40, that
             the grant of a residence permit to  a  national  of  a  Member
             State is to be regarded not as a measure giving rise to rights
             but as a measure by  a  Member  State  serving  to  prove  the
             individual position of a national of another Member State with
             regard to European Union law. The  CJEU  made  it  clear  that
             residence  permits  have  a  declaratory  as  opposed   to   a
             constitutive character. The effect of residence permits on the
             position of family members of EU and EEA citizens who  qualify
             under the Directive and the  2006  Regulations  cannot  differ
             from that of EU and EEA citizens. The family  members'  rights
             stem from EU law and not from a decision of the  Secretary  of
             State. See also McDonald's  Immigration  Law  &  Practice  9th
             Edition at 6.156 where it is stated that 'It is trite law that
             a residence card is the evidence of a right and not the source
             of it', although, as was  observed  in  Sanneh  &  Ors  v  The
             Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2015] EWCA  Civ  49,
             [2015] 1 WLR 1867 at [68], 'Matters of entry and stay for non-
             EU citizens are matters outside the  exclusive  competence  of
             the EU but the CJEU has laid down the principle that decisions
             which member states take on these matters must not be such  as
             to make the rights of EU citizenship ineffective'. It was also
             observed in that case (at [170]) that  'The  right  to  reside
             conferred by EU law takes  effect  automatically  in  domestic
             law'.

         21.      It is common ground that there are two regimes potentially
             in play for those in this country who are not UK citizens. The
             first is that under the 1971 Act which  requires  a  grant  of
             leave by the Secretary of State. The second is that under  the
             Free  Movement  of  Citizens  Directive  2004  and  the   2006
             Regulations. As is perhaps clear from  the  discussion  above,
             the question to be asked in each category is different.  Under
             the 1971 Act a person requires leave and if he or she does not
             have it, that person has no status in this country. Those  who
             have status pursuant to a grant of leave may have  that  leave
             extended if an application to vary the leave  is  refused  and
             there is an appeal against the immigration  decision  that  is
             refusing the application.

         22.      The position of those claiming to have EEA rights differs.
             Their rights result from their position and, in  the  case  of
             their dependants, the position of the EEA citizen. They either
             have those rights or they do not have those  rights.  The  EEA
             citizen only has those rights so long as he or she  remains  a
             qualified person within regulation 6 of the 2006  Regulations.
             Although there is provision for an appeal against the decision
             refusing an application under the  Regulations,  no  provision
             has been made in the Regulations for a right to remain in this
             country pending the exercise of such an appeal.

         23.      I do not accept that the  Regulations  and  in  particular
             paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 and paragraph 1 of Schedule 2 can be
             construed to  mean  that  there  is  a  different  answer.  Mr
             Kannangara's submission that a person 'should' have  a  status
             in effect similar to that given by section 3C of the 1971  Act
             is in effect a submission as to a reform designed to put  such
             a person in a similar position to a person  with  leave  under
             the  1971  Act.  That  process,  however,  is  one   for   the
             legislature  and  not  for  the  court.  In   the   particular
             circumstances  of  this  case  where  the  appeal  under   the
             Regulations was abandoned and it appears that the  appellant's
             right to be in this country as a dependant of an EEA  national
             may have ceased before the divorce in 2011 and thus before his
             application for permanent residence on 16 November  2011,  his
             argument is, in my judgment, without merit.

         24.      It follows from this consideration of  the  Directive  and
             the UK statutes and regulations that  the  appellant  did  not
             have leave to remain at the time he made his  application  via
             the 'private life'  route.  It  follows  from  this  that  the
             decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  16  August  2013
             refusing that application could not have been  an  immigration
             decision.

         25.      As well as  the  provisions  to  which  I  have  referred,
             paragraph 4(2) of schedule 2 to the 2006 Regulations expressly
             provides that a person who has been issued  with  a  residence
             card shall have no right of appeal under section 82(1) of  the
             2002 Act, and  regulation  19(5)  recognises  the  distinction
             between the right to reside under EU  law  and  the  right  to
             remain under the 1971 Act. It provides that a person must  not
             be removed as a person who does not have or ceases to  have  a
             right under the 2006 Regulations it he has a right  to  remain
             by virtue of leave granted under the 1971 Act."

23.   In AS (Ghana),  the  submissions  for  the  appellant  amounted  to  a
    contention that paragraph 1 of Schedule 1 to the EEA Regulations should
    be construed as having an effect corresponding to that of section 3C of
    the 1971 Act. The Court rejected those submissions, on the  basis  that
    it is for Parliament, rather than  the  courts,  to  expand  upon  what
    Parliament has seen fit to  say  in  section  7(1)  of  the  1988  Act,
    concerning the relationship between EU  rights  of  residence  and  the
    regime under the 1971 Act.

24.   We find that the interpretation of paragraph 245HD(p) urged on  us  by
    Mr Jafar is open to the same objection.  It too would result in a judge-
    made equivalent of section 3C  of  the  1971  Act,  covering  appellate
    proceedings under the EEA Regulations.

25.   As Beatson LJ pointed out at paragraph 22  of  AS  (Ghana),  "Although
    there is provision for an  appeal  against  the  decision  refusing  an
    application under the Regulations, no provision has been  made  in  the
    Regulations for a right to remain in this country pending the  exercise
    of such an appeal".   That finding was reiterated a few weeks after the
    handing down of the judgment in AS (Ghana) by another division  of  the
    Court (which included Beatson LJ) in R (Ahmed) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 303.  In Ahmed, it  was  held  that
    rights of appeal under the EEA Regulations in the case of third-country
    nationals asserting rights as family members are  not  suspensive.  The
    Court agreed with the Upper Tribunal that it is wrong

        "to conflate the absence of a statutory prohibition on the bringing
       of an appeal from within the United Kingdom with the existence of  a
       right to be so present in order to  bring  such  an  appeal  and  to
       prosecute it to its conclusion" (paragraph 10: Laws LJ).

26.   The ability of the respondent to remove a third-country national,  who
    is pursuing an EEA appeal, arises  from  the  fact  that  the  national
    "requires leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom but  does  not
    have it" (section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999).   As  the
    heading to section 10 makes clear (see  paragraph  15  above),  such  a
    person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully; otherwise, he or she  could
    not be removed. There is also no escaping the fact that,  at  least  in
    theory, the person concerned risks prosecution  for  an  offence  under
    section 24 of the 1971 Act.

27.   As can now be seen, an  acceptance  of  Mr  Jafar's  first  submission
    would be directly contrary to the judgments in Ahmed, as well as  those
    in AS (Ghana). If, by pursuing an EEA appeal, a person must be  treated
    as being present in accordance with immigration laws, then  he  or  she
    cannot be removed from the United  Kingdom  until  he  or  she  becomes
    appeal rights exhausted.

28.   We do not find there is any scope for holding that paragraph  245HD(p)
    and section 10 should be construed differently, so that a  person  will
    be in breach of immigration laws for  the  purposes  of  removal  under
    section 10 but not for the purposes of the requirement in sub-paragraph
    (p). To do so would undermine the structure of the legislative  scheme.
    In enacting section 7 of the 1988 Act and paragraph 1 of Schedule 2  to
    the 2006 Regulations (which is declaratory of the effect of section 7),
    Parliament has specified the relationship between the 1971  Act  regime
    and that of EU law. Since there is nothing in EU law to  indicate  that
    this specification is contrary  to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    under EU law, any change must be a matter for Parliament.

29.   The present applicant asserted that he should  be  given  a  residence
    card as an extended family member, rather than as a family member.  The
    difference between those two categories  is  that  the  respondent  has
    discretion under regulation 12(2) whether to grant such a  card  to  an
    extended family member, even where the  person  concerned  is  held  to
    satisfy the requirements of regulation 8(2), (3), (4) or (5).   In  the
    case of family members, the respondent must issue the  residence  card,
    which acts as a recognition of  the  underlying  right  of  the  person
    concerned,  rather  than  as  an  instrument  conferring   that   right
    (regulation 12(1)).

30.   In Sala v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department  [2016]  UKUT
    00411 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal held that there is no  statutory  right
    of appeal against the  decision  of  the  respondent  not  to  grant  a
    residence card to a person claiming to be an  extended  family  member.
    This is because the EEA Regulations confer a right of  appeal  only  in
    respect of EEA decisions which concern a person's  "entitlement  to  be
    issued with or to have renewed, or not to  have  revoked,  a  residence
    permit or residence document" (regulation 2(1)).

31.   The issue in Sala is the subject of a pending appeal to the  Court  of
    Appeal.  Our findings, however, do  not  depend  upon  any  distinction
    between family members and extended family members.  We have found that
    a person is in breach of immigration laws for the purposes of paragraph
    245HD(p) during such time as he or she (i) was in  the  United  Kingdom
    without leave and (ii) required such leave. That is so of  persons  who
    unsuccessfully contend they are family members, as much  as  it  is  of
    those unsuccessfully seeking recognition as extended family members.



(b) The second submission

32.   We do not accept that any "fairness" issue, however described,  arises
    from the terms of the "Certificate of Application" of 14 November 2013.
     The respondent's advice to the applicant not to make  "any  non-urgent
    travel plans until we have decided your client's application and return
    your client's passport(s) or travel  document(s)"  cannot  properly  be
    said to amount to a representation, let alone an  acknowledgment,  that
    the applicant had a right to remain in the  United  Kingdom  merely  by
    making the application for a residence card.

33.   In any event, Mr  Jafar's  submissions  regarding  paragraph  245HD(p)
    relate to the period between the respondent's decision  to  refuse  the
    residence card application and the  point  when  the  applicant  became
    appeal rights exhausted as regards his appeal against that refusal.  As
    is evident from paragraphs 11 and 12 above, the terms of the notice  of
    decision and accompanying "reasons" letter were sufficiently plain: the
    applicant was told that he should leave the United  Kingdom  unless  he
    considered that he had some other basis upon which to remain.



(3) The third submission

34.   We are entirely satisfied that  there  is  no  common  law  basis  for
    finding that the respondent should have given  the  applicant  detailed
    written advice regarding the relationship between the 1971 Act and  the
    relevant European law.  It is  plainly  the  case  that  a  person  who
    decides to pursue an application under the EEA Regulations may  thereby
    prejudice their position under the Immigration  Rules  by  becoming  or
    remaining an overstayer.  As can readily  be  appreciated,  however,  a
    bald statement to that effect in a notice  of  decision  or  associated
    "reasons" letter from  the  respondent  is  likely  to  carry  its  own
    difficulties.  It might, for instance, be perceived as putting pressure
    on individuals not to pursue their European rights.

35.   It is, in  short,  not  the  function  of  the  respondent  to  advise
    individuals on legal  and  tactical  considerations  in  the  field  of
    immigration law.  The applicant was acting through  solicitors  at  all
    material times.  The applicant's only  legitimate  expectation  was  to
    receive advice from those solicitors.





E. Section 31A(2) of the Senior Courts Act 1981

36.   Finally, the applicant's submissions regarding the  interpretation  of
    paragraph 245HD(p) in any event founder for a separate reason.  As  the
    Tribunal pointed out  at  the  hearing,  the  application  made  on  25
    November 2015, which gave rise to the  decision  under  challenge,  was
    made some four months and 26 days after  the  applicant  became  appeal
    rights exhausted.  Thus, even if (which we do not find) there  was  any
    merit in the applicant's contention that he had not been in  breach  of
    immigration laws for 28 days, when he made his previous application  on
    27 July 2015, he plainly had been, by the time of  his  application  in
    November 2015.  Although the  respondent's  decision  referred  to  the
    period leading up to 27 July 2015, it is manifest that the respondent's
    decision of 7 January 2016 would have been the same,  had  she  counted
    back from 14 November 2015.  Applying  section  31A(2)  of  the  Senior
    Courts Act 1981, the Tribunal would, accordingly, refuse relief.



F. Decision

37.   The application is dismissed.  The Tribunal will hear Counsel  on  the
    issue of costs, unless this can be agreed.~~~~0~~~~





                                                                23 June 2017

-----------------------
[1] Immigration Act 1971

