






                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/5371/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                             23 January 2017


                                  The QUEEN
                         (ON The application OF aak)
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                               - - - - - - - -



Mr R Khubber of Counsel, instructed by Turpin Miller Solicitors appeared on
behalf of the Applicant.

Mr Z Malik, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

JUDGE hanson: The claim for judicial review was issued on 13 May  2016.   It
    challenged the impugned decision which is a refusal by the Secretary of
    State to consider submissions that have been made  on  the  applicant's
    behalf by his solicitors, Turpin Miller, in a  letter  of  29  December
    2015 as amounting to a fresh  claim  as  that  term  is  understood  by
    reference to paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.  The date  of  the
    impugned decision is 16 February 2016.


2.   The applicant challenged that decision on four pleaded grounds.   These
    are repeated in the skeleton argument that has  been  submitted  by  Mr
    Khubber on behalf of the applicant but referring to  paragraph  4.1  of
    the grounds for submission pleaded.  It is asserted that the  essential
    flaws with the Home Office decision under challenge are that it

    (i)  fails to apply anxious/adequate scrutiny to

    (ii) the question of internal relocation

    (iii)    in light of the  Secretary  of  State's  acceptance  that  the
           applicant cannot be returned to Mosul because  to  do  so  would
           breach Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive with

    (iv) the need to appreciate that the question of internal relocation is
           whether it would be unduly harsh in the  applicant's  particular
           circumstances.

3.   Permission was granted by my colleague, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Canavan,
    in an order sealed on 20 July 2016 but made on 14  July  2016  for  the
    following reasons:

         "1.  The applicant seeks to challenge the respondent's decision  of
             16/02/16 to refuse to treat further  submissions  as  a  fresh
             protection claim.

         2.   It is at least arguable that the respondent did not  give  the
             level of anxious scrutiny required to the question of  whether
             it would be unduly harsh for  the  applicant  to  relocate  to
             Baghdad in circumstances where the last known location of  his
             family members was in the contested  area  of  Mosul.   It  is
             arguable that the respondent failed to  have  regard  to  some
             material factors that might be relevant to the  assessment  of
             internal relocation as outlined in AA (Iraq)."

4.   The starting point in any case of this nature,  as  the  Tribunal  were
    reminded by Mr Malik, is in fact the submissions that were made to  the
    Secretary of State set out in the  letter  of  29  December  2015.   In
    relation to the issue of internal relocation those submissions  are  in
    the following terms:

         "It is important to remember that, having established a  real  risk
         of serious harm in his home area of Mosul, the test is now  one  of
         undue hardship in relation to internal relocation.  Undue  hardship
         does not equate  to  fear  of  persecution  and  involves  a  case-
         sensitive consideration of the effect of the proposed relocation on
         the individual concerned.

         In the applicant's case we draw the Secretary of State's  attention
         to the following points which we believe, taken cumulatively, would
         make it unduly harsh to expect him to relocate to Baghdad.

         1.   The applicant has been outside of Iraq for eleven years.

         2.   Prior to leaving Iraq, he had lived in Mosul for  all  of  his
             life.  He has never lived in Baghdad and has no family and  no
             friends in Baghdad.  He has no-one in Baghdad to whom he could
             turn to for support and no sponsor to  assist  with  obtaining
             accommodation.

         3.   The applicant has no family outside  Iraq  who  could  provide
             financial support to him if he returned."

5.    The  decision  maker  clearly  started  with  those  submissions   and
    thereafter looked very carefully at the applicant's own position.  That
    is set out at the top of page 4 of the refusal letter and I  will  read
    it verbatim as it is a useful summary of the applicant's  circumstances
    which led to the position that he finds himself in  today.   It  is  as
    follows.

         "You claim to have arrived in the United Kingdom  in  January  2004
         clandestinely, and when discovered you claimed asylum on 21 January
         2004 under the name AMA, a Syrian national.  Your asylum claim  was
         refused on 9 March 2004 because you had previously  claimed  asylum
         in Germany using another identity, that of HH, an Iraqi national on
         26 March 2003.  You then left the UK and returned to  the  UK  from
         Sweden on 3 May 2007 and claimed asylum.   Your  asylum  claim  was
         refused on 1 June 2007.  You returned to Sweden and claimed  asylum
         there on 22 August 2008.  You then returned to the UK on 2 December
         2008 and claimed asylum.  Your  asylum  claim  was  refused  on  29
         January 2009.  You appealed this decision which was dismissed on 18
         March 2009, and you became appeal rights exhausted on 20 May  2009.
         You presented further submissions on 8 May 2009 which were  refused
         on 17 February 2010.  You then presented further submissions on  16
         June 2010 which were  refused  on  24  September  2010.   You  then
         presented further submissions on 27 October 2014 which were refused
         on 27 February 2015.  You lodged further submissions on 26  January
         2016 that are the subject of this decision."

6.   The decision maker went on:

         "Below is a summary of your further submissions.

         1.   You claim that you may not be returned because of the  ongoing
             and severe security threat in Iraq and that the indiscriminate
             violence there would be a breach of the threshold  of  Article
             15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

         2.   You claim that you are from Mosul, which is under ISIL control
             and therefore you qualify for international  and  humanitarian
             protection."

7.   That chronology is set out in  greater  detail  in  a  document  headed
    "Chronology for Hearing Monday 23 January 2017" which has been prepared
    by Mr Khubber on the applicant's behalf.  I have not referred to it  in
    the same detail.  It is an extensive document but I do not feel that  I
    need to refer to the matters in the accuracy in which they are recorded
    there, as the summary that I have referred to does not  require  me  to
    mention anything in any greater detail.  There is  no  factual  dispute
    between the parties in relation to the chronology of events  or  indeed
    the relevant law that this Tribunal must apply.

8.   The decision maker was clearly aware not only of  those  facts  that  I
    have referred to but also the relevant case law in relation to  whether
    an internal flight or internal relocation is appropriate or  reasonable
    or unduly harsh in the circumstances of the case and that  relating  to
    whether an individual is capable of or can be returned to Iraq set  out
    in detail by the Upper Tribunal in the  country  guidance  case  of  AA
    (Article 15(c)) (Rev 1) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544.

9.   There is within the bundle, and I say this in passing and  no  more,  a
    document showing a grant of permission to appeal by the Court of Appeal
    in relation to the Tribunal's findings in AA but  in  relation  to  the
    document I make the following observations.

10.  Firstly ground 3, which challenged the finding in AA that a Kurd  could
    return to Iraq,  which,  it  was  suggested  in  the  grounds,  was  an
    irrational finding or not one in accordance  with  that  evidence,  was
    rejected by the Court of Appeal and permission not granted.  The  issue
    on which permission was granted has not been shown to have any material
    impact upon the decision in this case. It is also of relevance at  this
    stage, obviously not knowing what the Court of  Appeal  may  eventually
    decide, that the country guidance case of AA is still applicable law.

11.  The Court of Appeal  did  not  grant  any  form  of  injunctive  relief
    staying the effect of AA pending the outcome of their decision and  for
    that reason this Tribunal has looked at the matter in relation to AA as
    indeed the decision maker was arguably entitled to  do.   I  made  that
    point in passing.  It has not been extended by Mr  Khubber  before  the
    Tribunal but it is a matter that he  does  refer  to  in  his  skeleton
    argument and the relevant document is contained within the bundle.

12.  In terms of the fresh claim there are two elements  to  a  fresh  claim
    decision that is being challenged that this Tribunal has  to  consider.
    Again, within the authorities bundle we have the lead  decision  of  WM
    (DRC) v  Secretary  of  State  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1495  and  subsequent
    authorities, the gist of which has been that the findings of  Buxton  J
    in WM remains good law and on the whole should be followed.

13.  That set out a twofold test the first  part  of  which  is  whether  in
    challenging a fresh claim decision the applicant had demonstrated  that
    arguably the Secretary of  State  did  not  undertake  the  obligations
    imposed upon  her  under  the  Rules  as  encapsulated  in  Buxton  J's
    judgment, namely to consider the information made  available  with  the
    required degree of anxious scrutiny.

14.  The second element  of  the  test  is  whether  there  is  a  realistic
    prospect of a First-tier Judge applying the rule  of  anxious  scrutiny
    thinking the applicant would be exposed to  a  real  risk  of  harm  or
    persecution on return or that there would be a breach  of  a  protected
    right under the European Convention on  Human  Rights  or  an  unlawful
    decision contrary to the Immigration Rules.

15.  As stated, there was no dispute in relation to the  law  and  Mr  Malik
    whilst submitting that the decision was within the range of those  that
    the decision maker was reasonably entitled to make on the basis of  the
    evidence,  did  also  include  the  important  caveat   "provided   the
    appropriate required degree of anxious scrutiny had been exercised". If
    the required degree had not been exercised, then it may cast doubt upon
    the sustainability of the decision that has been made.

16.  It does no harm at this stage to  remind  ourselves,  as  I  have  done
    during my preparation for this matter and also during the  short  break
    that the parties were given, of the relevant law in  relation  to  both
    the position of returnees to Iraq and also the law relating to internal
    relocation.  These are the cases that were considered by  the  decision
    maker.  I do not propose  to  make  any  reference  to  cases  such  as
    Elgafaji or any of the cases  relating  to  Article  15(c)  as  it  was
    conceded by the decision maker that as the applicant's  home  point  of
    residence is Mosul, which is in a situation of crisis at the moment, if
    I can use that as a general term, the applicant could not  be  returned
    without a breach of his Article 15(c) rights.  That is therefore is not
    a live issue so far as this decision is concerned.

17.  Starting with AA, AA provided some useful guidance  both  in  terms  of
    the country conditions but also in relation to the individual areas  to
    which a person might be returned and also the factors that a  Tribunal,
    because obviously their decision was directed at the Tribunal but  also
    within that that I include the decision  maker,  should  consider  when
    assessing whether return was reasonable in all the circumstances.

18.  The first thing that was held in AA was that the  return  of  a  former
    resident of the Kurdish Regional Area, IKR it was referred to, would be
    to the IKR and all other Iraqis would  be  to  Baghdad.   The  decision
    maker was clearly aware of that and if one reads the decision letter it
    is quite clear that what was envisaged is  a  direct  return  from  the
    United Kingdom to Baghdad.

19.  AA also found that no Iraqi national will be returnable to  Baghdad  if
    not in possession of one of the requisite documents, that being defined
    as a current or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez passer document.

20.  In this case it is accepted that the applicant has  in  his  possession
    both an expired Iraqi passport, the number of which is included on page
    7 of the refusal letter, together with a national ID  card  the  serial
    number of which is again referred to on page 7 of the refusal letter.

21.  When considering therefore whether return was feasible on the basis  of
    the documentation the conclusion by the decision maker that it  was  in
    all  the  circumstances  is  a  decision  that  has  been  arrived   at
    considering the relevant parts of AA and the available information with
    the required degree of anxious  scrutiny  and  no  arguable  basis  for
    allowing the applicant to succeed in relation to that  matter  is  made
    out.  To be fair to Mr Khubber, following an  earlier  indication,  the
    issue of feasibility of return and documentation was not a matter which
    I considered to be his strongest point in relation to his challenge  to
    the decision.

22.  In relation to documentation where return is feasible, AA also went  on
    to discuss at some length the  status  of  the  Civil  Status  Identity
    Document, the CSID, and the methods by which that  could  be  obtained.
    It was found that where the individual's return to Iraq is found by the
    Tribunal to be feasible it  would  generally  be  necessary  to  decide
    whether that individual has a CSID or  would  be  able  to  obtain  one
    reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  A CSID is generally required in
    order for an Iraqi to access financial assistance from the authorities,
    employment, education, housing and medical treatment.  If the applicant
    shows there are no family or other members likely to be able to provide
    means of support, the person is in general likely to face a  real  risk
    of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by the  time  any  funds
    provided to that person by the Secretary of  State  or  her  agents  to
    assist that person's return  have  been  exhausted,  it  is  reasonably
    likely that the applicant will still have no CSID.

23.  The decision maker again considered this matter on page 7 by  reference
    to the appropriate background information and the fact that  it  states
    that a CSID may be obtained via the Iraqi Embassy in London  or  via  a
    power of attorney in Iraq.   There  is  reference  to  the  applicant's
    statement in his asylum claim that he had a  mother,  sister  and  five
    children in Iraq, in Mosul, but it then goes on that he claimed to have
    family members who would be able to vouch for his identity in order  to
    prepare the laissez passer or CSID.

24.  We touch at this stage upon the submission made by  Mr  Khubber,  which
    is quite important and almost a cornerstone to the submissions that  he
    has made in relation to internal flight  and  other  points,  that  the
    decision maker does not appear to have considered to any extent at  all
    how family members in Mosul, which at the date of  decision,  which  is
    the point at which this matter  is  being  considered,  was  under  the
    control of IS, who, it is  known,  are  in  the  practice  of  shooting
    anybody or torturing them in indescribable manners if they thought they
    were trying to flee that area, how such people would be able to provide
    any sort of assistance to the applicant  in  relation  to  providing  a
    power of attorney or vouching to the authorities  in  relation  to  his
    identity.  That is not a matter in relation to returnability but rather
    the obtaining of a CSID once he returns to Iraq.

25.  The difficulty in relation to the obtaining of that  document  was  one
    recognised by the Tribunal in AA when looking at the  expert  evidence.
    They do not make any clear findings in relation to  how  an  individual
    who relies upon an application made to an office created outside  their
    own residential area for the purposes of  obtaining  CSID  would  fare.
    Before the decision maker  there  was  information  to  show  that  the
    applicant had the required identity documents to enable the  respondent
    return him, to show that there had been established in Baghdad a  Civil
    Status Affairs Office for those  from  the  contested  areas  including
    Mosul, Anbar and Salah Al-din, indicating  that  the  applicant  had  a
    place of reference.  It  was  not  established  on  the  basis  of  the
    documents that were available that the applicant would not be  able  to
    acquire a CSID, per se, and in that respect I did  not  find  that  any
    error in the process taken by the decision maker  in  relation  to  the
    documentation has been made out.

26.  AA, however, also went on to give advice on the  position  in  relation
    to a returnee to the Kurdish Region.  Now, this is of  some  importance
    as it was accepted  in  AA  that  where  an  individual  could  or  may
    experience difficulties in areas such as Baghdad then there may  be  if
    they are of Kurdish ethnicity an alternative internal flight option  to
    the Kurdish zone.

27.   In  relation  to  Baghdad,  returning  to  that  before   looking   at
    relocation, I make the following comments, again, referring to AA.   In
    that case it was held it would not be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for
    a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad City.   So  as  a
    general proposition the comment by the decision maker  in  the  refusal
    letter that that was a viable option per se  is  not  infected  by  any
    arguable legal error.

28.  AA went on then to:

         "In assessing whether it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for
         an Iraqi national to relocate to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors
         are, however, likely to be relevant",

    and this moves into the area that, Mr Khubber submitted, had  not  been
    adequately considered by the decision maker.  They are firstly:

         "(a) Whether the applicant has a CSID or will  be  able  to  obtain
                one."

    I have referred to that issue previously prior to  moving  on  to  this
    section of the decision.

         "(b) Whether the applicant can speak Arabic."

    This is  important  as  those  who  cannot  are  less  likely  to  find
    employment.  The information before the decision  maker  was  that  the
    applicant  spoke  a  little  Arabic.   There  is  no  more  information
    available to me to what extent that term is  meant  to  incorporate  by
    saying "a little Arabic".

         "(c) Whether the applicant has family members or friends in Baghdad
                able to accommodate him."

    That is a matter that I shall refer to shortly.

         "(d) Whether the applicant is a lone female."

    That does not apply.

         "(e) Whether the applicant can find a sponsor  to  access  a  hotel
                room or rent accommodation."

    The applicant claims he has no family and knew nobody  within  Baghdad.
    Therefore, the information before the decision  maker  suggested  there
    was no sponsor available.

         "(f) Whether the applicant is from a minority community."

    That is not a reference to his ethnicity as a Kurd.  It is a  reference
    to his religion. The applicant is a Muslim.  The two predominant Muslim
    groups in Iraq generally and in Baghdad are the Shia or Sunni of  which
    the applicant falls within one such group.  It is not established he is
    from a minority community such as Christian, Yazidi or any of the other
    religions in Iraq.

         "(g) Whether there is support available for the  applicant  bearing
                in mind there is some evidence that returned  failed  asylum
                seekers are provided with the  support  generally  given  to
                IDPs."

    In relation to that, the decision maker was of the  opinion  that  such
    support could be provided to family members, which is, again, a  matter
    I shall refer to shortly.

29.  It is not disputed before me that  the  applicant  would  receive  some
    support and, again, the country guidance looked at in AA indicated that
    that would be given to internally displaced person in relation to which
    the UNHCR  and  the  various  humanitarian  groups  in  Iraq  speak  of
    considerable pressure being placed  upon  those  resources.  There  are
    within the documents that might have been  available  to  the  decision
    maker examples of financial hardship and issues with regard to food and
    accommodation experienced by some IDPs but that is not information that
    was  put  to  the  decision  maker  in  the  submissions  made  on  the
    applicant's behalf.

30.  In relation to relocation to  the  Kurdish  area,  AA  found  that  the
    Kurdish Area is virtually violence-free.  There was  no  Article  15(c)
    risk to an ordinary civilian  in  that  area.   A  Kurd  who  does  not
    originate from the Kurdish zone can obtain entry  for  ten  days  as  a
    visitor and then renew this entry permission for a  further  ten  days.
    If the Kurd finds employment he can remain longer although he will need
    to register with the authorities and provide details of  the  employer.
    There was  no  evidence  that  the  authorities  in  the  Kurdish  zone
    proactively remove Kurds from their area whose permits have come to  an
    end.  None of that is contested in terms of the submissions  that  have
    been made to this Tribunal.

31.  What the Tribunal in AA also  say,  however,  is  whether  a  Kurd,  if
    returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be expected to avoid any  potential
    undue harshness in that city by travelling to the Kurdish zone, will be
    fact-sensitive and is likely  to  involve  an  assessment  of  (a)  the
    practicality of travel from Baghdad to the Kurdish  zone  (such  as  to
    Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of the Kurd  securing  employment  in
    the Kurdish zone; and (c) the availability of  assistance  from  family
    and friends in the Kurdish zone.

32.  AA was a case in which  the  issue  of  internal  relocation  was  very
    important as indeed it is in this case.  The applicant has  been  found
    to be a person who lacks credibility, who did not  tell  the  truth  in
    relation to his asylum claim and in relation  to  whom  Professor  John
    Ritson gave very  clear  and  sustainable  reasons  for  rejecting  the
    credibility of his claim in 2009.

33.  I do, however,  accept  Mr  Khubber's  point  that  there  has  been  a
    material change in the circumstances in Iraq since 2009. It is also the
    case that the decision maker, did not  find  that  the  claim  did  not
    satisfy the fresh claims test because the applicant had been  found  to
    lack credibility. It is a conclusion based upon a finding that he could
    not realistically succeed, even applying the required degree of anxious
    scrutiny, on the basis of the circumstances that existed  at  the  date
    that the further submissions were made.

34.  Internal relocation  is  of  course  an  important  aspect  for  it  is
    established law, repeated in cases such as AMM and others  [2011]  UKUT
    445, that Article 8(1) of the Qualification Directive provided that the
    member  state  may  determine  that  a  person  is  not  in   need   of
    international protection if there is a part of the country of origin in
    which there is no well-founded fear of being persecuted or of suffering
    a real risk of  serious  harm  and  the  applicant  can  reasonably  be
    expected to stay in that part of  the  country.  Article  8(3)  of  the
    Qualification   Directive   states   that    Article    8(1)    applies
    notwithstanding technical obstacles to return to the country of origin.
     If one looks at that earlier case law and AA  we  have  this  repeated
    theme running through as to whether a person can reasonably be expected
    to stay in the part of the country in relation to  which  it  is  found
    there was a viable internal relocation option.

35.  The leading case with regard to internal relocation is,  however,  that
    of the House of Lords in Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v
    AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 in which the House of Lords pointed out  that
    the test to determine whether internal  relocation  was  available  was
    that set out in Januzi v Secretary of State [2006] UKHL 5 in  that  the
    decision maker should decide whether taking into account  all  relevant
    circumstances pertaining to the claimant and  his  or  her  country  it
    would be reasonable to expect the claimant to relocate  or  whether  it
    would be unduly harsh to expect him or her to  do  so.   The  House  of
    Lords in AH stated the test was one of great generality.   In  applying
    the test enquiry had to be directed to the situation of the  particular
    claimant.  Very little was excluded from consideration other  than  the
    standard of rights protection which  a  claimant  would  enjoy  in  the
    country where refuge was sought.

36.  Baroness Hale said that all the circumstances of the  case  had  to  be
    assessed holistically with specific reference to personal circumstances
    including past persecution or fear  thereof,  psychological  or  health
    conditions, family and social situation and survival capacities in  the
    context of the conditions in the  place  of  relocation  including  the
    basic rights, security and  socio-economic  conditions  and  access  to
    health care facilities, all with a view to determine the impact on  the
    claimant of settling in the proposed place of internal  relocation  and
    whether the claimant could live a relatively normal life without  undue
    hardship.

37.  The House of Lords said that it was not a correct  application  of  the
    test to  only  focus  on  the  comparison  between  conditions  in  the
    claimant's home country as a whole and those prevailing  proposed  area
    of relocation nor was it correct to  only  compare  conditions  in  the
    place of habitual residence from which a claimant had fled and those in
    the safe haven.

38.  In relation to this matter it is important that we do  not  lose  sight
    of the fact that when considering  internal  relocation  those  earlier
    decisions were as binding  upon  the  decision  maker  as  the  country
    guidance case of AA.  If one now turns to look at the  criticisms  that
    have been made of the decision it was simply, but accurately, put by Mr
    Khubber in his submissions that although the decision maker  was  aware
    of the decision in AA the decision maker in arriving  at  the  impugned
    decision did not focus upon the practicalities of return as he  or  she
    was required to do so on  the  basis  of  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal and, indeed, as the decision maker was required  to  do  based
    upon the guidance provided by the House of Lords in AH (Sudan).

39.  The location of the applicant's  family  is  of  some  significance  in
    relation to the point made by Mr Khubber.  Mr Malik in his  submissions
    took me to page 8 of the refusal letter, page 99h  of  the  applicant's
    bundle, and a particular paragraph in that in which the decision  maker
    made the following statement:

         "In your case however as noted above you are a Kurd  (who  are  not
         considered to be at risk of harm in non-contested areas), and  that
         you also have your parents, two brothers  and  a  sister  remaining
         there.  Whereas it is acknowledged that your parents  and  siblings
         were living in Mosul when you left (screening  interview  dated  13
         January 2009) you have not provided any evidence that would suggest
         that this is no longer the case.  Therefore, it is considered  that
         you do have close family remaining in Iraq who  would  be  able  to
         assist you.  Furthermore, you are a single healthy young  man  with
         no medical issues and the fact that you have been  able  to  travel
         and live abroad in three countries (UK,  Germany,  Netherlands  and
         Sweden) demonstrates your resourcefulness.   The  country  guidance
         report  also  states  that  the  onus  is  on  the  individual   to
         demonstrate  why  such  assistance  is  not  available,  and   that
         redocumentation, whilst important, is not in itself  a  reason  for
         international protection."

40.  The first observation in relation to that is even though the  applicant
    may clearly be a resourceful individual the fact he lived in the United
    Kingdom, Germany, Netherlands and Sweden is  arguably  irrelevant  when
    considering any risk on return or reasonableness of return and internal
    relocation within Iraq where it is the culture and conditions  in  Iraq
    that prevail.

41.   The  second  point  is  that  discussed  with  Mr  Malik  during   his
    submissions in that it is not at first flush clear  what  the  decision
    maker was actually trying to state or intending to say in  relation  to
    the whereabouts of the  family.   The  use  of  a  double  negative  is
    possibly the problem that is  caused  in  correctly  interpreting  that
    statement and it has to be  interpreted,  I  think,  in  light  of  the
    wording used that what the decision maker  is  concluding  is  that  no
    information had been provided to show that  the  circumstances  of  the
    family had changed, i.e. to show that it was no longer  the  case  that
    the family were still living in Mosul as  they  indeed  were  when  the
    applicant completed the screening interview in 2009.  This is  of  some
    importance and supports the submissions made  by  Mr  Khubber  for  the
    following reasons, namely that AA did identify that the availability of
    family support for an individual returned to Baghdad could be  of  some
    significance and needed to be properly  examined  and  in  relation  to
    return to the Kurdish zone the  availability  of  support  from  family
    members within the Kurdish zone to an individual when  looking  at  the
    reasonableness of relocation there is also a significant factor.

42.  The decision maker appears to  have  concluded  that  the  family  were
    still in Mosul, yet somehow also to  have  concluded  that  the  family
    could provide the required degree of assistance  as  identified  in  AA
    that may well make internal relocation to Baghdad and the Kurdish  zone
    reasonable and sustainable.

43.  There is an arguable conflict within those findings, and I  accept  the
    submission of Mr Khubber that the decision maker  does  not  appear  to
    have applied the required degree of anxious scrutiny to  the  facts  of
    the case that were known on. The information before the decision  maker
    clearly included not only the initial letter of further submissions but
    also other information including the screening interview  of  2009  and
    other paperwork that had been considered in relation to this matter.

44.  The decision maker on page 9 accepts, as stated, that Mosul is  a  city
    to which the applicant cannot be returned as it  would  breach  Article
    15(c) as it is clearly an area in relation to which there  was  at  the
    time of the decision, and indeed at today's date although that  is  not
    the relevant date, a place where the requirements of Article 15(c)  are
    satisfied.

45.  The second element of the failure by  the  decision  maker  to  examine
    matters  with  the  required  degree  of  anxious  scrutiny   is   also
    demonstrated by the paragraph on  page  9  below  the  acceptance  that
    return to Mosul would breach Article 15(c)  where  the  decision  maker
    makes the following statement:

         "However, it is considered that as an ordinary Kurdish civilian who
         has close family residing in Iraq, as well  as  being  a  civilian,
         with no adverse profile you may return  to  the  KRG  (via  Baghdad
         Airport), and that in accordance with AA Iraq that in returning you
         to KRG, your rights would not be breached under Article 15(c)."

46.  Whilst it is correct that there  is  no  evidence  that  returning  the
    applicant to the Kurdish zone would lead  to  a  breach  under  Article
    15(c) there is no further mention or appropriate  analysis  within  the
    decision of the reasonableness, or viability,  as  the  terminology  is
    used in AA, of the proposed method of return.  To return an  individual
    by internal flight it would have been known to the decision maker  that
    the first thing that would have been required would have been  a  valid
    Iraqi passport.  The applicant had an expired passport and the decision
    maker may have been entitled to conclude  that  such  could  have  been
    renewed.

47.  The second point is an individual would  have  to  have  the  financial
    means to be able to afford such a flight.  In this respect there is  an
    interrelationship  between  the  resources  that  the  decision   maker
    concluded would be available to assist the applicant on  return,  which
    places an emphasis upon the availability of  family  support,  and  the
    situation of the family which was  not  adequately  considered  by  the
    decision maker in arriving at the decision.

48.  Returning to the twofold test, has the applicant demonstrated that  the
    Secretary of State did not undertake the obligations imposed  upon  her
    as encapsulated in the judgment of Buxton J in WM (DRC) v Secretary  of
    State, the correct answer is, in my opinion, yes.   The  applicant  has
    demonstrated that the required degree of anxious scrutiny  required  by
    the country guidance case  and  earlier  authorities  relating  to  the
    reasonableness of internal flight were not adequately  considered  with
    the required degree of anxious scrutiny as a reading  of  the  decision
    letter  clearly  demonstrates.   In  relation  to  whether  there   are
    realistic prospects of a First-tier Judge applying the rules of anxious
    scrutiny him or herself thinking the applicant would be  exposed  to  a
    real risk of harm or persecution on return and that there  would  be  a
    breach of a protected  right  and  European  Convention  rights  or  an
    unlawful decision contrary to the Immigration Rules, on  the  basis  of
    the approach taken by the decision maker in assessing the merits of the
    claim it could not be said at this stage  that  no  realistic  prospect
    does not exist.

49.  Therefore, under both of the heads set down by Buxton J in WM  (DRC)  I
    find that the applicant has proved his case.  The decision I make is to
    quash the Secretary of State's decision of 16 February 2016.

Application for Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

50. I will refuse permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal of     the
    Tribunal's own motion on the basis there is no realistic prospect of
    success.  There is no arguable reason for that court to interfere with
    this decision on the basis of the information available and the content
    of the decision letter.




                            ~~~~0~~~~
