

                                    [pic]
   Upper Tribunal
   (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     Case Number: JR/6041/2014


             IN THE MATTER OF AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW


   |Heard at Field House                          |                             |
|On 5 April 2016                               |                             |
|                                              |                             |




                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH






                                   Between


                     The Queen on the application of CS
                       (by his litigation friend, JS)
                                                                   Applicant
                                     and


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department


                                                                  Respondent




   Representation:
   For the Applicant:       Mr Ranjiv Khubber, Counsel instructed by Coram
   Children's Legal Centre
   For the Respondent: Mr Zane Malik, Counsel instructed by Government
   Legal Department


   Anonymity Direction
   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
   2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper  Tribunal
   or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form
   of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
   Applicant or his litigation friend. This direction applies  to,  amongst
   others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
   give rise to contempt of court proceedings.






                                  Judgment


   Factual Background


   1. The Applicant, CS, through his  mother  and  litigation  friend,  JS,
      challenges the Respondent's decision dated  19  February  2014  ("the
      Decision").  By the Decision, the Respondent  granted  the  Applicant
      and his  mother  limited  leave  to  remain  of  thirty  months.  The
      Applicant contends that he should  be  granted  indefinite  leave  to
      remain ("ILR").  There is no challenge to the grant of thirty months'
      leave to remain to JS.


   2. The background to this challenge can be shortly stated.   JS  entered
      the UK in December 2000 from Jamaica.  She was then aged seven  years
      and arrived with her elder brother  to  join  her  mother.    Neither
      child nor mother had any lawful basis of stay in the UK.  JS and  her
      mother and sibling were overstayers.  CS was born to JS in the UK  on
      17 April 2011.  He was therefore aged less than three  years  at  the
      date of the application and was aged four years at the  date  of  the
      hearing before me.

   3. On 28 October 2013, JS's former representatives  (the  Cardinal  Hume
      Centre) made an application for leave to remain on her behalf as  she
      had by then spent more than half her life in  the  UK  and  was  aged
      under  twenty-five  years.   The  Applicant  was  included   in   the
      application as JS's dependent.

   4. In response to that application, on 19 February 2014, the  Respondent
      issued the Decision and thereby granted JS thirty  months'  leave  to
      remain and granted CS leave to remain of the same  duration  in  line
      with his mother.

   5.  Following the Decision, JS's current representatives issued a letter
      before action to the Respondent challenging the Decision on the basis
      that ILR should be granted to CS.    They contended that the Decision
      was contrary to CS's best interests and Article 8 ECHR.  On 15  April
      2014,  the  Respondent  responded  to  the   letter   before   action
      maintaining the Decision.

   6. This application for judicial  review  was  issued  on  6  May  2014.
      Permission to apply was refused on the papers by UTJ  Gleeson  on  26
      January 2015.  However, following an oral hearing,  on  1  May  2015,
      permission was granted  by  UTJ  Kopieczek  on  the  basis  that  the
      Decision was arguably unlawful on the basis that it did not reveal on
      its face that consideration was given to CS's best interests and "the
      wider considerations advanced in support of the application for leave
      to remain".  As a result, the Judge found  the  case  of  R  (on  the
      application of Alladin and Wadhwa) v Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department [2014] EWCA Civ 1334 ("Alladin and others") on  which  the
      Respondent relies to be arguably distinguishable.

   7. Detailed grounds were filed by the Respondent dated 8 June 2015 which
      stand also as the  Respondent's  skeleton  argument.   The  Applicant
      filed a skeleton argument on 22 March 2016  accompanied  also  by  an
      Appendix setting out the relevant legal framework and  a  chronology.
      I also received a bundle of relevant documents  and  two  volumes  of
      legal authorities.  I was greatly assisted by  the  able  submissions
      made by both Counsel.

   The Application


   8. The starting point for my consideration is the  application  made  by
      the Applicant's former representatives.  This was  accompanied  by  a
      covering letter.  That letter began by referring to JS's  immigration
      history and pointed out that JS,  as  a  result  of  her  immigration
      history qualified for leave to remain under paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) of
      the Immigration Rules ("the Rules").  Reliance was also placed on her
      Article 8 ECHR rights.


   9. In relation to CS, the letter referred to him as JS's dependent.  The
      letter stated that "Reliance is placed on his Article  8  rights  and
      your Section 55 duty to consider his best interests." The letter went
      on to refer to CS's and JS's circumstances  in  greater  detail.   At
      that time, they were said to be supported  by  social  services  and,
      absent that assistance, would be homeless and unable  to  meet  their
      essential living  needs.    A  waiver  of  the  application  fee  was
      therefore sought.

  10. The covering  letter  then  went  on  to  make  extended  submissions
      concerning  Article  8  and  section  55  Borders,  Citizenship   and
      Immigration Act 2009 ("section 55") as follows:-
            "The applicants have established family and private life in the
      United Kingdom   with each other and their friends  and  family,  and
      now have more ties to the  United   Kingdom  than  their  country  of
      origin.   Under  Section  55  of  the  Borders,   Citizenship     and
      Immigration Act 2009 and in accordance with the guidance laid down by
      the   Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
      Home Department  [2011] UKSC 4, the best interests  of  any  children
      affected  by  the  decision  must  be  a      primary  consideration.
      Obviously  it  would  be  in  the  best  interests  of   the   second
      applicant to remain in the United Kingdom where  he  has  established
      his private      and family life, and  to  be  granted  legal  status
      here.  It would particularly be in his       best  interests  because
      conditions  for  children  in  Jamaica  are  less   favourable   (see
      enclosed country information).
            It would therefore be reasonable to grant them leave to remain.
       We would also ask    that, in your discretion, you consider  whether
      a grant of Indefinite Leave to Remain  would be in the best interests
      of the children, following the case law in SM and TM     and  JD  and
      other v SSHD [2013] EWCA 1144 (Admin)."


  11. The letter then recorded that as JS and CS were destitute  the  grant
      should permit recourse  to  public  funds.   It  was  said  that  the
      imposition of that condition would amount to a breach of the relevant
      Home Office policy and would also be a breach of Article 8  ECHR  and
      section 55. In fact, the Decision did impose a condition that JS  and
      CS could not access public funds but there is  no  challenge  to  the
      imposition of that condition.


  12. The application included a witness statement from JS.  The  statement
      repeats that she and CS would be destitute absent  the  support  from
      social services and asks that she be allowed to remain in the  UK  to
      further her education and work for the benefit of her son.  The  only
      reference to CS's best interests is that it  would  be  in  his  best
      interests to remain in the UK.

   The Decision


  13. The Decision followed.   That  is  addressed  to  JS  and  states  as
      follows:-
            "Thank you for your application for limited leave to remain  in
      the United Kingdom.   Your application for limited leave to remain on
      the basis of your Private Life has     been considered.
            Consideration has been given  under  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
      Immigration Rules     and you have  been  granted  leave  within  the
      Immigration Rules under paragraph      276BE because you are aged  18
      years or above and under 25 years and have spent at     least half of
      your life living continuously in  the  UK.   Please  note  that  your
      dependent child has been granted leave in line with you."


  14. The Decision goes on to  record  that  a  period  of  120  months  is
      required in order to qualify for settlement under the Rules and  that
      further leave should be sought prior to the expiry of the  period  of
      leave granted via a charged application.  I note at this point that I
      was told that the current period of CS's and JS's leave  will  expire
      in June 2016 so that it will be  necessary  for  them  to  apply  for
      further leave very shortly.


   Pre-action correspondence


  15. On 2 April 2014, Coram Children's Legal Centre sent a  letter  before
      action.  That letter contains a lengthy section setting out the legal
      framework relating to the best interests of the child.  The  relevant
      submissions are then made in the following terms:-
            "This case concerns a vulnerable  child  who  has,  through  no
      fault of his own, been      born without immigration  status  in  the
      UK.  His mother was brought to the UK as a   young child of 7.  It is
      understood   that   the   Claimant's   grandmother's    efforts    to
      regularise her immigration status and [JS]'s status  were  previously
      unsuccessful     (notwithstanding  that  the  Claimant's  mother  had
      lived in the UK since the age of 7).
            The Claimant is vulnerable due to the fact  that  but  for  the
      support he and his    mother  have  been  receiving  from  the  Local
      Authority, they would be homeless and  destitute.  As  a  consequence
      of his mother having no immigration status, they have,  as  a  family
      been socially isolated.  The Claimant's mother  has  been  unable  to
      work  or to further her education - despite having lived  in  the  UK
      since she was a young       child.  The Claimant's and  his  mother's
      lack of immigration status  has  caused  his     mother  considerable
      stress and  anxiety,  which  has  inevitably  affected  the  Claimant
      during the crucial first three years of his life.
            In the Defendant's letter dated 19 February 2014  no  reasoning
      is given for the      Defendant's decision to grant the Claimant  2.5
      years' leave to remain, indeed, there  is no reference whatsoever  to
      s55 in the Defendant's letter.   This  is  despite  the      specific
      request in the covering letter from the Cardinal Hume Centre dated 28
                 October 2013 for the Claimant  to  be  granted  indefinite
      leave to remain (with       reference to the case of SM & others)"


  16. The letter then goes on to assert that based on the principles  in  R
      (SM and others) v Secretary of State for the Home Department   [2013]
      EWHC 1144 ("SM") there has been "a fundamental  failure  to  consider
      what  would  be  in  the   Claimant's   best   interests   in   these
      circumstances." It is  submitted  that  there  are  "exceptional  and
      compelling circumstances" which should have led the Respondent in the
      application of her policy on the best interests of the child to grant
      ILR.  It is said that this emerges from the duty not simply  to  have
      regard to the welfare of the child but also to his development.


  17. In her response to the letter before action, the Respondent noted the
      applicant to be JS rather than CS.  She then set out her response  to
      the matters raised as follows:-
            "(i) The Secretary of State received an application for limited
      leave to remain on    form FLR(O) on 30th October 2013.  She  granted
      this application with recourse to      public funds on 19th  February
      2014.
            (ii) It is the position of the  Secretary  of  State  that  her
      decision to grant leave with      recourse to public funds is in full
      compliance with her s55 duties.  It is additionally     the case that
      while  your  client's  former   solicitors   may   well   have   made
      representations in support of a grant of ILR, they did  not  in  fact
      make a settlement      application,  they  made  an  application  for
      limited leave to remain.
            (iii)      Notwithstanding the fact that  your  client  has  30
      months LTR, it remains      open to her to apply  for  settlement  at
      any time should she feel that she meets the  requirements for it.
            (iv) In the circumstance where your client has the  alternative
      remedy of making      the  correct  application,  the  claim  is  not
      conceded in any way."
      There is an error in the reference to the grant being with recourse to
      public funds but, in the absence of challenge to this  aspect  of  the
      Decision, that is not material.


  18. The application for judicial review includes a witness statement from
      JS in which she sets out why she seeks ILR  for  CS.   It  is  common
      ground that this was not  before  the  maker  of  the  Decision.   Mr
      Khubber submitted that it was nonetheless relevant to the question of
      the materiality of the error in the Decision since it  sets  out  the
      sorts of issues which he says should be taken into account.  He  also
      submitted  that  it  is  relevant  to  my  consideration   concerning
      proportionality under Article 8 ECHR. In support of  that  submission
      he relies on the case of  R (A) v Kent Constabulary [2013]  EWCA  Civ
      1706.  Mr Khubber took me in particular to the reference to a  number
      of immigration cases at [77].   It  is  arguable  that  read  in  the
      context of the remainder of that judgment, Mr Khubber's  reliance  on
      this case is misconceived.  However, as a result of my conclusions on
      the Article 8 ground, I do not need to decide this.


   Applicant's grounds and Respondent's response


  19. The Applicant's grounds can be summarised in the following way:-
            Ground one: fettering of discretion
            The Applicants submit that on a plain reading of  the  Decision
      and pre-action   response the Respondent has required an  application
      for settlement in     order to consider the grant of ILR.  It is said
      that this is inconsistent  with  the      flexible  approach  in  her
      policy to consider the grant of non-standard periods    of leave.




           Ground two: failure to take into account relevant factors/breach
           of s55 duty
            It is said that it is clear from the relevant  legal  framework
      that the   Respondent is required to appreciate the  long  term  best
      interests of the child      in any decision making and that  duration
      of leave helps to  promote  the  long      development  of  the  best
      interests of the child.
               Ground    three:    taking    into    account     irrelevant
      factors/misdirecting herself on   the evidence and the law
            The  Applicant  asserts  that  the  Respondent  has  failed  to
      understand that the   Applicant was seeking limited leave  to  remain
      under the Rules but also    ILR under the relevant policy outside the
      Rules.
            Ground four: decision irrational/disproportionate
           The Applicant submits that by reason of the errors disclosed  by
           the first  three  grounds,  the  Decision  is  irrational.   The
           Applicant says that, since the Decision involves   human  rights
           consideration, the Tribunal is not limited to  considering  this
           on a 'Wednesbury' basis but should also consider the merits.  It
           is argued that the Decision  fails  to  take  into  account  the
           child's best interests and is therefore not in  accordance  with
           the law (dealing with the third question set out in R (Razgar) v
           Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2004]  UKHL  27  -
           "Razgar").  It is submitted that the Decision does not  serve  a
           legitimate  aim  (the  fourth  Razgar  question)  and   is   not
           proportionate (the fifth Razgar question).


  20. Criticism is made of the Respondent's summary grounds  on  the  basis
      that those contain an ex post facto justification for  the  Decision.
      It is not necessary for me to refer to those since  the  Respondent's
      response to the Applicant's grounds is to be found  in  the  Detailed
      Grounds in any event.  That response is as follows:-
          . The Applicant's application was for limited leave to remain.  CS
            and JS do not qualify for ILR under the Rules.
          . The grant of thirty months is consistent with what  is  now  the
            policy under the Rules - SM pre-dates the changes brought  about
            in July 2012. The Respondent was entitled to grant a  period  of
            leave based on the Rules.
          . Even if the Respondent  was  required  to  consider  granting  a
            longer period of leave outside the Rules, there was no  evidence
            before the Respondent at the date of Decision as  to  what  CS's
            best interests required.  The witness statement  of  JS  setting
            out why CS should be granted ILR was not before  the  Respondent
            at the date of Decision.
          . Article 8 is not engaged.


  21.  As the Applicant recognises, there is considerable  overlap  between
      the grounds.  The Respondent's response  does  not  follow  the  same
      formulation.  I therefore approach the  matter  in  relation  to  the
      overall legal errors  asserted.   Before  doing  so,  though,  it  is
      convenient to dispose of the fourth ground concerning the  impact  of
      Article 8 ECHR.








   Article 8 ECHR


  22. Mr Khubber's submissions in relation to  Article  8  ECHR  are  as  I
      record above at [19].  As I pointed out to him in the course  of  his
      oral submissions, however, the basis of  the  challenge  ignores  the
      first and second Razgar  questions  namely  whether  CS's  Article  8
      rights are engaged by the Decision and, if so, whether the grant of a
      period  of  limited  leave  amounts   to   a   sufficiently   serious
      interference to lead on to the third to fifth questions which, it  is
      common ground, are matters for the Respondent to justify.


  23. Mr Khubber accepted in discussions that the first two  questions  are
      matters for the Applicant to demonstrate. That is  confirmed  by  the
      case of Miao v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA
      Civ 75. That case concerned an application for family  reunion  of  a
      child with his refugee father.  Unsurprisingly, therefore, engagement
      was  not  at  issue  and  the  case  turned  on  whether  there   was
      interference.  The Court of  Appeal  confirmed  that  it  is  for  an
      applicant to establish a threatened  interference  with  a  protected
      right at which point the burden shifts to the State to  justify  that
      interference.

  24. In relation to engagement, Mr Khubber relied on the case of Niemitz v
      Germany (1993) 16 EHRR 97.  That case concerns the enforcement  of  a
      search warrant at the offices of a lawyer who claimed that the action
      infringed his Article 8 and Article 1, Protocol 1 rights.  It appears
      from [74] of the judgment  that  the  Court  was  influenced  by  the
      applicant's position as a lawyer and the interference with  his  duty
      of confidentiality to his client.  That is very far removed from  the
      present case.  Mr Khubber also took me to the  case  of  R  (Wood)  v
      Commissioner of Police of the Metropolis [2009] EWCA  Civ  414  which
      concerns the retention by the police of photographs of  the  claimant
      at a meeting in a public place. In that case,  the  Court  of  Appeal
      held that the actual taking of the photographs was not sufficient  to
      engage the Appellant's human rights.  It was  the  retention  of  the
      photographs  which  constituted  the  engagement.   Those  cases  are
      distinguishable from the present.


  25. It is difficult to see how the grant of thirty months'  leave  rather
      than ILR has any impact at all upon  CS  in  the  context  of  rights
      protected by Article 8.  A child at CS's very young age  is  unlikely
      to have any awareness of the differential  impact  arising  from  the
      length of leave granted and  there  is  no  reason  to  suppose  that
      further leave to remain will not be granted  on  further  application
      provided CS and JS continue to qualify under the Rules for leave.  At
      the very least, the Respondent is entitled to expect some explanation
      in the context of the application made to her as to how Article 8  is
      engaged or interfered with by the grant of a period of limited leave.
      In the absence of such explanation, I do not accept that CS's Article
      8 rights are even engaged by the decision to grant a  limited  period
      of leave as opposed to ILR.

  26. Even assuming that  the  Decision  engages  CS's  Article  8  rights,
      however,  it  remains  for  CS  to  show  that  there  has  been   an
      interference of sufficient severity to require justification.  I note
      what is said in VW (Uganda), AB (Somalia) v Secretary  of  State  for
      the  Home  Department  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  5  and  that  there  is  no
      particularly high threshold in relation to Article 8(1) so that where
      the state action "touches the individual's personal autonomy" it  may
      not require a particularly serious interference  for  the  burden  to
      shift.  However, this case is unlike that case and other  cases  such
      as ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] AC 166.  The issue in those  cases  is
      whether removal of a child amounts to a breach of Article 8 ECHR.  In
      such cases, the interference is obvious.  That  is  not  so  in  this
      case.

  27. Mr Khubber submitted that the interference with CS's  rights  is  the
      Respondent's failure to appreciate the impact on CS  of  a  grant  of
      limited leave rather than ILR.  That submission conflates the section
      55 duty with the issue of  whether  there  is  an  interference  with
      Article 8 rights.  The  argument  is  also  misconceived  because  it
      relates to the third Razgar question (whether  the  decision  is  "in
      accordance with the law") and not the second.


  28. In his final formulation of how Article 8  is  engaged  and  how  the
      grant of a shorter period interferes with  CS's  rights,  Mr  Khubber
      submitted that the interference is created by the grant  of  a  short
      period of  leave  where  it  is  recognised  that  the  child's  best
      interests are to remain in the UK in the long term.  However, in this
      case, the grant of leave is founded on JS's ability to meet the Rules
      to remain rather than CS's.  If the application had been made on  the
      basis of CS's length of residence, the application - at  least  under
      the Rules - would be bound to fail as he has been in the UK for  less
      than seven years.  The Respondent does  not  dispute  that  the  best
      interests of the child at his age and particularly where  he  has  no
      contact with his father require him to remain with his mother.   That
      is not to say though that  either  his  best  interests  or  his  own
      Article 8 rights require that to be in the UK or require that to be a
      permanent arrangement.   Further, in any event,  CS  and  his  mother
      have been granted the leave set out in the  Rules  of  no  more  than
      thirty months.  As Mr Malik submitted (relying on the case of  Zia  v
      Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2015]  UKUT  191),  in
      general, an applicant can legitimately expect only that leave will be
      granted based on the  Rules  which  are  in  force  at  the  date  of
      decision.   As I pointed out in  the  course  of  Mr  Khubber's  oral
      submissions, even if leave had been granted based on CS's  length  of
      residence in the UK, the rule would normally require only that he  be
      granted thirty months' leave to remain.


  29. Even if I were to find that CS's Article 8 rights are engaged by  the
      Decision, therefore, I am quite unable to accept that  the  Applicant
      is able to show an  interference  of  sufficient  severity  with  his
      Article 8 rights in the circumstances of his case and on the evidence
      before me and which was before the Respondent.  The cases to which  I
      was referred relating to the best interests  of  the  child  in  this
      context are cases concerning removal of a child where there is  quite
      clearly an interference occasioned by the removal.  None of the cases
      to which I was taken in the context of a challenge to the duration of
      leave deal with this issue on the basis of Article  8  ECHR.   As  Mr
      Malik pointed out, in the case of R(NS) v Secretary of State for  the
      Home Department [2014] EWHC 197 ("NS"), Article 8 was raised  as  one
      of the grounds of challenge but that ground was not  pursued.   I  do
      not discount the possibility  that  it  might  be  possible  to  show
      interference in an appropriate case where for example, the grant of a
      limited period has a particularly severe impact (perhaps impacting on
      a child's health or the like) but that is not this case.

  30. In those circumstances, I  do  not  need  to  consider  Mr  Khubber's
      submissions in relation to the third, fourth and fifth  questions  in
      Razgar.  In fact, there is a degree of overlap here too  between  the
      Article 8 grounds and the conventional public law grounds.  The third
      question as to whether the Decision is in  accordance  with  the  law
      overlaps with Mr Khubber's  submissions  concerning  section  55  and
      failure to have regard to that  and  the  Respondent's  policy.   The
      fourth and fifth regarding the necessity and proportionality  of  the
      grant of a shorter period of leave overlap with the question  whether
      the Decision is  reasonable,  albeit  if  Mr  Khubber   succeeded  in
      relation to his Article 8 arguments, he submits that I would be bound
      to  consider  for  myself  whether  the  Decision   amounted   to   a
      proportionate response and whether it breached CS's rights (R (on the
      application of SA) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  IJR
      [2015] UKUT 00536 (IAC)).  As it is,  since  I  do  not  accept  that
      Article 8 is engaged by the Decision, the issue for me is whether the
      Decision is unlawful  or  unreasonable  on  conventional  public  law
      grounds.


   Is the Decision unlawful or 'Wednesbury' unreasonable?


  31. I move on then to consider the Applicant's case that the Decision  is
      unlawful or irrational on the 'Wednesbury' basis.


   Section 55


  32. The focus of this aspect of CS's case is whether the  Respondent  has
      had proper regard to section 55.  The requirements of section 55  are
      well known but I set those out for completeness:-
                 "(1)  The Secretary of State must  make  arrangements  for
   ensuring that -
           (a)   the functions mentioned in subsection (2)  are  discharged
                 having regard to the need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
                 welfare of children who are in the United Kingdom,....


              2) The functions referred to in subsection (1) are -
                 (a)   any function of the Secretary of State in relation to
                 immigration, asylum or nationality;...


              3) A  person  exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,  in
                 exercising the function,
                 have regard to any guidance given  to  the  person  by  the
                 Secretary of State for the purpose of subsection (1)."


  33. Mr Khubber relied in particular on the requirement to have regard  to
      the promotion of the welfare of the child.  He referred  to  Articles
      3,4 and 6 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child and General
      Comment No 5 (2003) which advocates a wide interpretation of the word
      "development" in Article 6 of the Convention.  He  referred  also  to
      the Home Office Guidance "Every Child Matters"  dated  November  2009
      and drew attention in particular  to  the  requirement  to  take  the
      guidance into account and to give clear reasons for departing from it
      if a decision is taken to do so.  I was not referred to any  part  of
      the guidance, however, dealing with the specific context of this case
      as opposed to general  principles  which  are  now  well  stated  and
      understood namely that the best interests of the child  should  be  a
      primary consideration.


  34. Mr Khubber also relied on the case of JO and others (section 55 duty)
      Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  00517  (IAC)  and  to  the  reference  to  the
      unqualified duty on decision makers and caseworkers to have regard to
      section 55 on a case by case basis. The decision in  that  case  sets
      out what are termed the "seven principles" arising from the  case  of
      Zoumbas v Secretary of State for the Home Department   [2013]  1  WLR
      3690.  Those include the necessity to have a clear idea of a  child's
      circumstances and to require a careful examination  of  all  relevant
      factors in an Article 8 assessment.  The point is made at  [11]  that
      the requirement to be properly informed  and  carefully  examine  all
      relevant information and factors is a necessary part of the  task  of
      identifying the child's best interests and balancing them with  other
      material considerations.

  35. I readily accept those propositions as they apply in the  context  of
      an Article 8 assessment concerning  the  removal  of  a  child.   The
      requirements are less obvious where, as  here,  the  decision  is  to
      permit the child to remain in the UK albeit  not  with  an  immediate
      right to settlement.  In my view, in such a case, a decision maker is
      entitled to expect to be told in what way, if any,  the  grant  of  a
      lesser period impacts on the child's best interests in the context of
      the specific case before the  issue  arises.   I  turn  therefore  to
      consider whether the obligation arises in this case based on what was
      before the decision maker and the Respondent's policy to have  regard
      to the child's welfare and development when deciding upon the  period
      of leave to be granted.

   The Rules and the Respondent's policy


  36. In reality, the central issue in this case is the application of  the
      Respondent's policy in relation to whether and when a  longer  period
      of leave should be granted.  I turn therefore to  consider  therefore
      whether the Respondent has failed to have proper regard to her policy
      and/or whether the  reasoning  in  the  Decision  was  deficient  for
      failure to show that the decision maker had regard to her policy.


  37. It is common ground that the Applicant and JS cannot meet  the  Rules
      for a grant of ILR.  Mr Khubber accepts that the application which JS
      made was for limited leave to remain.  His case however  is  that  it
      was not sufficient for the Respondent to simply grant  limited  leave
      to remain because that was the  application  made.   Since  the  case
      involves a child and  the  Respondent  was  asked  to  consider  that
      child's best interests and  to  consider  a  grant  of  ILR,  it  was
      incumbent on her to consider  that  request  by  application  of  her
      policy regarding the child's best interests.  In  so  doing,  it  was
      incumbent on her to explain her reasoning for refusing to grant ILR.

  38. Mr Khubber submitted that the Rule itself incorporates  the  exercise
      of discretion.   The relevant part of paragraph  276BE(1)  states  as
      follows:-
            "Limited leave to remain on the grounds of private life in  the
      UK may be granted     for a period not exceeding 30  months  provided
      that the Secretary of State is satisfied     that the requirements in
      paragraph 276ADE(1).....
            [my emphasis]
      Mr Khubber points to the use of the word "may" and submits that  this
      shows that the Rule includes discretion to grant a longer  period  of
      leave.  Mr Malik points to the words "not exceeding 30 months".   The
      Rule therefore provides that the Respondent is not obliged to grant a
      period of 30 months and may decide  to  grant  less  (or  even  grant
      nothing at all) if the criteria in paragraph 276ADE(1)  are  met.   I
      prefer Mr Malik's submissions.  If Mr Khubber  were  correct  in  his
      submission the words "for a period not exceeding 30 months" would  be
      meaningless.


  39. I turn then to consideration of the issue whether the Respondent  has
      had regard to her policy. The policy which  both  parties  accept  is
      relevant in this case is one dated January 2014 entitled "Guidance on
      consideration of a  child's  best  interests  under  the  family  and
      private life rules and in Article  8  claims  where  the  criminality
      thresholds in  paragraph  398  of  the  rules  do  not  apply"  ("the
      Policy").  It is trite law that failure to have regard to a  relevant
      policy is a public law failure which can render a decision  unlawful.
      It is common ground that the Policy is the only one relevant to  this
      case.  In particular it is accepted that the successor policy to that
      under consideration in SM and other cases and which  relates  to  the
      grant of leave where a person is unable to  meet  the  Rules  is  not
      relevant.  This case concerns the grant  of  leave  under  the  Rules
      albeit the grant of a longer period than thirty months  would  entail
      the exercise of discretion outside the Rules.


  40. Much of the guidance in the Policy relates to the issue of whether  a
      child should be granted leave under the Rules where the  issue  which
      arises is whether it is reasonable to expect the child to  return  to
      his home country.  Mr Malik accepted however that some of the section
      beginning  at  [23]  headed  "Exceptional  circumstances  that  might
      warrant a grant of leave  outside  the  Rules"  is  relevant  to  the
      present case.  My attention was  drawn  in  particular  to  [28]  and
      following:-
            "[28]      There is also discretion to grant a longer period of
      leave where appropriate.    There may be cases where a longer  period
      of leave outside the  rules  is  considered      appropriate,  either
      because it is clearly in the best  interests  of  a  child  (and  any
      countervailing considerations do not outweigh those best  interests),
      or  because        there  are  other  particularly   exceptional   or
      compelling reasons to grant limited leave    for a longer  period  or
      to grant Indefinite Leave to  Remain  (ILR).   The  onus  is  on  the
      applicant to establish that the child's best interests would  not  be
      met by a grant of     30 months' leave to remain and that  there  are
      compelling reasons that require a      different period of  leave  to
      be granted.
            [29] Caseworkers must also have regard to the best interests of
      the child as a   primary consideration  (but  not  the  only  or  the
      paramount consideration) when     deciding the period of leave to  be
      granted.  Whilst the expectation is that a period  of     30  months'
      (2.5 years') leave will generally be appropriate, there may be  cases
      where evidence is provided demonstrating  that  a  longer  period  of
      limited leave (or     ILR) is required in order to reflect  the  best
      interests of the individual child under      consideration.  A longer
      period  of  leave  can  be  granted  where  the   child   meets   the
      requirements of the rules (in which case they would be granted  leave
      outside the      rules for a longer period than 30 months)  or  where
      they fail to meet the       requirements of the rules but  there  are
      exceptional circumstances in their case that       warrant a grant of
      leave outside the rules.
            [30] In considering the period of  leave  to  granted,  factors
      such as the length of       residence in the UK,  whether  the  child
      was born in the UK and strong evidence to    suggest that the child's
      life would be adversely  affected  by  the  grant  of  limited  leave
      rather than ILR are relevant.  The conduct of the  child's  parent(s)
      or primary carer      and their immigration history, and  the  public
      interest in maintaining fair, consistent     and coherent immigration
      controls, are all relevant considerations  as  to  the  length     of
      leave granted.  Where the parent(s)  or  primary  carer  already  has
      leave, or where  their application is being decided first, the period
      of leave granted to the parent or      primary carer is  relevant  to
      the assessment of what  period  of  leave  to  grant  the      child.
      Whilst it will usually be in the child's best interests to have leave
      in line with     their parent(s) or primary carer, caseworkers should
      take into account any       particularly compelling factors which may
      warrant a longer period of leave.  It  should be borne in  mind  that
      the child is  not  responsible  for  the  conduct  or     immigration
      history of their parent(s) or primary carer.  An example  of  a  case
      where      it might be appropriate to grant  a  child  ILR  might  be
      where the child had a serious     and chronic medical condition which
      might not be able to be treated in the country     of return  and  it
      was considered in their best interests to  grant  the  child  ILR  to
      provide a greater degree of  certainty  for  the  purposes  of  their
      continued treatment   or mental well-being.  However,  the  threshold
      is high and concerns the direct effect        on  the  person  rather
      than simply their age.
            [31] Where a decision is taken to grant ILR to a child  because
      it is considered to   be in  their  best  interests,  this  does  not
      necessarily mean that the parent(s) or       primary carer should  be
      granted ILR in line.  It will normally be appropriate to      grant a
      period of limited leave of 30 months  to  the  parent(s)  or  primary
      carer unless     they can demonstrate exceptional  and  compassionate
      circumstances in their own  right that warrant  departure  from  this
      policy."


  41. As a preliminary issue to my  consideration  of  the  lawfulness  and
      reasonableness of the Decision, I need to consider the material which
      it is appropriate for me to take into account.  Mr Khubber  submitted
      that I should have regard to the content of the letter before action.
       Mr Malik submitted that I should not because that letter goes beyond
      simply setting out why the Decision is unlawful  based  on  what  was
      before the decision maker and contains a substantial  amount  of  new
      material and submissions which were not before the original  decision
      maker.  In that context, he pointed to the  response  to  the  letter
      before action which sets out the Respondent's position.  Her position
      is that matters which were not before  the  original  decision  maker
      could form part of a further application but could  not  be  used  to
      challenge the Decision.  Mr  Malik  conceded  that  if  the  original
      application had been accompanied by a letter similar  to  the  letter
      before action setting out fully the reasons why it was said that CS's
      best interests would be affected by a grant of limited leave and with
      proper evidence of  the  impact  of  a  failure  to  grant  ILR,  the
      Respondent would be bound to consider those submissions even  if  the
      application itself was for limited leave and not indefinite leave.


  42. Mr Malik also  pointed  out  that  the  Applicant's  grounds  do  not
      challenge the response to the letter before  action.   He  relied  in
      support of his submissions on Abdulla v Secretary of  State  for  the
      Home Department (JR/6393/2013).  The arguments set out at [32] of the
      judgment are similar to the arguments made  by  Mr  Khubber  in  this
      case.  As noted  at  [31],  the  pre-action  response  in  that  case
      consisted, as here, in a statement that the original decision was not
      unlawful, that further submissions (here a fresh  application)  could
      be made and that the case had been dealt with  appropriately  and  no
      further action would be taken.  Phillips J  accepted  the  submission
      made by Mr Malik there and in this case that the pre-action  response
      was not a separate reviewable decision and that it was  open  to  the
      applicant to make further submissions.

  43. By analogy with the fresh claims context, I  agree  with  Mr  Malik's
      submissions that my consideration is limited to  the  material  which
      was before the maker of the Decision.  If the Respondent had decided,
      following the letter before action or the  grant  of  permission,  to
      issue a supplementary  decision  letter,  I  could  have  taken  into
      account the further submissions made  in  the  letter  before  action
      which go beyond what was said in the  original  covering  letter.   I
      could also have considered the further evidence  submitted  with  the
      application for  judicial  review  if  the  decision  maker  had  the
      opportunity to take that into  account.   However,  the  Respondent's
      position in the pre-action response was that JS should make a further
      application if she wished those matters to  be  taken  into  account.
      For that reason, I consider myself constrained to review the Decision
      only on the basis of the material before the maker of the Decision.

  44. I was taken to a number of cases which concern the duration of  leave
      granted.  I do not need to refer to those in  detail.   Both  parties
      accept that, whilst those cases might appear  on  their  face  to  be
      highly relevant to this case, most of the cases can be  distinguished
      in terms of  the  policy  there  under  consideration.   Those  cases
      consider the grant of leave where the applicant was unable to succeed
      under  the   Rules  and  therefore   the   Respondent's   policy   on
      discretionary leave applied. That policy and its  successor  are  not
      relevant in this case.   However,  the  cases  are  relevant  to  the
      general principles in play.

  45. The starting point is the case of SM in which Holman J found that the
      Respondent's decision to grant only limited leave was  unlawful.   He
      also held that the Respondent's policy regarding the period of  leave
      to be granted was unlawful for failure to have regard to section  55.
      This case is distinguishable from the present not simply  because  it
      pre-dates the changes brought about by the introduction  of  the  new
      Rules in July 2012 but also because, in  SM,  the  applications  were
      made on the basis of a request for  settlement.   Holman  J  accepted
      therefore that, where the Respondent granted only limited  leave,  it
      was incumbent on her to explain her reasons for that course.

  46. I note at this juncture, Mr Khubber's submission  that  consideration
      of the present case is more nuanced because, slightly  unusually,  it
      is the position of the child's mother, JS, which led to the grant  of
      leave to remain under the Rules as opposed to  the  more  usual  case
      where it is a length of residence by a child of more than seven years
      which leads to the grant under challenge.  In the latter cases, it is
      recognised by the Rules that it is the period  of  residence  of  the
      child and the fact that it is not reasonable to expect the  child  to
      return to his or her home country which gives rise to  the  grant  of
      leave to remain.  Mr Khubber submits that because this case  is  more
      nuanced than the normal case involving a child, it  is  incumbent  on
      the Respondent to give fuller reasons than she has done (or indeed on
      Mr Khubber's submission any reasons) for granting only limited leave.
        He says that this is so even if there were only limited information
      about the child's best interests in the material before the maker  of
      the Decision.

  47. As I pointed out to Mr Khubber, however, the facts of this case  tend
      to point in the opposite direction. The main focus of  the  grant  of
      leave in this case is the length of residence of the  child's  mother
      and not of the child himself.  That is reflected by the fact that the
      child is the dependent on the application rather than being the focus
      of it. In such circumstances, the grant of leave to the dependent  in
      line with the main applicant satisfies the application which is  made
      absent any reason in policy or otherwise to consider a longer period.
       In those circumstances, the increased duty if there is one is on the
      applicant to explain  why  ILR  should  be  granted  because  of  the
      involvement of the child as dependent.

  48. The Respondent relies  on  the  cases  of  Alladin  and  others.  The
      Respondent's decisions in those cases also pre-date the  introduction
      of the new Rules in July 2012.  As Mr Khubber also  pointed  out,  in
      that case, the Respondent had issued a supplementary decision letter.
       That however related only to Mr  Alladin's  case.   In  Mr  Wadhwa's
      case, the decision letter stated only  that  discretionary  leave  to
      remain would be granted.  There was no further explanation. The Court
      of Appeal took into account the case of SM and, since the  Respondent
      did not appeal that judgment, accepted  that  the  policy  which  the
      Respondent had applied in the two cases was unlawful.   The  question
      for the Court was therefore whether the error of law was material.

  49. The Respondent's submissions are recorded at  [54]  to  [56]  of  the
      judgment and are in essence that section 55 adds little  where  leave
      is granted as the fundamental aspects of the welfare of the  children
      are already catered for.  Crucially, in those cases, Counsel for  the
      Respondent pointed out that there was no evidence  of  any  detriment
      suffered.  In its discussion, the Court accepted that the authorities
      in relation to the section 55 duty showed that this duty  applied  to
      the decision whether to grant leave to remain at all and decisions as
      to duration of leave.  However, it went on to say as follows:-
            "[59]      There can, in my judgment,  be  no  doubt  that  the
      Secretary of State is entitled    in  principle  to  adopt  a  staged
      approach to settlement.  Even where children are  the     applicants,
      it does not follow that the Secretary of State is bound, on  a  first
      application  to  grant  ILR.   The  considerations  outlined  in  the
      evidence of Mr   Gallagher amount to  factors  which  are  worthy  of
      consideration, and deserve to be  placed in  the  balance  after  the
      best interests and welfare of the children have  been     considered.
      It follows that an applicant who wishes to persuade the Secretary  of
      State to grant her leave for a period longer than that  provided  for
      by the staged    settlement policy has to do more than point  to  the
      fact that she is a child."


  50. Mr Malik relies in particular on the Court of  Appeal's  findings  in
      relation to Mr Wadhwa's case at [70] as follows:-
            "[70]      As I  have  intimated,  a  striking  feature  of  Mr
      Wadhwa's case is that at no       stage did he make a  clear  request
      to the Secretary of  State  for  the  grant  of  ILR.   In      those
      circumstances it would be wrong to criticise the Secretary  of  State
      for granting     DLR in the belief that she was acceding to the  only
      application made.  Consistently   with the absence of any request for
      ILR, none of the material sent to the UKBA  in       support  of  the
      application pointed to any disadvantage associated with the grant  of
      DLR as opposed to ILR."
      I accept Mr Khubber's point that this is  not  conclusive.   In  that
      case, it is said that ILR had not been requested whereas in this case
      the solicitors had at least requested consideration of the  grant  of
      ILR.  It is however supportive of the Respondent's case that in order
      to require the Respondent to consider the grant of ILR, there must be
      something before her on which to base  the  exercise  of  discretion.
      That is also consistent with the Policy.


  51. The other case on which Mr Malik placed considerable reliance  is   R
      (on the application of Amitkumar Pravinbhai  Patel)  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department (duration of leave - policy) IJR [2015]
      UKUT 00561 (IAC).  The headnote in that case so far as relevant reads
      as follows:-
            "(1) The decision of the High  Court  in  R  (SM  &  others)  v
      Secretary of State for      the  Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  1144
      (Admin) relating to the  2009       Discretionary  Leave  policy  and
      instruction only applies to cases  where  the  decision     to  grant
      leave to remain was made prior to 24 June 2013.
            (2)  There is no obligation on the Secretary of State to  grant
      ILR or to consider    granting ILR in circumstances where  no  formal
      application for ILR has been      made...."
      That case considers the position after the introduction of the family
      and private life Rules in July 2012.  However, in that case the grant
      of leave was based on an appeal allowed on the  basis  of  Article  8
      ECHR apparently outside the Rules.   As Mr Khubber also  points  out,
      it does not appear that the Judge's attention was drawn to the Policy
      and accordingly the decision may be  per  incuriam  (although  it  is
      possible that the Policy was not thought relevant as in that case the
      grant was giving effect to an appeal allowed outside the Rules).


  52. The final case in this line of cases on which Mr Malik relies is  NS.
      This is a case dealing with the situation after the Rules  change  in
      July 2012.  In that case,  the  Court  also  considered  the  Policy.
      Indeed the Policy was  itself  challenged.   In  the  course  of  its
      discussion, the Court  drew  attention  to  the  way  in  which  best
      interests arise for consideration under the Policy as follows:-
            "[40]      The Guidance does place  the  initial  onus  on  the
      applicant to raise the issue      of the best interests of the  child
      involved.  Given a context in which the  applicant  is     seeking  a
      period of leave that is substantially  longer  than  that  ordinarily
      provided   by the IR, I  do  not  regard  this  as  an  objectionable
      feature, or one that itself is in      conflict with, or  undermines,
      the duty under section 55.  The applicant should be in  a position to
      explain what children are involved in the decision, and how in  broad
      terms the interests of the children would be adversely  affected  if,
      for example, LTR      rather than ILR were granted.  In some cases of
      course the Defendant will have    independent access  to  information
      bearing on the immigration history of the     persons  involved,  and
      could be expected, consistent with the duty under  s55,  to      take
      into account the welfare of a child concerned, even if the  applicant
      did not    specifically raise that consideration.  Once the  decision
      maker has basic and reliable      information concerning the position
      of any child involved, the  decision  maker  is        then  required
      under the Guidance to treat the best interests of any child  involved
      as    a primary consideration.  Furthermore, once the decision  maker
      can see that the      issue of the welfare of a child has  arisen,  I
      accept that the decision maker should be     pro-active in seeking to
      obtain, if need be, further information bearing on that       issue."
      The Judge went on to note that the Claimant  initially  applied  only
      for limited leave although had  then  made  representations  for  ILR
      which the Defendant had considered in a supplementary decision  which
      the Judge took into account.  However, the case can be  distinguished
      on its facts from the present case because, as  the  Judge  notes  at
      [44], the case concerned the grant of leave to an  adult  who  sought
      leave on the basis of her  relationship  to  her  children  who  were
      British citizens and therefore no point arose as to  the  appropriate
      length of leave for a child.


  53. Finally, for completeness in this section, Mr Malik referred  to  the
      case of  R(Sayaniya) v Upper Tribunal (IAC) and  Secretary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 85.  Mr Malik relied on  this
      case as authority for the proposition that, where leave is sought  by
      application of the Rules, the grant of leave in accordance  with  the
      Rules does not amount to a fetter on discretion.  The Court of Appeal
      accepted in that case that it remains open to the Respondent to grant
      leave or  a  different  period  of  leave  in  the  exercise  of  her
      discretion outside the Rules, but the onus is  on  the  applicant  to
      seek reconsideration on that basis.


   Adequacy of reasons


  54.  I turn then to the issue of the sufficiency of the reasons given  in
      the Decision for the period granted.  It is common  ground  that  the
      Decision contains no express reference to a consideration of  section
      55 or best interests - indeed that was the reason given for the grant
      of permission.  Mr Malik submitted that I should not on that  account
      find the Decision to be unlawful or unreasonable.

  55. There are two issues  for  me  to  consider.  Firstly,  what  is  the
      Respondent's duty to give reasons and, secondly, whether the  reasons
      are sufficient in light of what was before the  decision  maker.   Mr
      Malik drew my attention to South Bucks District Council and another v
      Porter (No 2)  [2004]  UKHL  33  and  to  the  passage  at  [35]  and
      following.  That case arises in a very different context  -  that  of
      planning.  The House of Lords also  made  clear  that  the  case  was
      considered in light of the previous authorities in that context.   In
      cases involving in particular fundamental  human  rights,  there  may
      well be a need to give fuller reasons (and it may be that it  is  for
      the Tribunal itself to consider  the  issue  of  whether  rights  are
      breached).  However, in a case such as this when I am considering the
      reasonableness  of  the  Decision  against  the   backdrop   of   the
      traditional 'Wednesbury' principles, the requirement to give  reasons
      and consideration of the adequacy of reasons are unlikely to be  very
      different.  At [36] of the judgment, Lord Brown set out the following
      principles:-
         "The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether  the  decision-maker
         erred in law, for example by misunderstanding some relevant  policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn.  The reasons need refer only to the  main  issues
         in the dispute, not to every  material  consideration....  Decision
         letters must be read in a straightforward manner  recognising  that
         they are addressed to parties well aware of the issues involved and
         the arguments advanced.  A reasons challenge will only  succeed  if
         the party aggrieved can satisfy the court  that  he  has  genuinely
         been  substantially  prejudiced  by  the  failure  to  provide   an
         adequately reasoned decision."


  56. Of course, Mr Khubber's response to this passage is that the Decision
      does not do what is  required.   It  does  not  refer  to  let  alone
      consider section 55  and  what  is  in  the  best  interests  of  CS.
      However, that submission has to be judged against the material before
      the decision maker and the decision  maker's  obligations  under  the
      Policy.  I have set out the relevant extract from the Policy at  [40]
      above.  As that makes clear, it  is  for  the  applicant  to  provide
      evidence and put forward a case as to why the child in the particular
      case requires a longer period of leave.  That point is reinforced  by
      what was said by the Court of  Appeal  in  Alladin  and  others  even
      though, in that case, the Court was considering a different policy.


  57. In my judgement,  the  Respondent  is  entitled  in  the  absence  of
      anything to the contrary and when faced with an application for leave
      to remain to grant what is sought.  That is particularly the position
      in this case where the main applicant was  JS  who  sought  leave  to
      remain  expressly  because  she  met  the   criteria   in   paragraph
      276ADE(1)(v).  CS was her named dependent.   Again,  absent  anything
      put to the  decision  maker  to  the  contrary,  the  Respondent  was
      entitled to do as she would do in the case  of  any  other  dependent
      when the main applicant succeeds and grant leave  in  line  with  the
      main applicant. Indeed, that is what the Policy requires ([30] of the
      Policy).

  58. The issue is whether the maker of  the  Decision  in  this  case  was
      required to go further because of the matters raised in the  covering
      letter and to consider the exercise of discretion to grant  a  longer
      period of leave.  As I have already noted, under the  Policy,  it  is
      for the applicant to put forward his or her case for a longer  period
      of leave.  That is not inconsistent with the duty  under  section  55
      which is to have regard to development and promotion of  the  welfare
      of the child.  This is not a case, as it would be if the  child  were
      threatened with removal, where it is obvious what impact the decision
      would have on the child's best interests.  This is a case  where  the
      child is being permitted to remain in the UK and the  only  issue  is
      whether the child should be granted settlement from the outset.

  59. Mr Khubber sought valiantly  to  suggest  that  the  covering  letter
      should be interpreted as an exhortation to the  Respondent  to  grant
      ILR to CS on the basis that the Decision recognises that JS is likely
      to remain in the UK because of her previous length of  residence  and
      that, accordingly, CS's long term future would also  be  in  the  UK.
      Recognition of that position together with the requirement to promote
      CS's welfare would then require  the  grant  of  ILR.  However,  that
      interpretation is not supported by a plain  reading  of  the  letter.
      The letter relies on JS's length of residence as the  basis  for  the
      grant of leave.  That is unsurprising since  it  was  her  length  of
      residence which enabled mother and child to meet the  relevant  Rule.
      The fact that JS can meet the criteria under the Rules leads, as  the
      solicitors would know, to a grant of thirty  months'  leave.   If  it
      were the case that CS's best interests required  him  to  be  granted
      something more, it was incumbent on the solicitors to (at least)  set
      out the reasons  why  ILR  was  sought.   Absent  such  reasons,  the
      Respondent was entitled to treat CS as JS's dependent and grant leave
      in line.

  60. I accept that section 55 and Article 8 are raised in the  letter  and
      that it is noted that the child is a dependent on the application.  A
      request is also made for the Respondent to exercise her discretion to
      grant ILR.  However, the main submission in relation  to  section  55
      relates to the issue of recourse to  public  funds.   The  Respondent
      declined to accede to that submission and refused to  grant  recourse
      to public funds.  Interestingly, that refusal is not challenged.   In
      relation to the request made  for  the  Respondent  to  consider  the
      exercise of discretion to grant ILR,  no  reason  is  given  by  CS's
      former solicitors and no evidence is relied upon.  JS's statement  in
      support  of  the  application  makes  no  mention  of  the  need  for
      settlement in CS's best interests.  There is no evidence relied  upon
      as to the impact of a grant of limited leave to CS.  As the Court  of
      Appeal observed in Alladin and  others,  if  the  applicant  seeks  a
      longer  period  of  leave  in  the  exercise  of   the   Respondent's
      discretion, he or she needs to do more than point to  the  fact  that
      the application involves a child.

   Conclusions

  61. This is not a case where the Decision engages Article 8 ECHR. Even if
      the Decision engages that right, the Applicant has not shown how  the
      Decision interferes with his rights to a sufficient extent to require
      justification of that interference by the Respondent.


  62. Although I accept that  the  Respondent  could  and  perhaps  ideally
      should have explained in the Decision why she  declined  to  exercise
      her discretion to grant ILR to CS, based on the material  before  her
      and applying the Policy, she was not required to do more  than  grant
      what the Rules require where an application succeeds under the  Rules
      and therefore thirty months' leave.   CS was the  dependent  on  JS's
      application and therefore, in the absence of submissions and evidence
      setting out his case for ILR, it was not incumbent on the  Respondent
      to do more than grant leave in line with JS.

  63. That position  is  not  affected  by  section  55,  the  Respondent's
      guidance or the Policy.  It was for the Applicant (or more accurately
      his mother, JS, or their solicitors) to  explain  how  the  grant  of
      limited  leave  would  impact  on  his  best   interests.    As   the
      Respondent's pre-action response points out, it is open to JS and  CS
      to make a  further  application  on  that  basis  at  any  time.   In
      circumstances where they are due to apply  for  further  leave  later
      this year, it will be incumbent on them at that stage (if so advised)
      to make submissions as to why CS in particular should be granted  ILR
      and to supply evidence explaining why his best interests require that
      course.  However, based on the material  before  the  Respondent  and
      what was said to her at the time of the application, the Decision  is
      not unlawful or unreasonable.  There was no  obligation  to  do  more
      than grant what the Rules required.  In light of what was before her,
      it was sufficient for the Respondent not  to  give  reasons  for  the
      grant of thirty months which is the maximum period contained  in  the
      Rules and not  to  give  separate  reasons  for  not  exercising  her
      discretion to grant ILR.


  64. For all of the above reasons, this application for judicial review is
      dismissed.




   Signed        [pic]Date 3 May 2016




   Upper Tribunal Judge Smith






