

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/6176/2015

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                               27 March 2017


                                  The QUEEN
                    (ON The application OF guneet singh)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE smith


                               - - - - - - - -

Mr S Karim, instructed by Simman Solicitors appeared on behalf of the
Applicant.

Mr L Glenister, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE smith: This is an application for judicial review challenging the
    Secretary of State's decisions dated 22 October  2013  and  31  October
    2013 refusing further submissions and rejecting those as a fresh claim.


 2. As appears from the above, this application is now rather  dated.  This
    has occurred due to confusion within the  Tribunal;  the  Applicant  in
    this case was mistakenly thought to be the applicant in another case as
    a result of which the file was closed and an application had to be made
    to reinstate the application for judicial review.  There is no issue as
    to delay by either party at that time.

 3. The Applicant made further submissions on 3 May 2016 which have yet  to
    be responded to.  The Applicant accepts that I cannot consider those as
    they arise after the date of the decisions under challenge.

 4. I deal briefly with the Respondent's  submission  that  the  fact  that
    these further submissions remain outstanding renders  this  application
    for judicial review academic.  I disagree.  The Applicant  is  entitled
    to a lawful  decision  on  further  submissions.  That  entitlement  is
    unaffected  by  the  fact  of  having  made  later  submissions.    The
    Respondent could have chosen to issue a  supplementary  decision  which
    would have enabled the Tribunal to deal with all matters but chose  not
    to do so.

 5. I need not set the chronology out in any detail.  In short summary, the
    Applicant is a Sikh. He claims to be from Afghanistan.  The  Respondent
    disputes that and says that he  may  be  from  India  or  may  be  from
    Pakistan.  His appeal was  dismissed  on  the  basis  that  he  is  not
    returning to Afghanistan.

 6. I can  also  deal  relatively  briefly  with  another  point  on  which
    permission was granted.  Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Bruce on 22 March 2016 in the following terms:

         "The grounds seek to challenge the Respondent's decision dated 31st
         October 2013 to refuse to treat  his  representations  as  a  fresh
         claim for asylum.  The basis of his original claim had been that he
         is an Afghani Sikh: this  had  been  rejected.   The  new  evidence
         included  a  birth  certificate  and  translation  of  an  identity
         document, adduced to establish both nationality and religion.

         It  would  seem  that  the  Applicant's  case  was  not  free  from
         difficulty, but it is apparent from the Respondent's letter  of  31
         October 2013 and indeed the Summary Grounds  of  Defence  that  the
         Respondent's starting point in assessing these representations  was
         the earlier refusal of  asylum,  upheld  by  Designated  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Woodcraft on the 5th  July  2013.   That  claim  and
         appeal were determined in accordance with the Fast Track  procedure
         subsequently declared to be 'structurally unfair and unjust' by the
         Court of Appeal in The Lord Chancellor v  Detention  Action  [2015]
         EWCA Civ 840.  I grant permission for that reason."

 7. In fact, at the time when permission was granted, the only  declaration
    of unlawfulness in relation to the Fast Track Procedure  Rules  related
    to those in 2014 and the Rules current  at  the  time  of  the  earlier
    appeal in this case were the  2005  Procedure  Rules.   However,  since
    those were in fact also under challenge by the time  of  Judge  Bruce's
    decision the Respondent asked to stay  this  application  for  judicial
    review pending the outcome of that litigation.   On  4  November  2016,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane adjourned the application pending the outcome
    of that litigation.  That litigation culminated in the judgment  of  Mr
    Justice Ouseley in TN (Vietnam) and US (Pakistan) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2017] EWHC 59 (Admin) ("TN & US").

 8. Mr Karim informed me that the Applicant has now made an application  to
    set aside the First-tier Tribunal judgment relying on TN & US  but  did
    so only on 24 March 2017.  As Mr Justice Ouseley  makes  clear  in  his
    judgment that is the appropriate course.  I am therefore  conscious  of
    not making any findings in this judicial review which may appear to tie
    the hands of the First-tier Tribunal when considering  whether  to  set
    aside the earlier appeal decision.

 9. Mr Karim accepts that for the purposes of today the decision  of  Judge
    Woodcraft in the First-tier Tribunal should be assumed  to  be  lawful.
    He says, however, that the unlawfulness of the Rules is  a  significant
    factor in relation to whether the fresh claims decisions are lawful.

10. Mr Glenister says that it is clear from Mr Justice  Ouseley's  judgment
    that the Applicant has to show some procedural unfairness in  order  to
    establish unlawfulness of the previous appeal decision.  The  Applicant
    has failed to particularise that unfairness.  He refers to what is said
    by Mr Justice Ouseley at [114] of TN & US as follows:

    "[114]   Even where some such challenge is  permitted,  for  it  to  be
         successful there would also have to be a basis for holding that the
         decision was unfair beyond that it was reached under the FTR  2005.
         There is  no  presumption  of  unfairness  in  relation  to  appeal
         decisions under the 2005  FTR.  The  basis  must  be  evidenced  by
         reference to disadvantages, specific to the  case,  which  the  FTR
         timetable caused  but  which  the  Principal  Rules  timetable  and
         practice would have avoided, and which led to an unfair process.  A
         high standard of fairness is required. The SSHD might  be  able  to
         show that there was no unfairness in reality. This is not the  same
         at all as requiring the appellant to show  that  the  result  would
         have been different under a different regime; that is not required.
         But  the  claim  may  require  greater   justification   where   no
         applications for transfer out of the fast track or for adjournments
         have been made, and where no  attempt  has  been  made  to  advance
         claims or circumstances based on vulnerability,  or  if  no  issues
         about fairness have been  raised  during  the  appeal,  or  if  the
         evidence which was said to be missing is not provided as part of  a
         fresh claim made reasonably swiftly after the appeal concluded. The
         points I have referred to in relation to the "interests of justice"
         in the FtT would also be relevant in judicial review  cases  as  to
         whether or not time should be extended, and relief granted, if that
         were a route to relief available for challenging appeal decisions.

11. Based on the way that the Applicant's case is argued  before  me  today
    and no more I am satisfied that it cannot be said that the decision  of
    Judge Woodcraft is unlawful.  I emphasise that I am not  purporting  to
    determine that issue based on the application to set aside; that  is  a
    matter for the First-tier Tribunal based on whatever arguments are made
    to it.  For present purposes though the decision of Judge Woodcraft  is
    lawful and is the proper starting point for the Respondent's decision.

12. The issue in this Applicant's  case  is  very  narrow  but  nonetheless
    fundamental.  He is accepted to be a Sikh  but  not  from  Afghanistan.
    Judge Woodcraft set out at [37] to [49] of his decision the reasons why
    he found the Applicant not credible.  I do not need to  set  that  out.
    Suffice it to  say  those  reasons  included  that  the  Applicant  had
    produced an ID document which he later accepted was false and  that  he
    had very limited knowledge of Afghanistan.  The Judge found that he was
    a Sikh but not from Afghanistan.  It is  that  fundamental  nationality
    issue which the Applicant seeks to persuade the  Respondent  to  decide
    differently by his further submissions.

13. Mr Karim accepted that  the  Applicant's  father's  death  certificate,
    which accompanied the submissions, was not  translated  and  could  not
    assist.  He also accepted that a photo which was produced did  not  add
    to the  Applicant's  case.   There  are  two  documents  on  which  the
    Applicant relies.  The first is an identity document  said  to  emanate
    from Afghanistan as translated and the second is  a  birth  certificate
    said to have been issued by the Afghan Embassy in London.

14. In relation  to  those  documents  the  further  submissions  state  as
    follows:

         "It should be noted that the  Immigration  Judge  at  paragraph  21
         states that '... and noted that respondent's view was that  he  was
         an Indian national and as a result would be returned to India  ...'
         The new evidence which has been obtained indicates that our  client
         is a national of Afghanistan.  At paragraph 51 of the determination
         the Immigration Judge stated  '...  I  accept  that  the  Appellant
         cannot return to Afghanistan, he is not a citizen  of  Afghanistan,
         and the conditions for Sikhs in Afghanistan is  of  such  a  nature
         that would potentially be a breach of Article 3 ...'

         New evidence

       . We enclose our client's  birth  certificate  from  Embassy  of  the
         Islamic Republic of Afghanistan

       . Translation of Afghani ID card

       . Birth certificate of our client's father

         We therefore submit that our client is a national  of  Afghanistan.
         It is further submitted that in the light  of  Immigration  Judge's
         findings at paragraph 51 there is a real  risk  that  our  client's
         life would be in danger if he is removed to Afghanistan."

15. Before turning to the Respondent's  response  to  those  documents  and
    further submissions I need to deal with what  the  translated  identity
    card showed.  It showed the correct date of birth, albeit in rather odd
    form, that the Applicant is from Afghanistan and that his  religion  is
    Islam and his language Urdu.  That is clearly incorrect on the facts as
    the  Applicant  asserts  them.   Following  the  Respondent's  decision
    pointing  this  out  the  Applicant's  solicitors  then  wrote  to  the
    Secretary of State saying that the error was  one  of  translation  and
    asking that she defer a further decision to allow this to be rectified.
     The solicitors then produced a further translation which corrected the
    religion and language.  Otherwise the document was identical.

16. I am also told that the Applicant produced a document showing that  the
    error was one in translation.  This led to  the  Respondent's  decision
    dated 31 October 2013.  That decision also deals with  the  Fast  Track
    Procedure Rules issue with which I have already dealt.

17. Mr Karim also challenges  this  later  decision  for  failure  to  have
    express regard to paragraph 353  or  to  consider  whether  the  second
    translation made  a  significant  difference  to  what  was  considered
    earlier.

18. When dealing  with  the  two  documents  the  respondent  responded  as
    follows:

              "It is noted with regards to the further documents  submitted
              that no indication has been received  as  to  how  they  were
              obtained.  The Home Office is making  attempts  to  obtain  a
              travel document and it  is  highly  inconsistent  that  these
              documents were not provided prior to your interview or  prior
              to your First-tier hearing in order to support your claim.

       .   This  is  particularly  relevant  in  relation  to  the  document
         submitted  which  your  representatives   claim   is   your   birth
         certificate from the Afghan Embassy in the UK (submission  1).   It
         is inconsistent this was not produced before, and no indication has
         been provided as to how on 01/10/2013 (the date  on  the  document)
         the Afghan authorities  were  willing  and  able  to  confirm  your
         nationality.  No explanation is  provided  as  to  how  the  Afghan
         authorities were able to obtain your photo, and moreover  how  this
         photo was linked to this birth certificate,  given  that  you  have
         been detained since 04/06/2013 and this  document  is  dated  0/10/
         2013."

    That then deals with the birth certificate.

19. In relation to the identity card the Secretary of State said this:

              "With regards to the original and translation of an Afghan ID
              card  (submission  2)   which   your   representatives   have
              submitted, this document is  highly  inconsistent  with  your
              earlier account.  Your religion  is  translated  as  'Islam',
              which is inconsistent with your claim in screening and asylum
              interview that you are a Sikh.

       .  It is noted with regards to the translation of this document  that
         the translator is not certified.  This is highly inconsistent given
         the length of time you have been afforded prior to  now  to  obtain
         certified translation.

       .  Furthermore, this  document  is  inconsistent  with  the  identity
         document produced at substantive  interview...  which  states  that
         your religion is  Hindu.   The  inconsistencies  are  clear,  three
         identity documents submitted each provide a different religion.

       .  It is also inconsistent that  this  official  Afghan  ID  document
         provides the translation of your date of birth from '15  years  old
         in 1384' to the British system: 'born on 01/01/1990'.   This  is  a
         document issued by the Afghan authorities and you have provided  no
         explanation as to why it  has  this  translation.   It  is  further
         inconsistent that you have provided two identity documents,  having
         submitted one at interview, yet you claim that they both relate  to
         you.

       .  It is noted in addition that this document states that  you  speak
         Urdu as your native language.  However this is highly  inconsistent
         with your claim in screening interview that you speak Punjabi  only
         (stage one, SCR), and  is  inconsistent  with  the  fact  that  you
         completed your substantive interview in Punjabi."

20. The decision then goes on to deal with the ease with which national  ID
    cards can be obtained which are false.  It  does  not,  however,  refer
    again to the birth certificate.

21. In relation to the identity document,  at  that  stage  the  Respondent
    cannot be criticised for the views there expressed.  On the face of  it
    the document undermined the Applicant's case.  However, in relation  to
    the birth certificate the position is less clear.  At one point  during
    his submissions Mr Karim sought to rely on MA (Bangladesh) and others v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  175  as
    authority for the proposition that the Respondent should have sought to
    verify the document which is said to have been issued in London.

22. Mr Glenister's response is that MA does not alter the position set  out
    in Tanveer Ahmed. The Respondent was entitled not to give the  document
    weight based on those principles.  The difficulty though is this is not
    what the Secretary of State did.  She makes no  finding  about  whether
    that document carries weight or not.  For  that  reason,  I  accept  Mr
    Karim's submission that the decision of 22 October is flawed by failing
    to take into account whether or not the document could be  relied  upon
    and what weight it should be given for the reasons which are there  set
    out.

23. I have also considered whether that error can be said to be a  material
    one given the other problems with the identity document.  I should  say
    that I was unpersuaded  by  Mr  Karim's  submission  that  the  further
    translation which it is said bore the hallmark of certification and the
    accompanying documents sent  to  support  that  this  is  an  error  in
    translation makes any significant difference.  All  three  translations
    provided said that they were accurate and complete.   The  document  at
    [125] of the bundle suggested that the errors or at least one  of  them
    are typographical errors.  That cannot possibly be the  case  and  does
    not explain how the error occurred.

24. However, as Mr Karim submitted, it is accepted that  the  applicant  is
    Sikh and speaks Punjabi and not Urdu.  It was therefore still incumbent
    on the Secretary of State to explain why she did not accept  the  later
    translation as genuine.

25. That leads on to the additional difficulty with  the  31  October  2013
    letter.  If the flaw asserted in that letter that it did not  refer  in
    terms to 353 were the only one I would not have  allowed  the  judicial
    review as it is clear that this letter and the earlier letter are to be
    read together.  However,  that  decision  too  is,  in  my  estimation,
    unlawful as it fails to revisit the evidence of the  birth  certificate
    taken with the retranslated identity card to  establish  whether  those
    submissions taken together led  to  a  realistic  prospect  of  success
    and/or  were  significantly  different  from  the  material  previously
    submitted.

26. I say no more about the evidence here  as  there  is  further  evidence
    outstanding on which  the  Respondent  has  yet  to  make  a  decision.
    However, for the reasons I have given, I  allow  this  application  for
    judicial review.



Costs

27. I am going to summarily assess costs in the sum of  �11,500  which  the
    Respondent is to pay to the Applicant.

Application for Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

JUDGE smith:

28. Is there any application for permission to appeal, Mr Glenister?

MR GLENISTER:

29. I don't think so.  Yes, can we have five minutes?

JUDGE smith:

30. Yes, well, in which case, since I have to deal with this  at  the  same
    time as handing down, it is  probably  best  that  I  just  refuse  you
    permission to appeal and you can take any further  application  to  the
    Court of Appeal if you need to.  That  gives  you  more  time  to  take
    instructions from the client.~~~0~~~~
