
[pic]
                                                                JR/7355/2015

                               UPPER TRIBUNAL
                      (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                       Judicial review Decision Notice

          The Queen (on the application of Zahra Shojaei Asadiyeh)
                         [ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE]
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and

           Secretary of State for the Home Department   Respondent



                      Before Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Mr J Walsh of Counsel instructed by Behbahani  &
Co Solicitors on  behalf  of  the  applicant  and  Mr  Z  Malik  of  Counsel
instructed by the Government Legal Department on behalf of  the  respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London, on 1 September 2016

Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

Judge Gill:

Introduction and background facts:


 1. A Tier 1 (General) Migrant (amongst others) who has "spent a continuous
    period" of 5 years lawfully in the United Kingdom  (hereafter  referred
    to for  short  as  the  "continuous  residence"  requirement)  and  who
    satisfies the other requirements listed in para 245CD of the  Statement
    of Changes in the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)  (hereafter
    referred to individually as a "Rule" and collectively the "Rules") will
    on application be granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  ("ILR").  Para
    245CD provides that, if the requirements listed in para 245CD  are  not
    met, the application "will be refused".

 2. The issue in this case is whether the  respondent  made  a  public  law
    error in deciding that  the  applicant  had  not  "spent  a  continuous
    period" of 5 years lawfully in the United Kingdom as required  by  para
    245CD(c) and (d). If she did not, whether she erred in law  in  failing
    to exercise her discretion outside the Rules and  grant  the  applicant
    ILR.

 3. The applicant contends that all (or nearly all) of the  period  between
    15 March 2010 (the date when she was granted entry clearance as a  Tier
    1 (General) Migrant) and 17 October 2010 (the first date she arrived in
    the United Kingdom after entry clearance was issued on 15  March  2010)
    should  have  been  included  by  the  respondent  in  calculating  the
    continuous residence requirement  because  she  had  submitted  medical
    evidence which explained that she was unable to travel  to  the  United
    Kingdom in the period between 24 May 2010 and 17 October 2010. She  had
    also explained that she was present in Iran when  entry  clearance  was
    issued on 15 March 2010 for work-related  reasons.  Alternatively,  the
    failure to grant her ILR outside the  Rules  was  unlawful,  given  her
    entire history and background,  including  the  explanation  given  for
    travelling to the United Kingdom on 17 October 2010.

 4. The applicant's case  is  explained  in  greater  detail  below.  In  a
    nutshell, she contends that the  continuous  residence  requirement  in
    para 245CD(c) and (d) must  be  interpreted  flexibly,  from  which  it
    follows (it is contended) that the Secretary of State has a  discretion
    in deciding whether the continuous residence requirement is  satisfied.
    The Secretary of State was therefore obliged to  consider  the  medical
    evidence she had submitted but failed to do so or erred  in  doing  so.
    Alternatively, the Secretary of  State  was  obliged  to  consider  the
    medical evidence in her consideration of  the  discretion  outside  the
    Rules but failed to do so or erred in doing so.

 5. The applicant is a national of Iran, born on 15 October 1962. She first
    arrived in the United Kingdom in 2002 with her husband (born on 21 June
    1964) and two sons (born on 18 September 1991 and a date  that  is  not
    apparent from the papers).  She  pursued  her  studies  in  the  United
    Kingdom and qualified as a food  consultant.  She  subsequently  gained
    employment. Further details of her background  are  given  at  para  36
    below. It is accepted on her behalf that there were gaps in her  lawful
    residence in the United Kingdom prior to  15  March  2010  because  her
    leave expired in September 2009.

 6. In October 2009, the applicant left the United Kingdom and travelled to
    Iran. Whilst in Iran, she applied for  entry  clearance  as  a  Tier  1
    (General) Migrant. On 15 March 2010, she was granted entry clearance as
    a Tier 1 (General) Migrant, valid from 15 March  2010  until  15  March
    2013. The grant of entry clearance operates as leave to enter.

 7. On 16 March 2015, the applicant applied for ILR. This  means  that  the
    relevant 5-year period of continuous residence required to be satisfied
    under para 245CD(c) and (d) was the period from 17 March 2010 until  16
    March 2015. However, as is evident from the above,  the  applicant  did
    not arrive in the United Kingdom until 17 October 2010.

The decisions and the grant of permission to apply for judicial review

 8. The respondent  refused  the  applicant's  application  for  ILR  by  a
    decision of 16 March 2015  (hereafter  the  "refusal  decision").  This
    states (inter alia):

         "As you entered the United Kingdom as a Tier  1  (General)  Migrant
        on 17 October 2010 a continuous period of 5 years lawful  residence
        in the United Kingdom, commenced from this date. You have therefore
        not completed a continuous lawful period of 5 years as of 16  March
        2015 and your application falls for refusal."

         (emphasis added)

 9. On 29 March 2015, the applicant applied for administrative review.

10. In both her initial application of 16 March 2015  and  her  application
    for administrative review, the applicant relied upon medical  evidence,
    as follows:

    (i)  As at the date of the refusal decision, the respondent had  before
        her a letter dated 8 March 2015 (A13)  from  Dr  Sayed  Majid  Reza
        Alavi Dehkordi (MD, PhD) in which he  said  that  he  examined  the
        applicant on 24 May 2010 after she had  fallen  heavily  backwards,
        sustaining an injury to her back and bruising to her arm,  hip  and
        wrist. He found that her  condition  "affected  [her]  body  spine,
        discs between the vertebrae, ligaments around the spine and  discs,
        spinal inflammation, spinal cord, nerves and muscles". He said that
        he recommended complete bed  rest  and  physical  therapy  sessions
        consisting of traction, massage and diathermy three times per  week
        from 24 May 2010 until 17 October 2010. During this period, it  was
        advised that  the  applicant  avoid  standing,  using  the  stairs,
        driving a car and travelling.

    (ii) With her application  for  administrative  review,  the  applicant
        submitted the following:

     a)  A second letter dated 18 March 2015  from  Dr  Dehkordi  (A14)  in
             which he clarified that his previous letter was a  summary.  He
             said that the applicant had been examined in hospital on 24 May
             2015 because she could not move and had intolerable  pain.  She
             was therefore unable to travel at all in any  circumstances  in
             the period from 24 May 2010 to 17 October 2010.

     b)  A letter dated 18 March 2015 from Dr Clare  Mason  (A16)  of  Park
             View Surgery in Loughborough.  Dr  Mason  was  the  applicant's
             general practitioner. Dr. Mason  said,  inter  alia,  that  the
             applicant was seen twice in 2010 when she  was  noted  to  have
             some bruising over her coccyx. An X-Ray of the lumbar spine  in
             October 2010 showed no bony abnormality.

11. By a decision of 31 March 2015 (hereafter  the  "administrative  review
    decision"), the  respondent  maintained  the  refusal,  stating  (inter
    alia):


        "Reasons why the decision has been maintained


        You claim that when your application was assessed, the exercise  of
        discretion was exercised in an unreasonable manner by the Secretary
        of State.


        The  test  of  unreasonableness   that   is   used   in   assessing
        administrative review decision  is  'Wednesbury'  unreasonableness,
        that  is,  so  unreasonable  that  no  reasonable   person   acting
        reasonably could have made it (...).


        You asked that discretion be exercised in  your  favour  due  to  a
        medical condition which prevented you from travelling and therefore
        can account for your exceeding the 180 day limit  permitted  during
        the past 5 years of your continuous  residency.  The  Secretary  of
        State is unwilling to exercise discretion because a medical  report
        by the [     ] Surgery in Leicester  described  symptoms  that  the
        Secretary of State does not  find  compelling  enough  to  restrict
        travel.


        We considered that  discretion  was  exercised  in  a  'Wednesbury'
        reasonable manner because it was exercised in a manner such that  a
        reasonable person could  reasonably  have  reached  that  decision.
        Therefore we have maintained the original decision."

12. Para  6  of  the  respondent's  response  dated  5  June  2015  to  the
    applicant's  pre-action  protocol  ("PAP")  letter  (A98-101)   states,
    insofar as relevant:

         "iv) The SSHD carefully considered the medical evidence  submitted,
             including the medical report dated 08  March  2015  and  letter
             dated 18 March 2015 from  [Dr  Dehkordi],  an  orthopaedic  and
             arthroscopic surgeon based in Iran. The  SSHD  also  considered
             the letter from [Dr  Mason]  dated  18  March  2015.  Dr  Mason
             confirmed that your client was seen twice in 2010  following  a
             fall where she twisted her ankle in Iran. Dr Mason  noted  that
             your client had, "Some bruising over the coccyx and was treated
             with simple analgesia".

         ...

         vi)  Regardless of whether the  facts  and  evidence  contained  in
             your client's application were referred to in the  decision  of
             refusal or  Administrative  Review  decision,  the  SSHD  would
             contend  that  your   client's   circumstances   and   evidence
             (including those submitted on 16 March 2015 and 29 March 2015),
             were carefully considered. Anxious scrutiny  was  applied  when
             the decision to refuse your clients' application was  made,  on
             16 March 2015 and also maintained on 31 March 2015.

         ...

         x)   Consequently, the refusal decision dated  16  March  2015  and
             administrative  review  decision  dated  31   March   215   are
             maintained."

13. On 2 November 2015, the Upper Tribunal (the "UT") granted permission to
    apply for judicial review. The  decision  granting  permission  states,
    inter alia, that neither the  refusal  decision  nor  the  decision  on
    administrative review made any reference to the medical  evidence  from
    Dr Dehkordi. It is apparent from  the  UT's  decision  that  the  judge
    considered  it  arguable  that  the  medical  evidence  had  not   been
    considered. The judge refused permission  in  relation  to  Article  8,
    stating that  the  applicant  had  an  alternative  remedy  because  it
    remained open to her to make a formal Article 8 ECHR application.

The relevant provisions and framework

14. Section 3(2) of the Immigration Act 1971 (the "1971 Act") provides:


           "The Secretary of State shall from time to time (and as soon  as
           may be) lay before Parliament statements of the rules, or of any
           changes in the rules, laid down by him as to the practice to  be
           followed in the administration of this Act  for  regulating  the
           entry into and stay in the United Kingdom of persons required by
           this Act to have leave to enter, including any rules as  to  the
           period for which leave is to be given and the conditions  to  be
           attached in different  circumstances;  and  section  1(4)  above
           shall not be taken to require uniform provision to  be  made  by
           the rules as regards admission of persons for a purpose or in  a
           capacity specified in section 1(4) (and in particular, for  this
           as well as other purposes of this Act, account may be  taken  of
           citizenship or nationality).
           If a statement laid before either House of Parliament under this
           subsection is disapproved by the resolution of that House passed
           within the period of forty  days  beginning  with  the  date  of
           laying (and exclusive of any period during which  Parliament  is
           dissolved or prorogued or during which both Houses are adjourned
           for more than four days), then the Secretary of State  shall  as
           soon as may be make such changes or further changes in the rules
           as appear to him to be required in the  circumstances,  so  that
           the statement of those changes  be  laid  before  Parliament  at
           latest by the end of the period of forty days beginning with the
           date of the resolution (but exclusive as aforesaid). "

15. Para 245CD and 245AAA of the Rules, insofar as relevant, read:


        245CD. Requirements for indefinite leave to remain


        To qualify for indefinite leave  to  remain,  a  Tier  1  (General)
        Migrant must meet the requirements listed below. If  the  applicant
        meets these  requirements,  indefinite  leave  to  remain  will  be
        granted. If the applicant does not  meet  these  requirements,  the
        application will be refused.


        Requirements:


        (a)  DELETED


        (b)  ...


        (c)  The applicant must have spent a continuous period as specified
            in (d) lawfully in the UK, of which the most recent period must
            have been spent with leave as a Tier 1  (General)  Migrant,  in
            any combination of the following categories:
             (i)  as a Tier 1 (General) Migrant,
             ...
        (d)  The continuous period in (c) is:


             (i)  4 years, if ...
             (ii) 5 years, in all other cases.


        245AAA. General Requirements for indefinite leave to remain


        For the purposes of references in this  Part  to  requirements  for
        indefinite leave to remain, except for those in  paragraphs  245BF,
        245DF and 245EF:


        (a)  "continuous period of 5  years  lawfully  in  the  UK"  means,
            subject to paragraphs 245CD, 245GF and 245HF, residence in  the
            United Kingdom for an unbroken period with valid leave, and for
            these purposes a period shall not be considered  to  have  been
            broken where:


         (i) the applicant has been absent from the UK for a period of  180
                 days or less in  any  of  the  five  consecutive  12  month
                 periods preceding the date of the application for leave  to
                 remain, except that any absence from the UK for the purpose
                 of assisting with the Ebola  crisis  which  began  in  West
                 Africa in 2014 shall not count towards the 180 days, if the
                 applicant provides evidence that this was  the  purpose  of
                 the  absence(s)  and  that  his  Sponsor  agreed   to   the
                 absence(s);


         (ii)     the applicant has existing  limited  leave  to  enter  or
                 remain upon their departure and return  except  that  where
                 that leave expired no more than 28 days prior to a  further
                 application for entry clearance, that period and any period
                 pending the determination of  an  application  made  within
                 that 28 day period shall be disregarded; and


         (iii)    the applicant  has  any  period  of  overstaying  between
                 periods of entry clearance, leave  to  enter  or  leave  to
                 remain of up to 28  days  and  any  period  of  overstaying
                 pending the determination of  an  application  made  within
                 that 28 day period disregarded
        (b)  ...


        (c)  ...

16. The respondent has guidance  entitled:  "Indefinite  leave  to  remain:
    calculating continuous period in UK". The version in force  as  at  the
    date of the two decisions in the instant case was  version  11.0  which
    was in effect from 23 January 2014 (hereafter the "Guidance").  Page  2
    of the Guidance states:

         "This guidance tells you how to calculate the five year  continuous
        period in the UK requirement for  an  applicant  in  the  following
        categories:

         ..."

17. Pages 19-22 of the Guidance (insofar as relevant) read:

              "Indefinite leave to remain: calculating continuous period  in
    UK

              Absences which will not break  continuity  in  the  continuous
    period

         This page tells you when absences will not  break  continuity  when
        calculating if the continuous period requirement has been met.

         No more than 180 days absence are  allowed  in  any  of  the  five,
        four, three or two consecutives 12 month periods, depending on  the
        category, preceding the date of  application for  indefinite  leave
        to remain (ILR).

         ...

         Absences must be for a reason consistent with the original  purpose
        of entry to the UK or for a  serious  or  compelling  compassionate
        reason in the following categories:

              (   work permit holder
              ...

         And the following sub categories of the points-based system

              (   Tier 1 (General)
              ...

          Absences  must  be  connected  to  the  applicant's  sponsored  or
        permitted employment, or  the  permitted  economic  activity  being
        carried out in  the  UK,  for  example,  business  trips  or  short
        secondments. This also includes, any paid annual leave  which  must
        be assessed on a case by case basis and must be in line with the UK
        statutory annual leave entitlement.

         ...

         Evidence in the form of a letter from the employer which  sets  out
        the reason  for  the  absences,  including  annual  leave  must  be
        provided.

         ...

         Compassionate reasons will vary but can include:

              (   serious illness of the applicant or a close relative
              (   a conflict, or
              (   a natural disaster,  for  example,  volcanic  eruption  or
        tsunami.

         The applicant must provide evidence in the form of a  letter  which
        sets out the reason for the absence with documents of support.  For
        example:

              (   medical certificates
              (   birth or death certificates
              (   evidence of disruption of travel arrangements

         ...

         The period between entry clearance being issued and  the  applicant
        entering the UK may be counted toward  the  qualifying  period,  as
        long as it does not exceed 90 days. This can occur if the applicant
        is delayed travelling to the UK. The period of delay  will  not  be
        counted as an absence if it does not exceed 90 days. If  the  delay
        is more than 90 days, none of the period  between  entry  clearance
        being issued and the applicant entering the UK can be  included  in
        the continuous period calculation."

         (emphasis added)

18. At the hearing, Mr Malik submitted that the part of the  Guidance  that
    concerned absences of 180 days applies  to  absences  from  the  United
    Kingdom once an individual  has  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom.  He
    submitted that this part of the Guidance was of  no  relevance  in  the
    instant case because the period in issue in the instant case concerns a
    period after entry clearance had been issued but before  the  applicant
    had arrived in the United Kingdom.

19. Mr Walsh did not seek to suggest that the part  of  the  Guidance  that
    concerned absences of 180 days was relevant  in  deciding  whether  any
    part of the period between 15 March 2010 and 16 October 2010 should  be
    included in calculating the continuous residence requirement.

The applicant's case

20. Although the applicant's  application  for  ILR  stated  that  she  was
    submitting a letter from her employer to explain her absences from  the
    United Kingdom for work-related reasons, Mr Walsh informed me that this
    letter could not be found. He did not request an adjournment although I
    drew attention to the fact that I did not have this letter before me.

21. In relation to the  refusal  decision,  Mr  Walsh  submitted  that  the
    respondent erred in law by  applying  too  inflexible  an  approach  in
    deciding whether  the  applicant  satisfied  the  continuous  residence
    requirement. The refusal decision gives  as  the  sole  basis  for  the
    refusal decision the mere fact that the applicant had not  entered  the
    United Kingdom until 17 October 2010.

22. In this regard, Mr Walsh relied upon the decision of the Upper Tribunal
    in BD (work permit - "continuous period") Nigeria [2010] UKUT 418 (IAC)
    (Cranston J and Senior Immigration Judge McKee), the head-note of which
    reads:


               "Paragraph  134  of  the  Immigration  Rules   provides   for
               indefinite leave to be granted to a work  permit  holder  who
               has spent "a continuous period of 5  years  lawfully  in  the
               UK" in that capacity.  Unlike the 'long  residence  rule'  at
               paras 276A-D, no definition of this requirement is  given  in
               HC 395, and there is currently no guidance  to  be  had  from
               the  Immigration  Directorates'  Instructions.  However,   "a
               continuous period" must  be  construed  sensibly,  so  as  to
               allow periods of absence  abroad.   Where  such  absence  has
               been required by the appellant's employer in  the  course  of
               his work permit employment, it need not impair  the  strength
               of  connexion  to  the  United  Kingdom  which  is   normally
               established by five years' residence."

23. Mr Walsh also relied upon Granovski v SSHD  [2015]  EWHC  1478  (Admin)
    (HHJ Coe sitting as a judge of the High Court). The judge accepted  the
    case of the claimant in that case that his application for  ILR  should
    have been decided under para 135 of the Rules as it was when he entered
    the "Highly Skilled Migrant Programme".  The  judge  therefore  decided
    that the claimant did not need  to  satisfy  the  continuous  residence
    requirement in para 245CD of the Rules. It is clear from paras 4 and  5
    of the judge's decision that, if the claimant's application had  fallen
    under para 245CD of the Rules instead, he would have had to  show  that
    he had spent a continuous period lawfully in the United  Kingdom  of  4
    years and that the issue in that case was not whether a period  between
    the date of issue of entry clearance and  the  date  of  arrival  after
    entry clearance was issued  counted  towards  the  relevant  continuous
    residence requirement but  whether  periods  of  absences  outside  the
    United Kingdom during the 4-year qualifying period exceeded the maximum
    of 180 days per calendar year. Nevertheless, although the  observations
    of the judge  concerning  the  continuous  residence  requirement  were
    obiter, Mr Walsh relied upon para 79 of the decision, where  the  judge
    said:

     "79.     ... The meaning of continuous residence cannot be  literal.  I
               consider the approach in BD to be correct. There is a  wealth
               of evidence here  which  would  support  the  fact  that  the
               Claimant resides here. ... The Defendant has applied a  rigid
               mathematical  formula   without   considering   the   broader
               picture. There is significant material which  she  could  and
               should have considered in deciding the  issue  of  residence.
               She did not. She only considered the percentage of  time  the
               Claimant spent abroad. There is a proper analogy made by  the
               Claimant, for example, with an airline pilot resident in  the
               UK, but who is abroad most  of  his  working  time.  In  this
               respect the Defendant's decision was flawed.  Similarly,  the
               Defendant failed to exercise her  discretion  on  this  point
               properly or at all. She did not consider whether  or  not  to
               disregard the absences by balancing them  against  the  other
               factors. The exercise of discretion was not  carried  out  in
               an appropriate manner."

24. Mr Walsh submitted that the respondent failed to consider  the  medical
    evidence in the refusal decision. It is the applicant's case  that  the
    medical evidence was relevant in deciding  whether  she  satisfied  the
    continuous residence  requirement  under  para  245CD.  Mr  Walsh  drew
    attention to the  fact  that  the  respondent's  Guidance  showed  that
    medical evidence  was  relevant  in  deciding  whether  the  continuous
    residence requirement was satisfied.

25. Put another way, it is the applicant's case that there was a discretion
    under the Rules in relation to the continuous residence requirement. Mr
    Walsh submitted that the discretion is to be inferred by reason of  the
    fact that the continuous  residence  requirement  must  be  interpreted
    flexibly.

26. It is the applicant's  case  that,  as  the  Guidance  had  raised  the
    possibility of a period between  the  date  of  entry  clearance  being
    issued and the  date  of  actual  arrival  being  counted  towards  the
    continuous residence requirement, the maximum limit of 90  days  cannot
    be regarded as a "hard-edge" issue. Mr  Walsh  submitted  that  it  was
    incumbent upon the respondent to consider the circumstances and  decide
    whether a period in excess of 90 days should  be  counted  towards  the
    continuous residence requirement.

27. In the alternative, it was impermissible for the  Guidance  to  provide
    that a period in excess of  90  days  cannot  be  counted  towards  the
    continuous residence requirement because  the  Guidance  had  not  been
    subject to Parliamentary approval: Alvi v SSHD [2014] UKSC 33.

28. Mr Walsh submitted that it is not the case that the Guidance  concerned
    the exercise of the respondent's discretion outside the Rules. This  is
    because page 2 of the Guidance states:  "This guidance tells you how to
    calculate the five year continuous period in the UK requirement for  an
    applicant in the following categories: ..." He submitted  that  it  was
    therefore clear that the Guidance concerned  the  continuous  residence
    requirement under the Rules. Accordingly, it was not the case that  the
    90-day maximum concerned the exercise of  the  respondent's  discretion
    outside the Rules.

29. Although Mr Walsh accepted that it was not necessary for the  Secretary
    of State to refer, in terms, to every piece of the  evidence  that  was
    before her, the medical evidence that was relied upon by the  applicant
    called for  such  consideration.  The  Secretary  of  State  failed  to
    consider the medical evidence and failed to exercise her discretion  in
    the light of the medical evidence in assessing whether  the  continuous
    residence requirement under the Rules was satisfied.

30. Mr Walsh stressed that, in relation to the refusal decision, it was not
    the applicant's case that inadequate reasons were given why the medical
    evidence was not sufficient but that the medical evidence had not  been
    considered  at  all.  He  submitted  that  this  is  clear   from   the
    respondent's use of the word "therefore" in the refusal decision.

31. In the administrative review decision,  Mr  Walsh  submitted  that  the
    respondent had introduced a new ground of refusal. This is because  the
    administrative review decision considered whether the discretion should
    be  exercised  in  the  applicant's  favour,  an  issue  that  was  not
    considered in the refusal decision. This is not permissible, given  the
    terms of paras 2.2-2.4 of Appendix AR of the Rules. Given  that  a  new
    ground of refusal was introduced in the administrative review decision,
    the  respondent  should  have  conferred  a  further  right   to   seek
    administrative review, which she failed to do. He  submitted  that  the
    administrative review decision  cannot  be  relied  upon  to  cure  any
    defects in the refusal decision.

32. Furthermore, in the  administrative  review  decision,  the  respondent
    considered the letter from Dr  Mason  but  impermissibly,  and  without
    explanation, failed to consider the letter from Dr Dehkordi.

33. Mr Walsh accepted that the applicant did not state in  her  application
    that she had been planning to travel to the United  Kingdom  within  90
    days of entry clearance being issued but was delayed due to her injury.
    However, he asked me  to  consider  the  application  as  a  whole.  In
    particular, it was clear  from  the  heading  of  the  letter  from  Dr
    Dehkordi, which reads: "Re: Medical report of [the applicant]  for  her
    absences from  the  UK  (24.05.2010  -  17.10.2010  and  29.01.2012-08-
    03.2012)".  Mr Walsh submitted that it was clear that Dr  Dehkordi  was
    advancing the contents of his report as the reasons why  the  applicant
    was prevented from travelling to the United Kingdom.

34. Mr Walsh submitted that para 6 iv) of  the  respondent's  PAP  response
    shows that the applicant's medical evidence was only considered in  the
    administrative review decision.

35. In the alternative, the respondent failed to  exercise  her  discretion
    outside the Rules and grant ILR in the light of the  medical  evidence.
    Mr Walsh submitted that it was clear  that  the  respondent  failed  to
    consider the exercise of  the  discretion  outside  the  Rules  in  the
    refusal decision because the refusal decision states that the appellant
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 17 October 2010  and  "therefore"  did
    not to satisfy the continuous residence requirement.

36. At para 12 of the applicant's skeleton argument, it is contended that a
    proper exercise of the respondent's discretion, whether under the Rules
    or outside the Rules, would have entailed not only consideration of the
    medical evidence from Dr Dehkordi but also of certain factors  set  out
    at para 12 of the skeleton argument as follows:

    i)   The applicant's long connection with the United Kingdom.  She  was
        first granted leave to enter the United Kingdom in  2002  to  study
        for her doctorate which she obtained in 2006 (student visas from  1
        July 2002 to 31 December 2006; HMSP visa from 12 September 2007  to
        12 September 2009; Tier 1 General visa issued  on  15  March  2010,
        valid for 3 years and two years to 2015). Her two sons and  partner
        resided in the United Kingdom since the family moved here in  2002.
        Her older son (the child dependant in the application of  16  March
        2015)  has  been  educated  in  the  United  Kingdom  and   attends
        university here. Her younger son entered the United Kingdom in 2002
        with the family and was educated here. He has returned to Iran.

    ii)  The applicant has held a number of academic and research posts  in
        the United Kingdom related to food management. She has lived in the
        United Kingdom for 14 years now, albeit that the Secretary of State
        considers that it has not been continuous residence for the purpose
        of the Rules. she and her family  have  invested  huge  amounts  of
        money in their education and residence in the United Kingdom.

    iii) The applicant's immigration history shows (it is  contended)  that
        her intentions at all material times were to reside permanently  in
        the United Kingdom. She returned to  Iran  in  2010  to  renew  her
        United Kingdom visa when she sustained the injury which delayed her
        return to the United Kingdom.

The respondent's case

37. Mr Malik submitted that contrary to the  applicant's  submissions,  the
    term "continuous residence" was defined under the  Rules.  Para  245AAA
    provides that "continuous period of 5 years lawfully in the  UK"  means
    "residence in the United Kingdom for  an  unbroken  period  with  valid
    leave" (emphasis added). Mr Malik submitted that, unlike leave to enter
    which is deemed conferred upon  issue  of  entry  clearance,  residence
    cannot commence until the individual has actually arrived in the United
    Kingdom.  Para  245CD  clearly  provides  that  the  5-year  continuous
    residence requirement is mandatory. Para 245CD provides that,  if  this
    requirement  is  not  satisfied,  the  application  "will  be  refused"
    (emphasis added). The respondent's Guidance provides an exception  when
    residence in the United Kingdom can be inferred provided the individual
    arrives within 90 days of the grant of entry  clearance.  The  Guidance
    sets out how the respondent will exercise her discretion to "count  in"
    a period between the date of issue of entry clearance and the  date  of
    actual arrival towards the continuous  residence  requirement  provided
    the individual actually arrives in the United Kingdom within  90  days.
    However, there is an  absolute  bar  to  counting-in  any  period  that
    exceeds 90 days.

38.  Mr  Malik  submitted  that  it  follows  that  any  challenge  to  the
    respondent's refusal to exercise her discretion in  a  case  where  the
    period between entry clearance being issued and the date of arrival  in
    the United Kingdom exceeds 90 days is a challenge to  the  respondent's
    decision on her discretion outwith  the  Rules  and  the  Guidance.  He
    submitted that the respondent's decision as to whether or not to "count
    in" a period that exceeds 90 days concerns a matter  of  pure  residual
    discretion.

39. Mr Malik accepted that the refusal decision did not make any  reference
    in terms to the medical evidence. However, this must  be  seen  in  the
    context of the Guidance and the fact that the Guidance  made  it  clear
    that any period in excess of 90  days  between  entry  clearance  being
    issued and arrival in the United Kingdom will not  be  counted  towards
    the continuous residence requirement and therefore that the  discretion
    will not be exercised. Mr Malik therefore submitted that the respondent
    did consider the exercise of discretion in the  refusal  decision.  Her
    decision was that it would not be exercised.

40. Mr Malik submitted that the mere  fact  that  the  respondent  did  not
    expressly refer to the medical evidence in the  refusal  decision  does
    not mean that it was not taken into account.

41. Mr Malik submitted that the administrative  review  decision  confirmed
    that the discretion had been considered in  the  refusal  decision.  It
    also gave reasons for not exercising the discretion. At para 6  iv)  of
    her PAP response, the respondent made it clear that she had  "carefully
    considered" the evidence from Dr Dehkordi when the refusal decision was
    made; it is not the  case  that  the  respondent  only  considered  the
    medical evidence when the administrative review decision was made. This
    much was clear (in Mr Malik's submission) from the fact that para 6  x)
    of the respondent's PAP response referred to both the refusal  decision
    and the administrative review decision.

42. In the event that I  decided  that  the  respondent  had  not  lawfully
    engaged with the medical evidence in the  refusal  decision,  Mr  Malik
    submitted that the error was not material in the light of para 6 iv) of
    the respondent's PAP response. The applicant would have  to  show  that
    the evidence  in  support  of  her  case  was  so  compelling  that  no
    reasonable Secretary of State could refuse to grant her ILR.

43. Mr Malik drew my attention to the fact that there  was  no  explanation
    why the applicant decided to remain in Iran in the period between entry
    clearance being issued and 24 May 2010 when she was injured. The letter
    from her employer which is said to explain that her absence during this
    period was for work-related reasons has not been submitted  to  the  UT
    nor has the letter from the applicant explaining her absence.

44. Furthermore, there was no  evidence  before  the  respondent  that  the
    applicant had been planning to travel to the United Kingdom within  the
    period of 90 days from the date that entry  clearance  was  issued  and
    that her plan to do so was delayed due to her  injury.  This  was  only
    raised in her grounds of administrative review (A26 (i) of the bundle),
    after the refusal decision had been made. Mr Malik drew  may  attention
    to the fact that the evidence that was before the respondent  when  the
    refusal decision was made was the evidence  at  A8-12  of  the  bundle.
    However, the letters listed at  A8  are  not  before  me.  At  A9,  the
    applicant said that she injured her back within 90 days.  However,  she
    did not say that the injury was the reason why she did  not  travel  to
    the United Kingdom within the 90 days.

45. In relation to the decision in BD, Mr Malik asked me to note  that,  at
    the time that BD was decided, there was  no  definition  of  continuous
    residence in  the  Rules.  The  Upper  Tribunal  construed  the  phrase
    "continuous residence" because there was no definition of this term  in
    the Rules. The Rules were amended subsequently and para 245AAA inserted
    by HC 760 with effect from 13  December  2012.  Accordingly,  Mr  Malik
    submitted that BD could no longer apply.

46. In any event, Mr Malik  submitted  that  BD  and  Granovski  should  be
    distinguished on the ground that the claimants in BD and Granovski  had
    arrived in the United Kingdom. The issue in BD and  Granovski  was  not
    whether the period between entry clearance being issued and the date of
    arrival should be counted towards the  relevant  period  of  continuous
    residence but whether the claimants' absences after  their  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom broke the  continuity  of  their  residence  in  the
    United Kingdom, whereas the issue in the instant  claim  is  whether  a
    period subsequent to the  issue  of  entry  clearance  but  before  the
    claimant's arrival in the United Kingdom  should  be  included  in  the
    calculation of the period of continuous residence.

47. Mr Malik submitted that the real issue in  this  case  is  whether  the
    respondent's refusal to exercise her discretion outside  the  Rules  is
    unlawful. He  submitted  that,  as  the  discretion  was  that  of  the
    Secretary of State and not the Courts, the respondent's  refusal  could
    only be challenged on traditional judicial review grounds.

48. Mr Malik relied upon the decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Castro
    (Removals: s47 (as amended)) [2014] UKUT 234 (IAC) adopting para 36  of
    the judgment of Lord Brown in South Bucks  District  Council  v  Porter
    (No.  2)  [2004]  UKHL  33.  Decision  letters  must  be  read   in   a
    straightforward manner. The fact that evidence has not  been  mentioned
    in a decision letter does not mean that it was not considered.  Reasons
    can be briefly stated.

49. At para 89 of R (Hamzeh) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 4113 (Admin), Simler J said
    that the Court should not  intervene  on  the  ground  that  inadequate
    reasons  were  given  unless  the  defective  reasoning  indicates   or
    demonstrates that there would have been a different outcome so that the
    decision is in error of law.

Assessment

50. I consider first Mr Walsh's submission that it is impermissible for the
    Guidance to provide for a 90-day maximum on the  period  between  entry
    clearance being issued and the date of arrival that may be included  in
    the calculation of the period of  continuous  residence.  He  submitted
    that this was because the Guidance had not been laid before Parliament.
    In this respect, he relies upon  the  Supreme  Court's  judgment  in  R
    (Alvi) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 33.

51. In Alvi, the Supreme Court considered s.3 of the 1971 Act and held  (in
    summary) that any requirement that must be satisfied for leave to enter
    or remain to be granted that is in the nature  of  a  rule  as  to  the
    practice to be followed in the administration of the 1971 Act  must  be
    laid before Parliament. It is not permissible for a rule to refer to  a
    document outside the  Rules  which  sets  out  the  requirement  to  be
    satisfied.

52. The leading authorities on the interpretation of  Rules  include  Mahad
    (Ethiopia) v Entry Clearance Officer [2010] 1 WLR 48,  [2009]  UKSC  16
    and Odelola v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  1  WLR
    1230. Para 25 of Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f))  [2013]  UKUT  00088
    (IAC) sets out the relevant passages from Mahad and Odelola, as follows
    (the emphasis is mine):

     25. The law is settled as to the proper approach  to  the  construction
             of the Rules.  As observed by Lord Brown in Ahmed Mahad  v  ECO
             [2009] UKSC 16 at paragraph [10]:


              "There is really no dispute about the proper approach to  the
                 construction of the Rules.  As Lord Hoffman said in Odelola
                 v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  1  WLR
                 1230, 1233 (paragraph 4):


                        'Further, like any other question  of  construction,
                        this  [whether  a  Rule  change   applies   to   all
                        undetermined  applications  or  only  to  subsequent
                        applications] depends upon the language of the Rule,
                        construed against  the  relevant  background.   That
                        involves a consideration of the Immigration Rules as
                        a whole and the function which  they  serve  in  the
                        administration of immigration policy.'


                   That  is  entirely  consistent  with   what   Buxton   LJ
                 (collecting together a number  of  dicta  from  past  cases
                 concerning the status of the Rules) had said in Odelola  in
                 the Court of Appeal [2009] 1WLR 126 and indeed,  with  what
                 Laws LJ  said  (before  the  House  of  Lords  decision  in
                 Odelola) in the present  case.   Essentially  it  comes  to
                 this.  The Rules are not  to  be  construed  with  all  the
                 strictness applicable to the construction of a  statute  or
                 statutory instrument but, instead sensibly according to the
                 natural and ordinary meaning of the words used, recognising
                 that they  are  statements  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
                 administrative policy.  The  respondent's  Counsel  readily
                 accepted that what she meant in her  written  case  by  the
                 proposition 'the question of interpretation is ... what the
                 Secretary of State intended his policy to be' was that  the
                 court's task is to discover from  the  words  used  in  the
                 Rules what the Secretary of State must  be  taken  to  have
                 intended.  After all, under s.3(2) of the  Immigration  Act
                 1971, the Secretary of State has to lay  the  Rules  before
                 Parliament, which then has the  opportunity  to  disapprove
                 them.  True, as I observed in Odelola (paragraph 33):  'The
                 question is what the  Secretary  of  State  intended.   The
                 Rules  are  her  Rules'.   But  that  intention  is  to  be
                 discerned objectively from the language used,  not  divined
                 by reference to supposed policy considerations. Still  less
                 is the Secretary of State's intention to be discovered from
                 the Immigration Directorates'  Instructions  (IDIs)  issued
                 intermittently  to  guide  immigration  officers  in  their
                 application of  the  rules.  IDIs  are  given  pursuant  to
                 paragraph 1(3) of Schedule 2 to the 1971 Act which provides
                 that:


                        'In the exercise of their functions under  this  Act
                        immigration officers shall act  in  accordance  with
                        such  instructions  (not   inconsistent   with   the
                        immigration rules) as  may  be  given  them  by  the
                        Secretary of State ...' (emphasis added)."

53. Accordingly, the first point that I draw attention to is the fact  that
    the Secretary of State's intention is not be discerned by reference  to
    the Guidance in the instant case. In my judgement,  this  point  is  of
    particular  significance  in  the  instant  case  because,  whilst  the
    Guidance permits the possibility of a period  of  non-residence  to  be
    included in the calculation of the relevant period of lawful continuous
    residence, it is clear from para 245CD(c) and (d) and the definition of
    "continuous period of 5 years lawfully in the UK" in para 245AAA(a) not
    only that actual residence is necessary but also  that  an  application
    "will be refused" if the individual has not resided in the  UK  for  an
    unbroken period for the relevant period with leave. The use of the term
    "residence" is plain and  admits  of  no  ambiguity.  It  requires  the
    individual to be physically present in  the  United  Kingdom.  Once  an
    individual  has  commenced  residence  in  the  United  Kingdom,   such
    residence will not be considered to have been broken where any  of  the
    three scenarios provided for in para 245AAA(a)(i)-(iii) apply.

54. It is clear, in my view, that once residence in the United Kingdom  has
    commenced, it will not be broken in the circumstances set out  at  para
    245AAA (a) (i)-(iii). However, it is necessary for  residence  to  have
    commenced before para 245AAA can apply.

55. In contrast to the clear  terms  of  paras  245CD  and  245AAA(a),  the
    Guidance provides  for  a  period  to  be  included  during  which  the
    individual was not resident in the United Kingdom subject to a  maximum
    of 90 days.

56. In my judgment, the Guidance cannot be  used  to  interpret  the  clear
    words in para 245AAA(a). To do so would empty the word  "residence"  in
    para 245AAA(a) of content and thus rob  para  245AAA(a)  of  its  clear
    intention. This is so notwithstanding  that  page  2  of  the  Guidance
    states:  "This guidance tells  you  how  to  calculate  the  five  year
    continuous period in  the  UK  requirement  for  an  applicant  in  the
    following categories: ...". The interpretation advanced by Mr  Walsh  -
    that there is  a  discretion  in  how  caseworkers  are  to  apply  the
    continuous residence requirement - does violence to the clear  language
    of para 245CD(c) and (d) and para 245AAA(a), in my judgement.

57. There are the following further difficulties with Mr Walsh's submission
    that the Guidance sets out how caseworkers were to apply the continuous
    residence requirement under the Rules and that there is a discretion in
    how caseworkers are to apply the continuous residence requirement which
    is to be inferred by reason of the fact that the UT decided in BD  that
    the continuous residence requirement must be interpreted flexibly:

    (i)  There was no definition of the continuous residence requirement at
        the time that BD was decided, whereas it is the case that not  only
        does para 245AAA(a) provide a definition for the purposes  of  para
        245CD, it makes it clear that residence in the  United  Kingdom  is
        necessary. Accordingly, reliance upon BD is misplaced.

    (ii) Likewise, reliance upon Granovski is misplaced.  The  observations
        of HHJ Coe at para 79 of Granovski were clearly obiter.

    (iii)     More importantly, in Granovski,  the  judge  relied  upon  BD
        which, for the reasons I have given, cannot apply  in  relation  to
        applications under para 245CD given the clear  definition  in  para
        245AAA(a).

    (iv) Furthermore, both BD and Granovski concerned periods  of  absences
        after the individuals concerned had arrived in the  United  Kingdom
        whereas the instant case concerns a period between entry  clearance
        being issued and arrival in the United Kingdom. It  is  clear  from
        the definition of "continuous residence"  in  para  245AAA(a)  that
        these two issues are treated differently. Accordingly,  it  is  not
        appropriate to read  across  observations  about  whether  absences
        after an individual's arrival break continuity  to  whether,  as  a
        matter of discretion, the  period  between  entry  clearance  being
        granted and arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  counts  towards  the
        continuous residence requirement.

58. Given that para 245AAA(a) requires "residence" -  which,  in  my  view,
    means  that  residence  must  have  commenced  -    that   para   245CD
    specifically states that if  the  requirements  of  the  Rule  are  not
    satisfied the application will be refused, the only way of making sense
    of the part of  the  Guidance  that  permits  a  period  between  entry
    clearance being issued and the  date  of  arrival  to  be  included  in
    calculating the period of continuous residence - without doing violence
    to the language of paras 245AAA(a) and 245CD - is to  acknowledge  that
    this part of the Guidance sets out how  the  Secretary  of  State  will
    exercise her discretion outside the Rules. The Secretary of State is in
    effect stating that, notwithstanding that such a period  cannot  amount
    to "residence", she is prepared to permit such a period to be  included
    in certain circumstances  provided  the  maximum  of  90  days  is  not
    exceeded.

59. Accordingly, I agree with Mr Malik  that  this  part  of  the  Guidance
    concerns the exercise by the  Secretary  of  State  of  her  discretion
    outside the Rules.

60. The next question is whether it is permissible  for  the  Secretary  of
    State to impose a  maximum  of  90-days  of  such  non-residence  (i.e.
    between entry clearance being issued and the date  of  arrival)  to  be
    included in  the  calculation  of  the  relevant  continuous  residence
    requirement.

61. Mr Walsh submitted that, once the respondent has opened the possibility
    of a period between entry clearance being granted and  arrival  in  the
    United Kingdom being included, it is impermissible to impose a maximum.
    In doing so, he relied upon  Alvi.  This  submission  is  misconceived,
    because the principle in Alvi concerns requirements  that  are  in  the
    nature of a rule, whereas the 90-day maximum concerns the  exercise  of
    the Secretary of State's discretion outside the Rules. The  requirement
    in issue in the instant case is that of residence. Paras  245CD(c)  and
    (d) and 245AAA(a) set out the requirement of residence which is in  the
    nature  of  a  rule  and  which  has  been  laid   before   Parliament.
    Accordingly, there has been compliance with the principle in Alvi.

62. The 90-day  maximum  on  the  period  of  non-residence  between  entry
    clearance being issued and the date of arrival which, in the  Secretary
    of State's exercise of discretion,  may  in  certain  circumstances  be
    included in the calculation of the continuous residence requirement can
    therefore only be challenged  on  the  ground  that  it  represents  an
    unlawful fetter of her general discretion.

63. In this respect, I have  found  the  judgment  in  R  (Thebo)  v  Entry
    Clearance Officer [2013] EWHC 146 (Admin) where Mostyn J considered the
    mandatory grounds of refusal in paras 320 (7A) and 7(B)  of  the  Rules
    and said, at para 31:


        "31. ... I am also satisfied that these rules fall outwith the  no-
            fettering of discretion principle. ... In Alvi at para 42  (per
            Lord Hope) and 111-112 (per Lord Walker) it was emphasised that
            the immigration system had to be both predictable and workable.
            Therefore the Secretary of State must be entitled to  lay  down
            ... "bright-line rules". Given that she  is  enjoined  to  make
            rules which control immigration I simply cannot see how a  rule
            which, subject to her  residual  discretion,  requires  her  to
            refuse entry in certain (understandable) circumstances  can  be
            categorised  as  irrational  and  therefore  unlawful.  On  the
            contrary, I consider these rules to be completely rational.  If
            their language is tendentious then that does not amount  to  an
            impermissible fettering of discretion since they  are  made  in
            pursuance of an important legislative aim."

64. If (as is plainly the case) it is not unlawful  for  the  Secretary  of
    State "to lay down ... "bright-line rules"" in setting  down  mandatory
    provisions under the Rules, it cannot a fortiori be unlawful for her to
    lay down in guidance that she publishes a bright-line beyond which  she
    will not exercise her general  discretion  outside  the  Rules,  in  my
    judgement.

65. I have therefore decided that the Guidance is not unlawful in  imposing
    a limit of 90 days on the period of non-residence between the issue  of
    entry clearance and the date of arrival that may  be  included  in  the
    calculation of the continuous residence requirement.

66. Having decided these issues, I turn to consider  the  applicant's  case
    against the refusal decision.

67. For the reasons given above, I reject the  applicant's  case  that  the
    Secretary of State failed to apply the continuous residence requirement
    under the Rules flexibly. I have given my reasons for interpreting  the
    continuous residence requirement in para 245CD and para 245AAA(a) as  I
    have. Given that the applicant did not arrive  in  the  United  Kingdom
    after entry clearance had been granted until 17 October  2010  and  the
    fact that para 244AAA(a) plainly requires residence to  have  commenced
    before any period of residence can  be  included,  the  respondent  was
    plainly entitled to conclude  that  she  did  not  satisfy  the  5-year
    continuous lawful residence  requirement  and  refuse  the  application
    under the Rules on the basis that she did arrive in  the  UK  until  17
    October 2010, without more.

68. The same applies to the Secretary of State's decision on  the  exercise
    of her discretion outside the Rules and under the Guidance.  Since  the
    Guidance  provided for how the discretion outside the  Rules  would  be
    considered and given that this makes it clear that any  period  between
    entry clearance being granted and the date of arrival which exceeds  90
    days will not be taken into account, the Secretary of State was plainly
    entitled to apply her published policy, without more. In my  judgement,
    she was entitled to say simply that, as the applicant  did  not  arrive
    until 17 October 2010, her application fell to be  refused.  Mitting  J
    said in R (Fu)  v  SSHD  [2010]  EWHC  292  (Admin)  (para  13  of  the
    respondent's skeleton argument), "it is only to be  expected  that  the
    rules will be applied in the ordinary case  automatically  without  the
    exercise of careful discretion based on individual facts".  If  (as  is
    the case) that is so in the case of a rule, it must  apply  equally  in
    relation to a  policy  that  limits  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    discretion outside the Rules will be applied in an individual's  favour
    (in this case, that the maximum of 90-days is not exceeded).  There  is
    no need for the Secretary of State to consider whether  the  particular
    circumstances of an individual who  has  exceeded  the  90-day  maximum
    justify the exercise of discretion in the individual's  favour  outwith
    the Rules and the Guidance.

69. Accordingly, I have concluded that  the  respondent  did  consider  the
    exercise of her discretion in the refusal decision, as is confirmed  in
    the administrative review decision. The fact that she did not refer  in
    terms to the medical evidence does not mean that it was not considered.
    It was sufficient for her to apply her policy for the exercise  of  her
    discretion and state simply that, as the applicant did not arrive until
    17 October 2015, her application was refused.

70. Mr Walsh submitted that such was the nature of the medical evidence  of
    Dr Dehkordi that it was incumbent upon the respondent to  consider  the
    evidence. He stressed that it was not the  applicant's  case  that  the
    respondent had failed to give adequate reasons for  not  accepting  the
    medical evidence but that she had simply failed to consider the medical
    evidence. He relied upon the fact that the Guidance showed that medical
    evidence is relevant  in  deciding  whether  the  continuous  residence
    requirement is satisfied.

71. However, the fact is that there is nothing in the Guidance  that  shows
    that medical evidence is relevant in deciding  whether  the  continuous
    residence requirement is satisfied in cases where  the  period  between
    entry clearance being issued  and  the  date  of  arrival  exceeds  the
    maximum of maximum of 90 days stated in the Guidance.

72. In my judgement, it was not necessary for  the  respondent  to  say  in
    terms that the medical evidence did not assist the  applicant.  It  was
    self-evidently the case that the medical evidence  could  not  surmount
    the clear requirement in para 245AAA(a) for "residence" and the  90-day
    maximum imposed by the Secretary  of  State  in  the  exercise  of  her
    discretion outside the Rules for including a  period  of  non-residence
    between entry clearance being issued and the commencement of  residence
    in the calculation of the continuous residence requirement.

73. I have therefore decided that the Secretary of State  was  entitled  to
    refuse the application under the Rules and outside  the  Rules  in  the
    exercise of discretion, on simple basis  that  the  applicant  did  not
    arrive in the United Kingdom until 17 October 2010.  This  single  fact
    meant  both  that  she  could  not  satisfy  the  continuous  residence
    requirement under para 245AAA(a) and that she fell outside  the  90-day
    maximum for the exercise of discretion outside the Rules as  stated  in
    the Guidance.

74. Accordingly, I  agree  with  Mr  Malik  that  the  applicant  can  only
    challenge the refusal decision  on  the  basis  that  the  respondent's
    refusal to exercise her general discretion outwith the  Rules  and  the
    Guidance is unlawful, i.e. on the basis that no reasonable Secretary of
    State could have refused to exercise her general discretion outside the
    Rules and the Guidance and grant ILR.

75. In this regard, I have decided that, whilst the factors relied upon  at
    para 12 of the applicant's skeleton argument (para 36 above)  may  well
    be considered by many to be strong, it is impossible  to  say  that  no
    reasonable Secretary of State could have refused to grant  ILR  outwith
    the Rules and the Guidance given the following:

    i)   There was nothing before the respondent as  at  the  date  of  the
        refusal decision that showed that  the  applicant  had  planned  to
        travel to the United Kingdom prior to the end of the 90-day  period
        from the date that entry clearance was issued and that  her  travel
        was delayed because she sustained an injury  on  24  May  2010.  Mr
        Walsh asked me to read the application as  a  whole.  He  submitted
        that the contents of the letter dated 8 March 2015 from Dr Dehkordi
        (A16) made it clear that he was advancing the reasons given in  the
        letter to explain why the applicant was prevented  from  travelling
        to the United Kingdom. I agree with this  proposition  but  for  an
        important qualification, that it is  clear  that  Dr  Dehkordi  was
        advancing reasons why the applicant could not travel to the  United
        Kingdom in the period from 24 May 2010 until 17  October  2010.  He
        made no mention of the period prior to  24  May  2010  and  plainly
        restricted his comments, in terms, to the period from 24  May  2010
        to 17 October 2010.

    ii)  The letter from the applicant's employer, which is  said  to  have
        explained that her absence from the United Kingdom  in  the  period
        prior to 24 May 2010 was for work-related reasons, was not  in  the
        bundle and no request for an adjournment was  made  notwithstanding
        that I drew attention to the omission.

    iii) The period between 15 March 2010 and 17 October  2010  amounts  to
        216 days, i.e. 2.4 times the period  of  90-days  set  out  in  the
        Guidance as the maximum period of such non-residence  that  can  be
        included  in  the   calculation   of   the   continuous   residence
        requirement.

76. I have therefore concluded that there is no public  law  illegality  in
    the refusal decision.

77. Accordingly, I do not need to decide whether there was any  public  law
    illegality in the administrative review decision. Mr Walsh and Mr Malik
    agreed that, in the event that I concluded (as I have) that there is no
    public law illegality in the  refusal  decision,  the  claim  would  be
    dismissed.

77.  For all of the above reasons, this claim for judicial review  falls  to
be dismissed.

78. I will hear the parties on any application for permission to appeal  to
    the Court of Appeal, costs and any ancillary matters when the  judgment
    is handed down.

Order

79. I make an order that this judicial review application be dismissed.

[pic]


Signed                              Date: 27 October 2016
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

