

                            IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                 EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT GIVEN FOLLOWING HEARING

                                                                JR/7554/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                               27 March 2017


                                  The QUEEN
               (ON The application OF SUBENTHIRAN VELUNAYAGAM)
                                                                   Applicant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE smith


                               - - - - - - - -

Ms H Short, instructed by Gurney Harden Solicitors appeared on behalf of
the Applicant.

Mr J Anderson, instructed by the Government Legal Department appeared on
behalf of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -
                    ON AN APPLICATION FOR JUDICIAL REVIEW

                              APPROVED JUDGMENT
                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

    JUDGE smith: This is a challenge to the Secretary of  State's  decision
    dated 8 April 2016 refusing further submissions and rejecting them as a
    fresh claim.


 2. The chronology of this matter  is  as  follows.   The  Applicant  is  a
    national of Sri Lanka.  He arrived in the UK in March 2011 and  claimed
    asylum in June  2011  which  claim  was  refused  and  his  appeal  was
    dismissed in November 2011.   He  became  appeal  rights  exhausted  in
    December 2011.

 3.  In  June  2012,  he  made  further  submissions  which  were  refused.
    Permission to challenge that decision by way  of  judicial  review  was
    refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan.  Further submissions were again
    made in 2014 but those too were rejected and permission was refused  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor.

 4. In June 2014, further submissions were  made  on  the  basis  that  the
    Applicant's wife had been arrested in Sri Lanka  and  bailed  and  that
    there was an open warrant out for the Applicant's arrest.  That is  the
    essence of the Applicant's further submissions, the response  to  which
    is challenged in this judicial review.

 5. Permission was granted in an earlier judicial  review  challenging  the
    first response to those further submissions. The Respondent then agreed
    to reconsider the decision and that judicial review was settled on this
    basis.  The reconsideration led to the  decision  dated  8  April  2016
    which is  under  challenge  in  this  application.  That  decision  was
    maintained on 17 May 2016 in response to a pre-action protocol letter.

 6. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Jacobs in the  following
    terms:

         "The test I have to apply is whether there is  an  arguable  ground
         for judicial review having a realistic prospect of success.  I have
         given permission because I consider that the  grounds  advanced  on
         behalf of the applicant have a realistic  prospect  of  success  by
         arguing that the Secretary of State's consideration  is  inadequate
         to justify her consideration that this was  not  a  new  claim  for
         asylum."

 7. I turn then to the basis of the Applicant's submissions that he  is  at
    risk on return to Sri Lanka.  The Applicant is a Sri  Lankan  of  Tamil
    ethnicity.  So much is accepted.  He claims that he ran a  timber  mill
    in Sri Lanka located in a former LTTE area.  He claims that in 2007  he
    was detained by the Karuna group for one day and beaten.  He says  that
    the group detained him because he had assisted the LTTE by helping them
    cut wood.

 8. On appeal, the Applicant's claim was found to be not credible by  Judge
    Williams in November 2011 for reasons given  in  that  decision.   That
    decision would form the starting point for a Judge  hearing  any  later
    appeal (Devaseelan v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2002]
    UKIAT 000702).

 9. The Applicant in his further submissions relies on events which he says
    have occurred since 2011.  He claims that on 14 May 2013 his wife,  who
    has remained in Sri Lanka, was arrested and detained by the authorities
    and produced before the  Magistrates'  Court  for  offences  under  the
    Prevention of Terrorism Act, was accused of being  a  chief  fundraiser
    for the LTTE and, as a result  of  her  activities,  it  is  said,  the
    authorities have also issued a warrant for the Applicant's arrest dated
    4 December 2013.

10. The Applicant relied initially on a letter from an  Attorney  dated  27
    January 2013 but which must be assumed to be January  2014,  apparently
    confirming the documents said to exist in the Magistrates'  Court  that
    the Applicant's wife had been detained and bailed and that there is  an
    arrest warrant against the Applicant.

11. The evidence of that Attorney is supported by  a  letter  from  another
    Attorney and I will need to turn  to  that  later.   A  certificate  is
    provided attesting to qualifications in relation to the position of the
    first Attorney although not the second.  Court documents have also been
    produced.

12. The Applicant also relies on evidence in relation to his mental health.
     Although Ms Short referred me to that evidence in respect of one short
    point the Respondent's decision in respect of that further evidence and
    the further submissions made in relation to the Applicant's  sur  place
    activities are not the subject of this judicial review challenge and  I
    need say no more about them.

13. I turn then to consider the main evidence on which the Applicant relies
    in support of his further submissions.  That consists of a letter  from
    the Applicant's wife dated 10 May 2014 indicating  that  she  has  been
    arrested as false charges had been brought  against  her  for  previous
    LTTE involvement, court documents which appear on their face  to  refer
    to an investigation report dated 14 May 2013  against  the  Applicant's
    wife and the Applicant, a summons dated 14 May 2013 and an open warrant
    issued against the Applicant on 25 June 2013.   Rather  bizarrely,  the
    two latter documents appear to be  written  in  English  but  no  point
    appears to be taken in that regard by the Respondent.

14. The documents purport to be stamped by  the  Magistrates'  Court  on  4
    December 2013 which has led, it appears, to an  error  in  the  further
    submissions that this is the date of the arrest warrant.  That  is  not
    the case.  4 December 2013 is the date when two  lawyers  are  said  to
    have attended the Magistrates'  Court  to  inspect  the  documents  and
    obtain copies.  It is accepted by the Applicant that  forged  documents
    are prevalent in Sri Lanka.  That is  the  point  relied  upon  by  the
    Respondent for  rejecting  that  evidence  as  not  giving  rise  to  a
    realistic prospect of success on further appeal.

15. The Applicant  says  though  that  the  same  cannot  be  said  of  the
    Attorneys'  letters.   The  Applicant  says  that,   applying   anxious
    scrutiny, the Respondent was not entitled to give no  or  very  limited
    weight to those  letters,  particularly  the  letter  from  the  second
    Attorney which  was  relied  upon  in  the  further  submissions  under
    consideration.  I will deal with the substance of those  documents  and
    the Respondent's response to them later in this judgment.

16. As I have indicated, the proper starting  point  for  the  Respondent's
    consideration is the  findings  of  the  previous  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  Although the Applicant says that  the  events  leading  to  the
    further  material  now  produced  postdate  the  appeal  decision   and
    therefore must be considered in their own right, Ms Short accepts that,
    in order to succeed, the  Applicant  must  also  cross  the  hurdle  of
    showing that the material undermines the adverse  credibility  findings
    made previously as those findings would be the starting  point  in  any
    further appeal.

17. Although it is true that the events now relied upon postdate the appeal
    decision, it is also the case that they are founded on the core of  the
    Applicant's previous claim which was rejected  as  not  credible.   The
    Applicant says that  the  events  have  as  their  starting  point  his
    ownership of the timber mill, which was used by the LTTE and which  led
    to interest from the Karuna group. That he says is at the heart of  his
    previous problems.  His wife says that lies at the heart  of  what  has
    happened to her and by extension to the Applicant since  then.   It  is
    therefore necessary to look at what the First-tier Tribunal Judge found
    in relation to that issue.

18. The first reason given for  disbelieving  the  Applicant  was  that  he
    delayed for several months in claiming asylum.  He arrived  here  as  a
    student and he says he in fact fled because of the risk to him  but  he
    did not claim asylum immediately when he arrived.  I accept Ms  Short's
    submission, however, that  this  could  not  be  determinative  of  his
    credibility.  It does, however, remain relevant.

19. The Applicant left Sri Lanka on his own passport.  Ms  Short  developed
    her submissions on this point beyond what is argued in the grounds  but
    Mr Anderson was able to deal with those submissions and I take no point
    about the failure to plead that point more fully.  Ms Short relies upon
    evidence  before  the  Tribunal  in  GJ  and  others  (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC)("GJ") which is referred
    to at [146] of that determination,  which,  she  says,  shows  and  was
    accepted as showing that a person  can  leave  Sri  Lanka  on  his  own
    passport by paying a bribe.

20. I do not need to deal with the question whether the Tribunal's  finding
    on that issue at [275] of GJ amounts to a complete acceptance  of  that
    evidence for two reasons.  First, although I do  not  have  the  asylum
    interview before me there is nothing in the material  to  suggest  that
    the Applicant said that he had paid a bribe to  leave  Sri  Lanka.   He
    left Sri Lanka on a student visa.  He does not claim he was assisted in
    doing so by an agent who bribed an official to procure his exit.

21. Secondly and more importantly, the  finding  is  not  simply  that  the
    Applicant left on his own passport but that he procured  that  passport
    from the Sri Lankan authorities in his own identity at a time  when  he
    claims that those same authorities had an adverse interest in him.

22. Thirdly, in the previous appeal, the Judge found that the Applicant was
    in fact always a genuine student and never owned a mill at  all.   That
    was fatal to the Applicant's appeal but is also a significant  obstacle
    to the Applicant's further submissions because the mill  ownership  was
    and  remains  central  to  his  claim  and  essential  to  his  further
    submissions.

23. The Judge dealt with this aspect of the case at  [37]  onwards  of  the
    appeal decision as follows:

         "37. It is not reasonably likely that the appellant had  worked  in
                the timber industry and in 2007 the  Koruna  group  detained
                him, as they were aware that he had been  helping  the  LTTE
                since 2003.  I  reach  that  conclusion  for  the  following
                reasons.

         38.  Firstly, in his screening interview, the appellant  was  asked
                (2.11, respondent's bundle page 9), 'have you applied for or
                been issued a visa for any other country before?'  To  which
                the appellant replied, 'Yes, Qatar, in 2006.  I was  working
                there for 3 years'.

         39.  The fact that the appellant, by his own admission, remained in
                Qatar until 2009 until he was arrested (2.12)  and  sent  to
                prison for 4 months undermines  his  whole  claim  of  being
                involved in the timber industry.

         40.  Secondly, the chronology of the appellant having obtained  his
                O-levels in 2005 also sits  well  with  then  travelling  to
                Qatar in 2006 before returning after 3 years of work  and  4
                months of prison.

         41.  Thirdly, the appellant has produced general licences and other
                documentation  (listed  at  page  72  appellant's   bundle).
                However, the weight that I can  attach  these  documents  is
                lessened after taking into account the fact that  Sri  Lanka
                is a corrupt country and where such official  documents  can
                easily be obtained by bribery."

    There is reference then to the U.S. State Department  Report  2010  and
    the Judge continues.

         "42. Moreover, the general licences contain inconsistencies,  which
                undermined  the  weight  that  I   can   attach   to   them.
                Specifically, licence 1278 (appellant's bundle 18) and  1279
                (appellant's bundle page 20) and  1277  (appellant's  bundle
                page 22) and 1276 (appellant's bundle page 24)  all  contain
                exactly the same information, are all for 2009, and yet  the
                appellant claims involvement with only 2 mills (he owned one
                mill  and  had  the  licence  for  one  other  at  different
                locations).

         43.  Fourthly, the appellant's account of his difficulties  in  Sri
                Lanka is riddled with inconsistencies confusion [sic], which
                undermines  the  weight  that  I   could   attach   to   it.
                Specifically.  Firstly, in  interview  he  initially  stated
                that his problems with the Koruna group/the 4 people  within
                the Koruna group started in 2010.  However,  this  does  not
                sit well with the fact that the appellant described how  (in
                oral evidence) that he had been, 'hit on the  head'  and  in
                interview stated that he was  beaten  and  detained  by  the
                Koruna group/the 4 people  within  the  Koruna  group.   The
                appellant's attempt to explain this inconsistency - that  it
                was only in 2010 that there was a danger to  his  life  with
                the Koruna group does not sit well  with  being  beaten  and
                incarcerated by the Koruna  group  in  2007.   Secondly,  in
                interview (AIR Q39) he stated that his first arrest  was  in
                July 2010 and yet in oral evidence he  stated  that  he  was
                first  arrested  in  July/August  2007.   Thirdly,  in  oral
                evidence the appellant could not  recall  the  date  of  his
                supposed second arrest by  the  police  in  2009,  and  then
                denied  being  arrested  at  all  in  2010.   Fourthly,  the
                appellant's account as to the  order  in  which  either  the
                Koruna group or the police visited him (a  matter  which  he
                would be expected he would have been  able  to  recall)  was
                very confused.  The appellant claims that  the  interviewing
                officer was aggressive  and  prevented  him  from  answering
                questions in a clear and coherent manner.  However, this  is
                not reasonably likely to be true since the appellant made no
                complaint in relation to the conduct of the interview at the
                time and indeed confirmed that  he  understood  all  of  the
                questions put to him."

24. In this regard, although Ms Short sought to rely in her submissions  on
    what is said  by  the  doctors  who  have  treated  the  Applicant  for
    psychosis about the Applicant's lack of concentration I do  not  accept
    that this can fundamentally undermine the findings made  by  the  Judge
    unless there is cogent evidence  to  the  contrary  for  the  following
    reasons.

25. First, as Mr Anderson pointed out, the report  only  notes  in  passing
    that the Applicant  lacks  concentration  and  does  not  say  that  in
    consequence the Applicant is  unable  to  give  evidence  or  may  give
    evidence which is inconsistent.

26. Second, as Mr Anderson also points out, Judge Jordan refused permission
    in relation to the challenge to  the  Respondent's  decision  rejecting
    further submissions made based on the medical evidence in 2013.

27. Third, whilst medical evidence might be capable of undermining findings
    made based on the inconsistencies in the Applicant's own account, those
    are limited to what is said at [40] of the appeal decision.

28. With that rather lengthy background I turn to deal with  the  substance
    of the further submissions made dated June 2014 so far as those  relate
    to the challenge before me and the underlying  documents.   So  far  as
    relevant those read as follows:

         "4.  The significance of this new evidence is that the Applicant is
             of continuing adverse  interest  to  the  authorities  in  Sri
             Lanka.   The  Applicant's  wife  Mrs  [JS]  was  arrested  and
             detained by  the  authorities  and  was  produced  before  the
             Batticoloa Magistrates' Court on  14  May  2013  for  offences
             under the PTA, in that she has been accused of being  involved
             as a Chief fund raiser for  the  LTTE  and  as  a  result  the
             authorities have issued an arrest warrant for  the  Applicant.
             The  Applicant  has  previously  submitted  a  copy   of   the
             information submitted to a Magistrate, demonstrating  why  the
             Applicant's wife was produced in court and as to why an arrest
             warrant has been issued against the Applicant.   We  have  now
             obtained verification of the Appellant's wife's  detention  in
             Sri Lanka.

         5.   The Applicant has attached a copy of that arrest  warrant  and
             it is dated  4th  December  2013  and  demonstrates  that  the
             Applicant is wanted under the PTA and  the  Applicant  further
             attaches the court's  Record  of  Proceedings  concerning  the
             issuance of that arrest  warrant.   Furthermore  we  attach  a
             witness statement from the  Appellant's  wife  clarifying  the
             Appellant's account and her arrest.

         6.   The Applicant submits that this fresh  new  evidence  arguably
             impugns the decision of the IJ and  the  previous  refusal  of
             asylum by the Respondent.  The  Applicant  and  his  wife  are
             considered to be a  threat  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities'
             concept of a unitary state and the Applicant will be  arrested
             and detained on his return  to  Sri  Lanka.   The  Applicant's
             Article 3 representations therefore also admit of a  realistic
             prospect of success when  examined  by  an  Immigration  Judge
             today."

29. Mr Anderson made a point about minor inconsistencies in  the  substance
    of the submissions in the bundle and those before  the  Respondent  but
    accepts that the Respondent is bound to consider the  totality  of  the
    evidence and therefore this makes little difference.

30. I have already referred to what the court documents show.  The focus of
    the submissions though is to the Attorneys' letters.  The letter relied
    upon in these submissions is dated 29 April 2014 and is  written  by  a
    Mrs Arulvani Sutharsan, who was said to be an Attorney in Batticoloa.

31. Accompanying this is a certificate showing that a Mr T Sivanathan is an
    Attorney-at-law.  No such certificate is produced in  relation  to  Mrs
    Sutharsan.  The significance of  the  certificate  in  relation  to  Mr
    Sivanathan is that he too wrote a letter dated 27 January 2013 which is
    said to be 27 January 2014 in support of earlier submissions to which I
    have already referred.  As I have already said, permission was  refused
    in relation to the decision on those further submissions.

32. I note though that the letters from Mr Sivanathan and Mrs Sutharsan are
    in identical terms as to content.  Both  say  that  they  attended  the
    Magistrates' Court on  4  December  2013  and  inspected  the  register
    obtaining precisely the same  documents.   Neither  mentions  that  the
    other was in attendance at the same time or that  they  had  both  been
    instructed to inspect the register together.  The  further  submissions
    do not deal at all with the fact  that  two  lawyers  were  instructed.
    Indeed, the further submissions under consideration  in  this  decision
    only refer to Mrs Sutharsan's letter and no certificate is produced for
    her.

33. The fact of two letters in precisely the same terms is  an  unexplained
    oddity in the evidence.  I accept that this is not a point on which the
    Respondent has determined the further submissions but it is, to say the
    least, odd and something which I take into consideration when giving my
    own anxious scrutiny to the Respondent's decision as to reliability  of
    the documents relied upon.

34. Turning then to how the Respondent deals with these  documents,  having
    recounted the previous judge's adverse findings, she says this:

         "Further to this you have provided a certified copy of your  wife's
         court record obtained on your behalf  by  Mrs  Arulvani  Sutharsan,
         Attorney-at-Law, which states that case number B/972/2013 was filed
         against you and your wife by the OIC, CSU Division Batticaloa under
         the Prevention of Terrorism Act.  The case record states that  your
         wife, [JS], was arrested on 14 May 2013 and  remanded  for  further
         investigation until 28 May 2013 when she was released on bail..."

    Details are then given of bail and the condition  that  she  report  to
    Batticaloa police station once a month.

         "...The case record also states that due to  you  having  absconded
         and failing to surrender for police investigation  that  a  warrant
         was issued against you on 28 May 2013.  On 25 June an open  warrant
         was issued against you and is still live.

         Consideration has been given to the documents  you  have  submitted
         and their contents, however, as they have  not  been  independently
         corroborated they add no substantial weight to your claim.   It  is
         noted that you have failed to provide any corroborating information
         to validate the identity of the claimed authors,  consequently  the
         documents could have been produced by anyone other than the claimed
         sources.

         It is further noted from the appeal determination promulgated on 29
         November 2011 that the IJ concluded that  you  were  a  student  as
         opposed to a mill owner (paragraph 35 refers) and that it  was  not
         reasonably likely that  you  had  worked  in  the  timber  industry
         (paragraph 37 refers).  In light  of  these  findings  your  wife's
         purported account of her dispute with members of the  Karuna  group
         whom she alleges made false  claims  against  her  leading  to  her
         arrest, after she failed to transfer ownership of  the  family  saw
         mill over to  them,  is  not  accepted.   No  weight  is  therefore
         attached to your wife's written statement or to  the  court  record
         obtained on your behalf by Mrs Arulvani Sutharsan, Attorney-at-Law,
         and their translations."

35. Having then referred to the background information in relation  to  the
    ease of obtaining false documents the Respondent concludes as follows:

         "Given the relative  ease  with  which  official  legal  and  court
         documents can be produced on request as outlined in  the  objective
         country information, coupled with the fact  the  letters  you  have
         provided purporting to be  from  your  wife,  [JS],  and  from  Mrs
         Arulvani  Sutharsan,  a  Sri  Lankan  Attorney-at-Law,  cannot   be
         validated as genuine, their presence does not add  any  substantial
         weight to your claim, particularly when taken into account with the
         findings of the Immigration Judge as noted above."

36. The Applicant accepts that lawyers' letters do not create a  rebuttable
    presumption having regard to what is said by the Court of Appeal in  PJ
    (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 1011.  Ms Short's submissions were confined to an argument that  it
    was not open to the Secretary of State to reject the letters as holding
    no weight because  they  are  lawyer  to  lawyer  correspondence.   She
    directed my attention to what is said by the Court of Appeal at [41] of
    PJ (Sri Lanka) as follows:

         "...Whilst it is undoubtedly the  case  that  false  documents  are
         widely available in Sri Lanka, once it  was  established  that  the
         documents in  question  originated  from  a  Sri  Lankan  court,  a
         sufficient justification was required for the conclusion  that  the
         appellant does not have a well-founded fear of persecution..."

37. Mr Anderson in response points to what the court says at [29] that  the
    documents should not be viewed in isolation and that evidence needs  to
    be considered in its  entirety.   He  also  noted  that  the  Court  of
    Appeal's judgment is concerned with an initial statutory appeal and not
    a fresh claims case where the Respondent  is  entitled  to  and  indeed
    obliged to take into account previous material.

38. The case law in relation to fresh claims is well-trodden and I  do  not
    need to rehearse it.  Paragraph 353 of the Immigration  Rules  provides
    as follows:

         "353.    When a human rights or protection claim has  been  refused
                or withdrawn or treated as withdrawn under paragraph 333C of
                these Rules and any appeal relating  to  that  claim  is  no
                longer pending, the decision maker will consider any further
                submissions and, if rejected, will  then  determine  whether
                they amount to a fresh claim.  The submissions  will  amount
                to a fresh claim if they are  significantly  different  from
                the material  that  has  previously  been  considered.   The
                submissions will only  be  significantly  different  if  the
                content:

                (a)    had not already been considered; and

                (b)     taken  together  with  the   previously   considered
                      material, created a realistic  prospect  of  success,
                      notwithstanding its rejection.

                This paragraph does not apply to claims made overseas."

39. The first issue for me is whether the Respondent has taken into account
    relevant material and ignored material which is not relevant.  That  is
    not the subject of any complaint by the Applicant.  The other issue  is
    whether the decision is unreasonable. As the case law makes clear, this
    is to be assessed on a Wednesbury basis having regard also to the  fact
    that this is a protection claim and that the  Respondent  is  bound  to
    accord the further submissions anxious scrutiny.

40.  As  is  observed  in  the  case  law,  the  question  whether  further
    submissions meet the test is a modest  threshold.   In  this  case  the
    Respondent did not give the lawyer's letter and the court documents  no
    weight.  Her reasoning  is  that  she  could  not  give  that  evidence
    substantial weight when taken together with  the  previous  Immigration
    Judge's findings.

41. As I observed at the outset, one of  the  main  difficulties  for  this
    Applicant is that he has been found not credible  in  relation  to  the
    core of his claim and whilst events now relied upon postdate that claim
    they still rely on fundamentally the same  core.   The  Respondent  was
    entitled to rely on those initial findings.  The further material  does
    nothing to undermine those findings.

42. For those  reasons,  looking  at  the  evidence  as  a  whole,  as  the
    Respondent was entitled and indeed obliged to do,  the  Respondent  was
    entitled to find that the submissions did not give rise to a  realistic
    prospect of success.  That is so notwithstanding the  reliance  on  the
    lawyer's  letter.   As  I  have  already  observed,  there   are   some
    difficulties with the content of the letters, particularly  given  that
    two lawyers who apparently practise at different addresses  have  given
    the precise same account and that this is not explained in the  further
    submissions.

43. However, even without those concerns, it is  consistent  with  PJ  (Sri
    Lanka) for the Respondent to consider that evidence in the  context  of
    the totality of the evidence.  She was required to look at  the  matter
    holistically.  Having done so, she was entitled to reach the conclusion
    she did that the further submissions and material relied upon  did  not
    give rise to a realistic prospect of success.

44. For those reasons, I dismiss this application for judicial review.

Costs

Mr Anderson:

45. MADAM, THERE IS AN APPLICATION FOR COSTS ON THE PART OF  THE  SECRETARY
    OF STATE.

JUDGE SMITH:

46. DO I HAVE A SCHEDULE?

Mr Anderson:

47. YOU DON'T HAVE A SCHEDULE,  NO.   A  SCHEDULE  HAS  BEEN  PRODUCED  AND
    PROVIDED TO ME BUT -

JUDGE SMITH:

48. I DARESAY MS SHORT HASN'T HAD THE OPPORTUNITY TO DEAL  WITH  THAT,  HAS
    SHE?

Mr Anderson:

49. IT HASN'T YET BEEN PROVIDED TO MS SHORT, NO.

Ms Short:

50. NO.  I ALSO NOTE THE ORDER OF UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACOBS AT  D3  WHERE
    HE RESERVED COSTS BUT SAID:

         "For the benefit of the judge of hears" -  I  presume  that's  "who
         hears" - this application I would disallow in  their  entirety  the
         costs claimed for the acknowledgement of service  and  the  summary
         grounds of defence.  The Secretary of State's so-called response at
         paragraph 19 onwards bears no resemblance to the case put on behalf
         of the applicant."





JUDGE SMITH:

51. I THINK THE EASIEST THING TO DO IN LIGHT OF THE FACT THAT YOU HAVE  NOT
    HAD THE TIME TO DEAL WITH THE SCHEDULE AND BECAUSE  OF  THAT  POINT  IS
    THAT I'M GOING TO MAKE AN ORDER THAT THE APPLICANT PAY THE RESPONDENT'S
    COSTS ON THE STANDARD BASIS TO BE ASSESSED IF NOT AGREED, AND  YOU  CAN
    HAVE AN ARGUMENT THERE ABOUT WHETHER IT IS REASONABLE FOR THE SECRETARY
    OF STATE TO RECOVER THE COSTS OF THE AOS.

Ms Short:

52. WELL.

JUDGE SMITH:

53. I AM NOT BOUND BY WHAT JUDGE JACOBS SAYS.   YOU  CAN  ARGUE  THE  POINT
    BASED ON WHAT IS SAID BY JUDGE JACOBS, CERTAINLY, BUT THE  QUESTION  OF
    WHETHER THE RECOVERY OF THE COSTS IS REASONABLE CAN BE  DEALT  WITH  IN
    THE COURSE OF ASSESSMENT, IT SEEMS TO ME.

Ms Short:

54. WELL, MADAM, PLAINLY IT'S YOUR DECISION.

JUDGE SMITH:

55. YES.

Ms Short:

56. BUT I ALSO DO NOTE THAT THE DETAILED GROUNDS OF DEFENCE WERE SERVED TWO
    MONTHS LATE AS WELL.

JUDGE SMITH:

57. I DON'T THINK THIS CASE HAS BEEN A SHINING  EXAMPLE  OF  ANYBODY  DOING
    ANYTHING PARTICULARLY TIMEOUSLY.  I ONLY RECEIVED THE BUNDLE ON FRIDAY.
     I AM NOT GOING TO DISALLOW ANY ENTITLEMENT TO COSTS BASED ON DELAY BUT
    THOSE ARE MATTERS THAT YOUR SOLICITORS CAN RAISE WHEN DEALING WITH  THE
    REASONABLENESS OF THE COSTS WHICH ARE CLAIMED.   I  THEREFORE  MAKE  AN
    ORDER THAT THE APPLICANT PAY THE RESPONDENT'S COSTS  OF  THIS  JUDICIAL
    REVIEW.  THE REASONABLENESS OF THOSE COSTS IS A  MATTER  WHICH  CAN  BE
    DEALT WITH IF NECESSARY BY WAY OF A DETAILED ASSESSMENT.

Application for Permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal

JUDGE SMITH:

58. MS SHORT, DO YOU MAKE AN APPLICATION FOR PERMISSION TO APPEAL?

Ms Short:

59. UM -

JUDGE SMITH:

60. I fear I have to deal with this.

Ms Short:

61. YOU DO, MADAM.  I DON'T HAVE INSTRUCTIONS AT THIS STAGE.   MAY  I  SEEK
    INSTRUCTIONS, MADAM?  OR -

JUDGE SMITH:

62. I THINK THE EASIEST THING IF YOU DON'T  HAVE  INSTRUCTIONS  BEARING  IN
    MIND THAT I AM OBLIGED TO DEAL WITH PERMISSION TO APPEAL WHEN GIVING MY
    DECISION IS THAT I WILL REFUSE PERMISSION TO APPEAL AND I WILL LEAVE IT
    TO YOU TO TAKE IT TO THE COURT OF APPEAL.

Ms Short:

63. I'M GRATEFUL.~~~0~~~~
