








                                                                JR/7516/2016


                               Upper Tribunal
                       Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                       Judicial Review Decision Notice







           The Queen on the application of Thuraisingam Kirushanth
                                                                   Applicant
                                      v


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



                     Before Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson




            Application for judicial review: substantive decision

Having considered  all  documents  lodged  and  having  heard  the  parties'
respective representatives, Ms A Walker, of  Counsel,  instructed  by  Theva
Solicitors, on behalf  of  the  Applicant  and  Ms  R  Murray,  of  Counsel,
instructed by the Government Legal Department, on behalf of the  Respondent,
at a hearing at Field House, London on 14 February 2017.

      Decision: the application for judicial review is refused

Reasons:

   1. On 7 July 2016, the applicant issued his challenge by way of  judicial
      review to the respondent's decision to reject further submissions made
      on the 29 June 2016 as not amounting to a fresh claim. The date of the
      impugned decision is 6 April 2016.
   2. The claim was out of time but was admitted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
      Smith in her order sealed on the 29 September 2016 in which permission
      to bring judicial review was granted.
   3. The grant of permission is in the following terms:


           I grant permission on the basis that it  is  arguable  that  the
           respondent has failed to take into account when considering  the
           further submissions that part of the applicant's brothers  claim
           for asylum was based on the Sri Lankan authorities  interest  in
           the activities of the applicant. The respondent  was  unarguably
           entitled to point out that the acceptance of the credibility  of
           the applicant's brother did not means that the  applicant  would
           be found credible. However, it was arguably incumbent on her  to
           say what she made of the brothers  claim  that  the  authorities
           remained  interested  (in  2013)  in  the  activities   of   the
           applicant. Although  the  brothers  witness  statement  was  not
           before the respondent at the date of decision, it is  said  that
           this was sent to the respondent  with  the  pre-action  protocol
           letter but it is not considered. In any event, the  point  about
           the interest in the applicant arises also on  the  face  of  the
           applicant's own witness statement coupled with the determination
           in the brother's appeal.


   4. Judge Smith noted a second ground based on the medical report provided
      which, although expressing herself to be "less  impressed"  with  this
      challenge, granted permission on both grounds.
   5. The applicant is a citizen of Sri Lanka  born  on  14  July  1984  who
      entered the United Kingdom on 19 May 2008. A claim for asylum made  on
      20 May 2008 was refused on 2  October  2009.  The  applicant's  appeal
      against the refusal was dismissed on 30 November  2009  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Hamilton and  permission  to  appeal  refused  by  then
      Senior Immigration Judge P Lane on 22  December  2009.  The  applicant
      became appeal rights exhausted on 22 June 2010.
   6. Judge Hamilton summarised the applicants claim in the following terms:


           3.    ...The  appellant  states  that  as  a  schoolboy  he  was
                 detained for two days in 2000 as a result of being  friends
                 with the brother-in-law of Mr Pathmanathan an  LTTE  member
                 (interview page 2). The appellant was detained at  Kotahena
                 police station and released  without  conditions  when  his
                 headmaster  telephoned.  The  appellant  stated   that   on
                 31.01.07 he was arrested for  a  second  time  because  the
                 police were searching for Pathmanathan  and  the  appellant
                 had remained at the same address (interview  page  3).  The
                 appellant was detained for three days his identity card and
                 photograph and fingerprints  taken.  The  police  suspected
                 that the appellant had a connection to Mr Pathmanathan  and
                 put a red mark on the police report (page 5 interview). The
                 appellant was released without charge or conditions but was
                 asked to inform the police if  he  came  to  know  anything
                 about Mr Pathmanathan (page 5 interview). The appellant was
                 arrested for a third time on 27.04.08.  The  appellant  was
                 stopped at a checkpoint and asked for his identity card and
                 police report. The officer saw the red mark on the document
                 and the appellant was taken to Peuyanthala police  station.
                 The  appellant  was  tortured,  beaten   and   burnt   with
                 cigarettes and hit with a batten (page  7  interview).  The
                 appellant was asked if he had a connection to a bomb  blast
                 in Pelliyanthawa and whether he had come to  plant  another
                 bomb. The appellant's fingerprints were taken and when they
                 were compared with the appellant's previous record  he  was
                 again asked about  Pathmanathan  (page  7  interview).  The
                 appellant was beaten for three days and detained  for  nine
                 days. The appellant's mother contacted an EPDP  person  and
                 paid for  the  appellant  to  be  taken  out  of  detention
                 disguised in a police uniform. The appellant was driven  to
                 Negombo and left  at  a  house  there.  The  appellant  was
                 advised by the police not  to  stay  in  the  country.  The
                 appellant's mother's friend Prasana told the appellant that
                 his mother had asked for the appellant to be  taken  abroad
                 (page 8 interview). The appellant states that  he  was  not
                 taken to court regarding any arrests but  might  have  been
                 taken on the third  arrest  had  he  not  escaped  (page  9
                 interview). The appellant stayed in Negombo for 12 days  at
                 the  agent's  house.  The  appellant  had  no  difficulties
                 leaving  Sri  Lanka  (page  11  interview)  using  a  false
                 passport that the agent provided. The  appellant  travelled
                 to Doha where he remained for two days or four days  before
                 flying to the United Kingdom. Once in  the  United  Kingdom
                 the appellant was  taken  to  his  aunt's  house  (page  12
                 interview). The appellant  telephoned  his  mother  in  Sri
                 Lanka and was told by her that he must not telephone as the
                 army and the police had visited the house asking after  him
                 (page 13 appellant bundle). The appellant's mother told the
                 authorities that the appellant had travelled to the  United
                 Kingdom. They told the appellant's mother that they  wanted
                 proof that the appellant was in the United Kingdom and that
                 should he return he should be  brought  to  them  (page  13
                 interview).  The  appellant's  mother  told  him  that  the
                 authorities have his photograph and are asking people about
                 him. The appellant states that if he returns to  Sri  Lanka
                 the army and the police will arrest and shoot him (Page 154
                 interview).   Having  received  the  refusal   letter   the
                 appellant explained that the  interpreter  made  a  mistake
                 when he wrote that the appellant had been in Colombo rather
                 than Negombo and that he had been mistaken when  he  stated
                 that he had been in Doha for only two days rather than four
                 (page 3 appellant bundle).


   7. Having recorded the nature of the evidence and having reminded himself
      of the issues Judge Hamilton sets out his findings at [9  -  20].  The
      Judge did not find the applicant to  be  credible.  Relevant  findings
      include:


    . "I do not believe that the appellant has been truthful  regarding  his
      history or his reasons for  travelling  to  the  United  Kingdom.  The
      appellant's evidence regarding events in Sri Lanka  was  inconsistent,
      implausible and lacking in credibility. I  do  not  believe  that  the
      appellant was detained, tortured or  that  he  is  wanted  or  of  any
      interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka" [9].
    . In relation to evidence given concerning the  appellant's  age:  "even
      taking into account that the appellant was no  doubt  feeling  nervous
      whilst giving evidence, the appellant's attempt to explain why he  had
      stated that he was 10 or 12 did not  cause  me  to  believe  that  the
      appellant had simply made a mistake rather I was left with the  strong
      impression that the appellant was not telling the truth..... I do  not
      believe that the appellant was arrested in 2000 and detained  for  two
      days or one day or at all" [10].
    . In relation  to  the  claim  by  the  appellant  that  two  apparently
      conflicting aspects of  his  case,  on  two  separate  occasions,  was
      explained by interpreter error:  "that  the  appellant  should  be  so
      unfortunate as to  be  misrepresented  by  two  separate  interpreters
      lacked credibility. That the appellant gave inconsistent dates for the
      second detention that he seeks to rely on caused me to  conclude  that
      the appellant was not telling the truth. I do  not  believe  that  the
      appellant was detained on 31.01.07 or in August 2006 or at all" [11].
    . In relation to the medical report dated 12.11.09 prepared by a Dr S  E
      Josse, in which there is reference to the appellant having stated that
      he was 'kicked punched, beaten with wooden planks and suspended upside
      down and beaten.  On  two  or  three  occasions,  he  was  burnt  with
      cigarettes over both arms (paragraph 4 report),  and  the  appellant's
      own evidence when he was describing what happened to  him  and  during
      which the appellant did not mention being suspended upside down in his
      interview as he claims he was not asked detailed questions  about  the
      torture, the Judge finds: "that the appellant relied  on  inconsistent
      evidence regarding the torture he states that he endured  damages  his
      credibility" [13].
    . In relation to the appellant's claim that he escaped wearing a  police
      uniform after three days of torture and six days being kept in a  cell
      alone, the Judge finds such account to be "implausible" and  that  for
      the reasons given in [14] the Judge finds "I do not believe  that  the
      appellant was arrested or detained or beaten or that he  was  lawfully
      released from detention by a corrupt police officer or guard."
    . At [15] the Judge makes a finding to which reference was  made  during
      the course of the oral hearing and which shall therefore be set out in
      full:


                       "The appellant provides photographs of the  cigarette
                       burns on his arms and a mark on  his  leg.  Dr  Josse
                       confirmed  that  the  appellant's  burns  are  highly
                       characteristic  of  cigarette  burns  but  makes   no
                       comment as to age of the injuries or of how the burns
                       could have been inflicted. The appellant directed the
                       doctor to no other mark on his body  attributable  to
                       the three days of torture  he  relies  on.  That  the
                       appellant sustained three  days  of  beating  without
                       incurring any mark or scar other than cigarette burns
                       was implausible. That  the  appellant  had  cigarette
                       burns on his arms did not cause me to  conclude  that
                       the  burns  were  inflicted   by   the   Sri   Lankan
                       authorities during a three-day period of  torture  as
                       claimed by the appellant."


    . At [16] the Judge finds "that this appellant who has never engaged  in
      unlawful activities or been charged with any offence would be of  such
      interest to the authorities lacks credibility.  Had  the  police  been
      interested in the appellant to the extent that the appellant describes
      I would have expected the appellant to have been recognised travelling
      to the airport or at the airport as he left Sri Lanka.  The  appellant
      confirmed at interview: 'no I did not have any problems  leaving  even
      at the airport I didn't have any problems'."
    . At [17] the Judge sets out his overall conclusions  in  the  following
      terms: "having  considered  all  the  evidence  relied  upon  by  this
      appellant I have concluded that his claim is entirely fabricated. I do
      not believe that the appellant was detained, questioned and beaten  by
      the police or any authorities in Sri Lanka as he claims or at  all  or
      that he is wanted or sought after by the authorities in Sri  Lanka.  I
      do not believe that the appellant genuinely believes that he would  be
      in any danger on his return to Sri Lanka."


   8. This was the extent of the evidence available to the decision maker in
      relation to the proceedings arising from  the  applicants  own  asylum
      claim.
   9. What was also available to the decision maker is a second judgment  of
      the  First-tier  Tribunal  written  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Griffith
      following a hearing at Taylor House on 18 December 2014. The appellant
      on that occasion was the applicant's brother.
  10. Judge Griffith noted that that appellant before him  based  his  claim
      upon an imputed political opinion as a  supporter  of  the  LTTE  [5].
      Judge Griffith was  told  that  the  appellant  before  him,  who  was
      studying in the United Kingdom, returned to Sri Lanka on 2 May 2013 as
      his father had fallen ill. He passed through the airport and into  Sri
      Lanka without difficulty although when he went to report that a number
      of items had been lost in a bag that he  left  in  a  'three-wheeler',
      that appellant claimed he was  detained  overnight  and  subjected  to
      interrogation about whether he had ever taken part  in  demonstrations
      and protests in London against the government.  It  was  claimed  that
      appellant had been shown photographs of demonstrations and asked if he
      could identify anyone and if he was one of  the  people  photographed.
      That appellant was interrogated by the CID about what he was doing  in
      London, why he had returned to Sri Lanka and  if  he  knew  of  anyone
      collecting funds for the LTTE in London or organising  demonstrations.
      That appellant stated he  was  ill-treated  whilst  in  detention.  At
      paragraph 14 of his decision Judge Griffith writes:


           "The pattern of interrogation continued and he  was  accused  of
           being  an  LTTE  member,   collecting   funds   and   organising
           demonstrations. He admitted that he  trained  briefly  with  the
           LTTE in 2006 but had never joined. He disclosed that  he  had  a
           brother and sister in the UK and his interrogators  accused  his
           brother of having  fled  to  the  UK  after  being  involved  in
           planting bombs. After further questioning and ill-treatment  the
           appellant signed a document written in Sinhalese and was told he
           would be transferred to another detention camp."


  11. At [38] Judge Griffith finds "for the reasons set out below and  based
      on the appellant's own evidence, medical evidence and  expert  country
      evidence, I am prepared to find that his account is credible.
  12. This information was before  the  decision  maker  together  with  the
      applicant's witness statement dated 10 June 2015 and a medical  report
      dated 15 June 2015.
  13. The basis of the further submissions is a claim that the applicant  in
      this case will be at risk of being subjected  to  persecution  on  his
      return to Sri Lanka  due  to  his  political  opinion.  The  applicant
      claimed that when his brother returned to Sri Lanka  in  2013  he  was
      detained and questioned about the applicant's activities which it  was
      submitted demonstrated that the applicant  was  of  continued  adverse
      interest to the Sri Lankan authorities and, as such,  if  returned  to
      Sri Lanka he will be arrested, detained, and persecuted. It  was  also
      argued that the applicant is entitled  to  qualify  for  discretionary
      relief on the basis of his Article 8 family and private life and  that
      removing him to Sri Lanka will breach Articles 3 and 8 on the  grounds
      of his health issues, with particular regard to his  claim  to  suffer
      mental health issues as outlined in the medical report.
  14. The witness statement of the applicant's brother, used in  his  asylum
      claim, was not before the decision maker and was not made available to
      the respondent until receipt of the pre-action protocol letter. It  is
      accepted that this is post decision evidence although it was suggested
      on the applicant's behalf that the core aspects of that statement  are
      set out in the determination of Judge Griffiths which was  before  the
      decision maker, in any event.
  15. It is not disputed that what needs to be considered in a challenge  to
      a refusal to treat further  submissions  as  a  fresh  claim  are  two
      elements the first of which is whether the applicant has  demonstrated
      that arguably the Secretary of State did not undertake the obligations
      imposed upon her under the Rules, as encapsulated in the  judgment  of
      Buxton LJ in WM (DRC) v The Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2006] EWCA Civ 1495, lawfully. The second element is whether there is
      a realistic prospect of a  First-tier  Judge,  applying  the  rule  of
      anxious scrutiny, thinking the applicant will be  exposed  to  a  real
      risk of harm or persecution on return or that there will be  a  breach
      of a protected right under ECHR or an unlawful  decision  contrary  to
      the Immigration Rules.
  16. In this case the respondent  arguably  did  consider  the  information
      provided in support of the claim with the degree of  anxious  scrutiny
      required as evidenced by a  reading  of  the  decision  letter,  which
      refers to the earlier asylum claim and the material made available  by
      the applicant.
  17. The second element is  the  question  whether  there  is  a  realistic
      prospect of a First-tier Judge, applying the rule of anxious scrutiny,
      thinking the applicant will be exposed to  a  real  risk  of  harm  or
      persecution on return or that there will be a breach  of  a  protected
      right under ECHR or an unlawful decision contrary to  the  Immigration
      Rules.
  18. Ms Walker submitted that the key to this question is the determination
      for the applicant's brother.
  19. When considering the applicant's brother's appeal Judge  Griffith  was
      required to consider the criteria set down in  paragraph  334  of  the
      Immigration Rules which states:


      "An asylum applicant will be granted asylum in the United  Kingdom  if
      the Secretary of State is satisfied that:


      (i) he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port of  entry  in
      the United Kingdom;
      (ii) he is a refugee, as defined in regulation 2  of  The  Refugee  or
      Person in Need of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations
      2006;
      (iii) there are no reasonable grounds for regarding him as a danger to
      the security of the United Kingdom;
      (iv) he does not, having been convicted  by  a  final  judgment  of  a
      particularly serious crime, he  does  not  constitute  danger  to  the
      community of the United Kingdom; and
      (v) refusing his application would result in him being required to  go
      (whether immediately or after the time limited by any  existing  leave
      to enter or remain) in breach of the Geneva Convention, to  a  country
      in which his life or freedom would threatened on account of his  race,
      religion, nationality, political opinion or membership of a particular
      social group".


  20. The focus of the test is  clearly  upon  the  person  claiming  to  be
      entitled to a grant of international protection based upon whether  an
      objectively verifiable risk for a  Convention  reason  arises  on  the
      facts a judge feels able to place appropriate weight  upon.  The  fact
      the applicant's brother succeeded on appeal and has been recognised as
      a refugee, accordingly, is not determinative  of  the  answer  to  the
      second question. What is required is an examination of  the  brother's
      decision to establish what facts were found credible by Judge Griffith
      and whether they give  rise  to  an  arguable  realistic  prospect  of
      success before a First-tier Judge for this applicant.
  21. Reference to this applicant appears at [14] of  the  determination  of
      Judge Griffith in which  he  was  setting  out  the  evidence  of  the
      appellant before him. The wording of that paragraph is set out at [10]
      above. Judge Griffith sets out the findings and reasons for  the  same
      in a section headed "Decision" at [37 - 48] in relation to the  asylum
      appeal. At [38] Judge Griffiths finds:


           38. For the reasons set out below and based on  the  appellant's
           own evidence,  medical  evidence  and  country  evidence,  I  am
           prepared to find that his account is credible.


  22. There then follow several paragraphs in which separate aspects of  the
      applicant's brothers claim are examined by Judge Griffith including  a
      medical report prepared by Dr Martin, whose opinion is that he had  no
      doubt that the injuries caused to that appellant arose as a result  of
      his being intentionally injured and that the most  likely  explanation
      was that he was severely  tortured.  At  [46]  Judge  Griffiths  finds
      "..... Additional factors to be taken into account are  that  he  was,
      albeit briefly, involved with the LTTE himself  aged  16  (Dr  Smith's
      report confirms that the LTTE practised forced conscription even  with
      children) and his brother's involvement which the appellant claimed he
      had no knowledge until after coming to the UK in 2012." Whilst this is
      not a specific finding that the claim by this applicant  is  true,  as
      that was not an issue Judge Griffith  was  having  to  decide,  it  is
      submitted it is arguable,  on  the  face  of  the  decision  of  Judge
      Griffith, that it was accepted that the applicant's brother's claim to
      face a real risk of persecution on return sufficient to entitle him to
      a grant of international protection is  based  on  acceptance  of  the
      separate elements of the claim  considered  by  Judge  Griffith  which
      included a claimed risk arising from the activities of this  applicant
      and the  adverse  interest  taken  in  the  same  by  the  Sri  Lankan
      authorities.
  23. This was an element that was not before  a  decision  maker  when  the
      applicant's previous asylum claim was considered and rejected and  the
      appeal against that decision dismissed. Whilst it is  noted  that  the
      determination of the brother's appeal was  provided  to  the  decision
      maker and considered, the decision-maker  rejected  any  alleged  risk
      arising from that decision on the basis of the findings of  the  Court
      of Appeal in AA (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
      [2007] EWCA Civ 1040 and the referral therein to the case of Ocampo  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1276  in
      which the appellant in that case  sought  to  rely  on  the  grant  of
      refugee status of another individual in his appeal. The decision-maker
      in this case clearly placed considerable weight upon the conclusion of
      the Tribunal in AA (Somalia) that there was no basis  to  assume  that
      one individual's  case  has  any  effect  on  another's.  There  is  a
      reference to [66 and 68] of AA (Somalia) where it was found:


           66. Returning to the reasons which might be given for  citing  a
           decision or determination made in an application or appeal by  a
           related claimant, there is surely no  reason,  in  principle  or
           authority, to give the previous determination  evidential  value
           to the case now under consideration. The previous  determination
           is  not  the  result  of  the  application   of   the   rigorous
           requirements of the criminal law; and the fact that  a  previous
           court or other decision-maker has  reached  the  view  on  facts
           which are in issue in the present appeal is not  of  itself  any
           evidence as to those facts. On the other hand,  in  the  general
           interests of good administration, it is  probably  true  to  say
           that decisions should not be unnecessarily diverging. It is that
           principle of good Administration which, so far as  we  can  see,
           provides the sole basis in logic or an authority for saying that
           the result of the previous litigation may  be  relevant  in  the
           present appeal.


           68. We can see no  possible  basis  for  the  assertion  that  a
           determination in one appellant's case has any binding effect  on
           any other individual...."




  24. Thereafter the decision-maker in the impugned decision continued:


      "whilst  it  is  acknowledged  that  your  brother  has  been  granted
      international protection  at  appeal,  it  is  not  accepted  that  Mr
      Thuraisingam's grant of asylum resolves any credibility issues  raised
      by the Immigration Judge (IJ) in relation to your account  of  events.
      Each asylum claim is considered on its own merits and the asylum claim
      of Mr Thuraisingam is an independent consideration. The  risk  factors
      associated with Mr Thuraisingam's circumstances, and that of your  own
      individual circumstances are different and Mr Thuraisingam's grant  of
      asylum there is no direct correlation between that and your own claim.


      When considering Mr Thuraisingam's account of events on his return  to
      Sri Lanka, the (IJ) takes into  account  a  number  of  factors  which
      differ to your own individual circumstances. In particular it is noted
      that the IJ accepted that Mr  Thuraisingam  had  provided  a  credible
      account of the treatment he had experienced on his return to Sri Lanka
      in 2013, and accepted that he had been  detained  "...  It  is  highly
      likely that the Appellant's detention in 2013 will  be  documented..."
      (Paragraph  47).  In  contrast,  it  is   noted   from   your   appeal
      documentation that the IJ concluded that you had not been detained  or
      that you were of the adverse interest of Sri Lankan authorities "... I
      do not believe that the Appellant was detained, questioned and  beaten
      by the police or sought after by  any  authorities  in  Sri  Lanka..."
      (Paragraph 17).


      It is also noted that the IJ had taken  into  account  your  brother's
      involvement  in  anti-government  demonstrations,  and  the   evidence
      submitted in support. It is noted that this is a  contributing  factor
      in the grant of International  protection  afforded  to  your  brother
      "since the refusal of his claim by the respondent he has continued  to
      participate in demonstrations and photographs of  him  appear  in  the
      bundle in which he is clearly identifiable. It is also documented that
      embassy officials take photographs  of  the  protesters.  It  is  very
      likely therefore that the Sri Lankan authorities will have a record of
      his  attendance  and  will  have  identified  him  as  a   protester."
      (Paragraph 39). With regards to your circumstances it  is  noted  that
      whilst you assert you have been involved in  political  activities  in
      the UK, such as attendance at demonstrations and events,  and  handing
      out leaflets, you have provided no evidence to demonstrate this.


      It is acknowledged that your brother  was  detained  and  interrogated
      after raising the authority's suspicions when it was discovered he had
      purchased goods in London. It was concluded that your brother,  having
      been detained, and upon return to  the  UK  had  continued  to  attend
      demonstrations, would be at risk of being detained and subject to ill-
      treatment again on arrival in Sri Lanka.  The  circumstances  of  your
      brother  are  notably  different  to  yours   when   considering   the
      determination of the IJ at your appeal in which you were found  to  be
      an incredible witness, and your lack of evidence  to  demonstrate  any
      political involvement in the UK. You have  provided  no  new  evidence
      within your  further  submissions  to  indicate  that  you  have  ever
      attended a demonstration, that  you  have  involved  yourself  in  any
      political events, rallies or meetings, that you are a  member  of  any
      political organisations or that you are a high profile leader, speaker
      or organiser of events. Furthermore, following  the  determination  of
      the IJ in which you were found not to have previously  been  detained,
      or indeed come to the attention of the authorities at  all,  you  have
      provided no new evidence that you have in fact been  detained  by  Sri
      Lankan authorities.


      It is noted that you have provided a psychological report completed by
      Dr Zerak Al-Salihy  dated  13  June  2015,  in  which  you  have  been
      diagnosed with Post Traumatic Stress Disorder. However this in  itself
      is not sufficient to  support  your  credibility  and  undermined  the
      findings of the IJ. It is considered that the  PTSD  could  have  been
      caused by incidence which are unrelated to the authorities as there is
      no evidence to confirm that it could only be caused in the  ways  that
      you described.


      .................


      Although it is  accepted  from  the  report  provided  that  you  have
      developed PTSD, it is not  accepted  that  this  has  been  caused  by
      torture from anyone in Sri Lanka and there are other ways  that  could
      have caused the PTSD.


      Therefore  the  medical  report  in  itself  does  not  undermine  the
      determination of the IJ and therefore the determination of the  IJ  as
      per Devaseelan UKIAT 000 72* [2002], remains valid  as  you  have  not
      undermined these findings with the Medical report.


      You claim  that  your  brother  was  questioned  about  you  and  your
      involvement in planting bombs in Sri Lanka during his  detention,  and
      that this demonstrates you are of continuing adverse interest  to  the
      authorities. However this is  not  sufficient  to  overturn  the  IJ's
      conclusion within your  appeal  that  you  have  not  previously  been
      arrested and questioned about your involvement in the  planting  of  a
      bomb. The IJ considering your brother's claim did not have  access  to
      first-hand information and evidence relating to  this  arrest,  unlike
      the judge considering your account at your appeal. In relation to this
      arrest dated 28 April 2008, the IJ assessing your claim  concluded  as
      follows; "... I do not believe that  the  Appellant  was  arrested  or
      detained or beaten or that he was unlawfully released  from  detention
      by a  corrupt  police  officer  or  guard."  (Paragraph  14).  The  IJ
      considering your brother's claim makes no specific  reference  to  the
      credibility of this particular aspect of his  account  as  it  is  not
      significant in assessing whether he is at risk on return to Sri Lanka.
      Whilst your brother, on  the  whole,  has  been  found  to  have  been
      credible, it is considered that  he  could  have  embellished  certain
      aspects of his claim in order to  assist  you  with  your  immigration
      matters, and there is no reason to assume that  because  he  has  been
      found to have provided, in general, a consistent account,  that  every
      aspect of his claim should be considered to be credible and  true.  It
      is not accepted that this is sufficient to demonstrate that  you  have
      in fact been arrested and detained, and that  you  are  of  continuing
      adverse interest to the authorities.


      Therefore, in consideration  of  the  evidence  provided,  it  is  not
      accepted that your brother's grant of asylum bears  any  relevance  to
      your own claim and does not establish that you are at risk  of  return
      to Sri Lanka. Notwithstanding this, consideration has  been  given  to
      your individual risk on return."

  25. The decision maker thereafter considered  the  applicant's  status  by
      reference to the current country guidance case law and comments:


      "It is also noted  that  the  Immigration  Judge  within  your  appeal
      determination gave full consideration of your account  of  events  and
      did not accept that you had been detained and tortured prior  to  your
      arrival in the UK, and it was concluded that you were not at  risk  of
      mistreatment on return. You have provided no new substantial  evidence
      to demonstrate that you have previously been  arrested,  detained  and
      ill-treated whilst in Sri Lanka to  indicate  that  you  would  be  of
      continuing interest to the authorities or that would highlight you  to
      be at risk of being detained on your arrival.


      ......


      In consideration of these tribunal conclusions  it  is  regarded  that
      only those individuals who are perceived to be a current risk  to  the
      government or state due to their past affiliations or activities  will
      be at risk. It is considered that these  individuals  will  have  been
      those of a high level involvement with the LTTE by playing  an  active
      role as a member, and will be on a watch list.


      In consideration of your individual circumstances in line with  GJ  it
      is noted:


    . you have failed to provide any evidence to indicate that you have  had
      a significant role in any activities in the UK that would cause you to
      be at risk of being perceived to be involved in  post  conflict  Tamil
      separatism (7) (a).
    . You have provided no  evidence  to  suggest  that  you  have  had  any
      involvement as a journalist (b).
    . You have provided no  evidence  to  suggest  that  you  have  provided
      evidence to the Lesson Learned and Reconciliation Commission  and  you
      have failed to provide sufficient evidence  to  demonstrate  that  you
      have provided written evidence against perpetrators of genocide (c).
    . You have provided no evidence to suggest that your name appears  in  a
      computerised stop list (or would be likely to) or  that  you  are  the
      subject of an arrest warrant or detention order that would cause  your
      name to appear on the list (d).


      You have provided no new substantial evidence to demonstrate that  you
      are the subject of an arrest warrant or detention order,  and  as  you
      have  not  previously  come  to  the  Sri  Lankan  attention  of   the
      authorities  for  any  reason,  or  involved  yourself  in  sur  place
      political activities that  would  bring  you  to  their  attention  on
      return, it is therefore not accepted that you are  at  risk  of  being
      subject to treatment contrary to Article 2 and 3 of the ECHR upon your
      return to Sri Lanka."


  26. On behalf of the applicant it was submitted that the decision of Judge
      Hamilton was based upon the information before him at  that  time  and
      that he did not consider the applicant to be truthful as "his evidence
      regarding events in  Sri  Lanka  was  inconsistent,  implausible,  and
      lacking in credibility" [para  9]  he  specifically  attached  adverse
      weight to:


   a. the fact that the applicant stated that he had been 10 or 12 years old
      at the time of his first arrest in 2000 when he had in  fact  been  16
      [para 10];
   b. the fact that the applicant gave  discrepant  evidence  regarding  the
      length of his detention in 2000, stating he had been detained for  one
      night in 2000 or two days [paragraph 10];
   c. the fact that the applicant gave the wrong  date  in  respect  of  his
      second arrest, and discrepant evidence regarding the  length  of  this
      second detention - three days or four days [para 11];
   d. the fact that there were varying accounts of the specific mistreatment
      that the applicant had been subjected to  at  the  hands  of  the  Sri
      Lankan authorities (the applicant mentioned being beaten  with  wooden
      sticks as opposed to wooden planks and also omitted to  mention  being
      "suspended upside down" at his asylum interview [para 13].


  27. It is not disputed that Judge Hamilton was fully entitled to draw  the
      adverse credibility conclusions that he did based  upon  the  evidence
      that was made available.  Such findings as Judge  Hamilton  made  were
      not found to be infected by arguable legal error at any later stage in
      the proceedings. Those matters set out above related  specifically  to
      the applicant's claim to have been detained  and  ill-treated  in  Sri
      Lanka and Judge Hamilton was entitled to find that  the  discrepancies
      went to the core of the claim.
  28. Judge Griffith in  the  determination  of  the  applicant's  brother's
      appeal makes no mention of the earlier decision of Judge Hamilton when
      referring to the allegation before him that  the  applicant's  brother
      had been questioned, not only about his own activities, but also those
      relating to this applicant. The starting point for Judge Griffith,  if
      he was to consider the credibility of this aspect of the claim, should
      have been the  early  determination  of  Judge  Hamilton  as  per  the
      Devaseelan principles. Judge Griffith therefore failed to factor  into
      the assessment the fact that this aspect of the  claim,  that  of  any
      risk arising as a result of the applicant's activities in  Sri  Lanka,
      had been found to lack credibility and not  to  be  true  by  a  judge
      specifically considering the risk to this applicant in his own  asylum
      appeal.
  29. There is, arguably, nothing in  the  decision  of  Judge  Griffith  to
      undermine  the  adverse  credibility  finding  in  relation   to   the
      applicant's own circumstances as put to Judge Hamilton. It is also, as
      stated above, the case  that  there  is  no  clear  finding  by  Judge
      Griffith that the applicant was involved in the LTTE or in planting  a
      bomb. The applicant's claim is that Judge Griffith accepted there  was
      a connection between the applicant's  assertion  in  relation  to  his
      adverse profile in Sri Lanka and the ill treatment handed out  to  the
      applicant's brother for the  reasons  stated  in  that  determination,
      which went far beyond the allegation concerning this applicant. As the
      decision-maker  noted,  the  applicant's  brothers  profile  was  very
      specific to a risk  on  return  identified  in  the  country  guidance
      caselaw as a person who had attended demonstrations, who would come to
      the adverse attention as a result of having purchase goods in the  UK,
      and who it was accepted was probably known to  the  authorities,  such
      that he was entitled to a grant of international protection.
  30. The medical evidence is not determinative and although the  author  of
      the report did state, at paragraph 53 of the report that "symptoms are
      compatible with a history given and are typical of those  suffered  by
      persons who have PTSD and  depression..."  A  medical  report  is  not
      determinative of credibility as  it  was  the  history  given  by  the
      applicant to Judge Hamilton that was found not to be credible.
  31.  This  is  an  interesting  case  with  several  overlapping   factors
      establishing an interrelationship between  the  applicant's  case  and
      that of his brother, according to Miss Walker.  The  second  stage  of
      the fresh claims test requires an evaluation of  whether  there  is  a
      realistic prospect of a First-tier Judge, applying the rule of anxious
      scrutiny, thinking the applicant will be exposed to  a  real  risk  of
      harm or persecution on return or that there will  be  a  breach  of  a
      protected right under ECHR or an unlawful  decision  contrary  to  the
      Immigration Rules.  Having  considered  the  competing  arguments  and
      submissions it has not been made out that  this  is  a  question  that
      would be answered in the applicant's favour based  upon  the  evidence
      that was found to lack credibility by Judge Hamilton and the resultant
      findings made, the failure by Judge Griffith to consider  the  earlier
      determination when considering the element of the applicant's brothers
      claim that related specifically to this applicants profile,  the  lack
      of any clear comprehensive finding by Judge Griffith  in  relation  to
      the brothers assertion in relation to those elements that  placed  him
      at "real risk", the  fact  that  the  'corroborative  '  evidence  the
      applicant is seeking to  rely  upon  consists  largely  of  a  witness
      statement by his  brother  lacking  specificity,  and  the  prevailing
      country guidance case  law.
  32. Accordingly, I do not find that the conclusion reached by the decision-
      maker that a First-tier Judge, applying the rule of anxious  scrutiny,
      will not think the applicant will be exposed to a real risk of harm or
      prosecution on return or that there will be a breach  of  a  protected
      right under ECHR or an unlawful decision contrary to  the  Immigration
      Rules, is arguably irrational  or  Wednesbury  unreasonable  or  falls
      outside the range of decisions fully open to the decision-maker  based
      on the information he or she was asked to consider.



Order


  33. I order, therefore, that the judicial review application be dismissed.






            Signed:


                                Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson.




        Dated: 11th April 2017.     Judgment handed down 28 April 2017.




