
IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                                                JR/7909/2016

                                                                Field House,
                                                            Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1WR


                                                           21, December 2016



                                   Before

         MR JUSTICE COLLINS SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                      E
                                                                   Applicant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
                               - - - - - - - -

Mr Alasdair Mackenzie, instructed by Birnberg Peirce & Partners appeared
behalf of the Applicant.

Ms Julie Anderson, instructed by the Treasury Solicitor appeared on behalf
of the Respondent.


                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

                                  JUDGMENT

                          - - - - - - - - - - - - -

MR JUSTICE COLLINS:
   1. The applicant is a Tunisian national. He came to this country in  1994
      and claimed asylum. His wife, now a British citizen, arrived  here  in
      1998 and he has five children, all British citizens. In December  2001
      he was certified as a risk to national security and was detained under
      the Anti-terrorism, Crime and Security Act 2001. In March 2005 he  was
      made the subject of a control order. It was decided that he could  not
      benefit from the Refugee Convention since he was excluded by virtue of
      Article 1F. But he could not be returned to Tunisia because  he  would
      be at risk of material ill-treatment. His control order was revoked in
      March 2008. He applied for but was refused ILR. In September  2011  he
      was granted 3 years DL which was not subject to any conditions.
   2. Following his application for ILR in September  2014,  he  was  on  31
      December 2015 granted leave pursuant to the policy on Restricted Leave
      applicable to those such as the  applicant  whose  presence  here  was
      regarded as being not conducive to the public good  because  of  their
      conduct which excluded them from the Refugee Convention under  Article
      1F but who could not be removed because of the  risk  of  their  human
      rights being breached. The leave granted is for 6 months only  and  is
      subject to a number of conditions.
   3. It is accepted by the respondent that in the light of my decisions  in
      the Administrative Court in MS v. SSHD [2016] EWHC 3162 (Admin) and  G
      v. SSHD [2016] EWHC 3232 (Admin) the decision of 31 December 2015 must
      be quashed. Accordingly, there is no need to go into the facts or  the
      law in any detail.
   4. In MS and G the chances of removal being possible remained remote.  In
      this case, E has visited Tunisia in 2013 so that it is  possible  that
      the bar to removal based on what might happen to him in Tunisia  could
      be lifted. His presence in the UK is still deemed non-conducive to the
      public good and whether or not he is granted ILR will not change that:
      see in particular paragraph 13 of MS. But we do not say in  this  case
      that the time has come when ILR must be granted and Mr  Mackenzie  has
      not submitted that ILR is required as a matter of law. He submits that
      it should be granted but recognises that, if limited  leave  is  still
      regarded as appropriate, it must be for a  substantial  period  of  at
      least 3 years.
   5. We have no doubt that only conditions which are  necessary  should  be
      imposed if it is decided to grant  limited  leave.  Knowledge  of  the
      applicant's whereabouts is reasonable  and  so  a  condition  that  he
      notifies the Secretary of State of any change of address or if  he  is
      leaving it for more than X days can apply. Reporting at  more  than  6
      monthly intervals may be difficult to justify. It is difficult to  see
      that any conditions of employment  or  education  are  needed.  And  a
      condition that he does not leave his address  for  more  than  limited
      periods without the consent of the Secretary of State is unlawful.
   6. We have had our attention drawn to the amended policy on RL  published
      on 7 December 2016. We have not considered any arguments  relating  to
      it, but we do find it extraordinary that it should have been published
      before the decisions in MS, G and this case were  known.  We  note  in
      particular on page 6 under the heading "Public Interest"  it  is  said
      that to grant ILR would send a message that there  is  no  longer  any
      public interest in removal and would establish that the individual was
      welcome. That is not what the cases decide. On page  20  the  unlawful
      residence condition is still included.
   7. Order:
   (1)    The decision of 31 December 2015 is quashed.
   (2)    The condition requiring the applicant not to  absent  himself  for
   3/10 days without consent of the Secretary of State is declared unlawful.


   Both orders to have immediate effect; the result of  which  is  that  the
   applicant remains here lawfully in accordance with s.3(C) leave but  with
   no conditions.
   The case to be adjourned to a date to be fixed  in  order  to  deal  with
   application for permission to appeal and costs.
   The parties to file and serve submissions  on  costs  and  permission  to
   appeal by 12 January 2017.
   The Court to respond to submissions within 14  days,  the  matter  to  be
   dealt with on the papers unless either party asks for an oral hearing.



. ~~~~0~~~~
