

IN THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER

                                                  Case Number:  JR/9862/2016

                                                          The Upper Tribunal
                                                                 Field House
                                                      15-25 Breams Buildings
                                                                      London
                                                                    EC4A 1DZ

                                                                  8 May 2017


                                   Before:

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                  Between:


                              thangeswararajah

                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




Ms Deborah revill appeared on behalf of the Applicant
Mr zane malik appeared on behalf of the Respondent


APPROVED JUDGMENT


UTJ GLEESON:

   1. The applicant, a Sri Lankan citizen,  seeks  judicial  review  of  the
      respondent's refusal of his asylum claim, set out in a decision letter
      of 22 August 2016.  The respondent certified in her decision, pursuant
      to section 96(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
      (as amended), that she considered that no satisfactory reason had been
      given for the applicant's failure to advance  the  ground  now  relied
      upon in a statement under sub-section 120(2) or 120(5)  of  that  Act.
      The effect of that certificate is that the applicant  has  no  section
      82(1) right of appeal against the decision under challenge.

   2. The applicant's history may be summarised as follows.   The  applicant
      was born in 1988 in Sri Lanka and is of  Tamil  ethnicity.   With  his
      parents and brother, he left Sri Lanka when he was two years  old  and
      went to live in  Tamil  Nadu,  in  the  Koddappaddu  Refugee  Camp  in
      Thiruchchirapalli, India.  His sister was born there in December 1992.



   3. The applicant's father travelled on to the  United  Kingdom  in  2002,
      when the applicant would have been about 14 years old.  The applicant,
      his mother and siblings remained in India initially.  The  applicant's
      father successfully obtained international protection as a refugee  in
      the United Kingdom, and the applicant's  mother,  brother  and  sister
      joined him by way of family reunion.

   4. The applicant was the  last  family  member  to  come  to  the  United
      Kingdom. The applicant  left  India  without  difficulty  on  his  own
      passport and on 11 October 2009 he entered  the  United  Kingdom  with
      entry clearance as a Tier 4 student.  The applicant was  no  longer  a
      child: he was already 21 years old when he came here.  He did  not  go
      to live with his father, mother and siblings: he  now  lives  with  an
      uncle in the United Kingdom.

   5. The applicant's leave to remain on Tier 4 grounds was  extended  until
      30 August 2014.   Following  a  refusal  in  June  2011,  he  had  and
      exercised an in-country right of  appeal,  which  was  successful  and
      restored the leave previously granted. That application is  important,
      because in the refusal letter on  14  June  2011,  the  applicant  was
      served with a one-stop notice under section 120 of the 2002  Act.   He
      did not respond disclosing the asylum grounds now relied upon.

   6. On 19 June 2014, before the expiry of his student leave, the applicant
      applied for an EEA residence card.  That application was  unsuccessful
      and the applicant's appeal rights were exhausted on 2 April  2015,  as
      his previous solicitors, HK Solicitors, failed to file  an  appeal  in
      time.  The applicant did not embark for Sri Lanka. On 13 July 2016, he
      was encountered, working at Daily Fresh Foods  on  the  Upper  Tooting
      Road in SW17 and was arrested and detained.

   7. On 17 July 2016, three days after his arrest, but almost  seven  years
      after his arrival in the United Kingdom,  the  applicant  lodged  this
      asylum claim.  Temporary admission  was  initially  refused,  but  was
      later granted, and the applicant was released on bail.   The applicant
      says he fears return to both India, his  country  of  former  habitual
      residence, and Sri Lanka, his country of nationality.

   8. The applicant does not know what facts and matters underlay the  grant
      of refugee status to his  father.   His  own  claim  is  based  on  an
      assertion that while in India, he undertook LTTE activities  and  came
      to the adverse interest of the Indian authorities.   It  is  his  case
      that the Indian authorities told the Sri Lankan authorities about  his
      LTTE activities in India, putting him at risk in Sri Lanka also.   The
      applicant also says that he has undertaken sur place activities in the
      United Kingdom which increased the risk for him on  return  to  either
      India or Sri Lanka.

   9.  In the refusal letter of 22 August 2016,  the  respondent  considered
      fully all the arguments advanced, including  his  claimed  history  of
      anti-Government activity in India, the awareness that the  Sri  Lankan
      authorities were said to have of that activity, his  activity  in  the
      United Kingdom in attending anti-Government  demonstrations,  and  his
      medical problems (he has  depression).   The  respondent  applied  the
      country guidance in GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]
      UKUT 319 (IAC) and concluded that the applicant would not be  at  risk
      on  return  to  either  Sri  Lanka  or  India.   In  relation  to  the
      applicant's mental health, the respondent applied the guidance of  the
      Court of Appeal in J v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2005] and Y v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  EWCA
      Civ 362.  She was not satisfied that the J/Y standard for suicide risk
      was met.

  10. The respondent certified the application under section 96, using the 4-
      stage process in J v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]
      EWHC 705 (Admin) at [106] in the judgment of Mr Justice Stadlen:

           "106. Under Section 96 (1) and (2) before the Secretary of State
           can lawfully decide to certify, she has to go  through  a  four-
           stage process. First she must be satisfied that the  person  was
           notified of a right of appeal under Section 82  against  another
           immigration decision (Section 96(1)) or that the person received
           a notice under Section 120 by virtue  of  an  application  other
           than that to which the new decision relates or by  virtue  of  a
           decision other than the new decision (Section 96(2)). Second she
           must conclude that the claim or application  to  which  the  new
           decision relates relies on a matter that could have been  raised
           in an appeal against the old decision (Section 96(1)(b)) or that
           the new decision relates to an application or claim which relies
           on a matter that should have been but has not been raised  in  a
           statement made in response to that  notice  (Section  96(2)(b)).
           Third she must form the opinion that there  is  no  satisfactory
           reason for that matter not  having  been  raised  in  an  appeal
           against the old decision (Section 96 (1) (c)) or that  there  is
           no satisfactory reason for that matter not having been raised in
           a statement made in response to that notice (Section 96 (2)(c)).
           Fourth she must address her mind to whether,  having  regard  to
           all relevant factors, she  should  exercise  her  discretion  to
           certify and conclude that it  is  appropriate  to  exercise  the
           discretion in favour of certification."

  11.  The respondent in her letter of refusal followed that  process.   She
      was satisfied that there had been a section 120 notice in  2011;  that
      the applicant had not disclosed any fear of persecution as alleged  in
      the asylum application he now made, in response to  that  notice;  and
      that the explanation he had given was neither  valid  nor  reasonable.
      The explanation the applicant gave was that his solicitors had advised
      him to await the outcome of his EEA application.  The  respondent  was
      unarguably entitled to consider that  the  applicant  had  received  a
      section 120 notice but not  disclosed  his  present  claim  and  that,
      having had access to legal advice, the applicant could not be heard to
      say that he did not know he needed  to  make  his  asylum  application
      earlier.

  12. The question, therefore, is whether the Secretary of  State  exercised
      her discretion at the fourth stage properly.   Her  exercise  of  that
      discretion is set out at [114]-[115] of the refusal letter:

           "114. Exercising discretion in relation to  certification  under
           section 96

           115.  Due regard has been given to the discretion to  apply  the
           certificate under section 96.  Having carefully  considered  all
           the relevant factors in relation to  your  application,  it  has
           been decided that discretion ought not to be exercised  in  your
           favour, not only because you have failed to provide a reasonable
           explanation for your failure to make the asylum  application  at
           the earliest opportunity, but also because your application  for
           asylum does not disclose a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution,
           harm,  ill-treatment,  inhumane  or  degrading  treatment  under
           Article 3, either on return to Sri Lanka. [sic]"

  13. That is the element of the refusal letter which must be considered  to
      see whether the  Secretary  of  State  has  exercised  her  discretion
      lawfully.

  14. To assist me with that, I have a skeleton argument and  oral  argument
      from the applicant's Counsel, Ms Revill, and  detailed  grounds  which
      stand as a skeleton argument and oral argument from Mr Malik  for  the
      respondent.

Permission for judicial review

  15. The applicant has made applications to both the  High  Court  and  the
      Upper Tribunal arising out of the same refusal letter.   The  question
      of abuse of process was settled in  the  grant  of  permission  and  I
      indicated to Mr Malik that I was not prepared to go behind that grant.



  16. On 22 November 2016, Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy granted  permission
      at an oral hearing.  He declined to  strike  out  the  Upper  Tribunal
      proceedings as an abuse of process  and  refused  permission  for  the
      respondent to challenge that decision before the Court of Appeal.  The
      decision continues:

           "Furthermore I accept the reasons given why  the  applicant  did
           not raise the issue of asylum at an earlier stage as he believed
           that he was entitled to  remain  and  in  any  event,  had  been
           advised by a representative not to make the  asylum  application
           while his original application was  being  considered.   I  also
           consider that  it  is  possible  that  the  [sic]  this  was  an
           application which was  not  necessarily  bound  to  fail  and  I
           therefore grant permission."

  17. That is the basis on which this application  comes  before  me.  I  am
      satisfied that Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy when granting  permission
      was entitled to conclude that there was no abuse  of  process  by  the
      applicant,  as  despite  his  best  efforts  and  those  of  his  then
      solicitors (Hanson Young) the applicant had been  unable  to  discover
      from his original solicitors (David Benson)  whether  proceedings  had
      been issued on his behalf in the High Court.

  18. I indicated at the substantive hearing that I would proceed to  decide
      the substantive merits of the judicial review  application.   For  the
      avoidance of doubt, however, I do not regard myself as bound by  Judge
      McGeachy's observation that he accepted the reasons for  the  lateness
      of the asylum claim being made, nor that the  asylum  application  was
      one which was not necessarily bound to fail.  Those are matters  which
      fall to be  considered,  by  way  of  judicial  review  only,  in  the
      substantive hearing.

Substantive judicial review

  19. For the applicant, Ms Revill in her skeleton argument identified  five
      issues, in addition to the abuse of process issue which I have already
      considered.  Ms Revill confirmed at the hearing that the applicant did
      not seek to challenge the  underlying  decision  by  way  of  judicial
      review, nor did he dispute that the decision to refuse protection  was
      lawfully made.  The applicant's challenge is only to the certification
      of that refusal of protection such that he has no right of  appeal  to
      the First-tier Tribunal against the underlying decision.

  20.  The  following  issues  of  substance  arise  out  of  the  grant  of
      permission:

        i) Whether the respondent's decision  was  Wednesbury  unreasonable
           for failure to identify whether all or  any  of  the  sur  place
           activities relied upon (the United Kingdom demonstrations) post-
           dated the service of the section 120 notice.

       ii) Whether the decision was Wednesbury unreasonable for failure  to
           consider material matters when deciding that the  applicant  had
           given no satisfactory reason for failure to make his  protection
           claim earlier;

      iii) Whether the respondent had acted unlawfully in  failing  to  use
           anxious scrutiny in the exercise of her discretion  to  certify;
           and

       iv) Whether the respondent's exercise of her discretion  to  certify
           was Wednesbury unreasonable.

  21. The first point is bound to fail: contrary to the assertion at [40] in
      the skeleton argument, which presumably represents instructions  given
      by him to his solicitors, the applicant instructed Ms  Revill  at  the
      hearing that several of his attendances at demonstrations had  already
      taken place when he received the section 120  notice.   The  applicant
      therefore could have made a protection claim on sur place  grounds  in
      response to that notice in 2011.

  22. The next question is whether he should have made that protection claim
      in 2011 when served with the section  120  notice.   I  must  consider
      whether the reason given by the applicant for failing to  advance  his
      protection claim then or later  is  one  which  the  respondent  could
      lawfully consider to have been unsatisfactory.

  23. Ms Revill contended that there was no obligation on the  applicant  to
      give details of his asylum claim in 2011, when served with  the  s.120
      notice, since at that time he had an in-country right  of  appeal  and
      thus section 3C leave to remain.  The applicant chose to exercise  his
      right of appeal and did so successfully.  Ms Revill contended that:

           "The fact that the applicant had a meritorious claim  to  remain
           under the Immigration Rules, and the entitlement to  demonstrate
           as much by way of appeal, arguably  constituted  a  satisfactory
           reason for his failure to raise his fear of return to Sri  Lanka
           at this stage.  The respondent has  given  no  consideration  to
           this possibility."

  24. Ms Revill also argued that the applicant  was  not  asked  during  his
      asylum interview why he had not  disclosed  his  protection  claim  in
      response to the section 120 notice, only why he  'waited  so  long  to
      claim asylum' and that therefore the respondent's  decision  that  the
      reason given was unsatisfactory regarding the section 120  notice  was
      irrational and/or Wednesbury unreasonable.

  25. The  final  two  issues  concern  the  exercise  of  the  respondent's
      discretion to certify: Ms Revill's submission is the same whether  the
      question is framed  as  a  lack  of  anxious  scrutiny  preceding  the
      respondent's   exercise   of    her    discretion,    or    Wednesbury
      unreasonableness in  the  certification  decision  itself.  Ms  Revill
      contends  that  the  respondent  was  not  entitled  to  rely  on  the
      unsatisfactory explanation again,  nor  on  her  assessment  that  the
      protection claim as advanced had no prospect of success.

  26. In her oral submissions, Ms Revill confirmed that  the  applicant  had
      not sought to challenge the  underlying  asylum  decision  by  way  of
      judicial review, though he would do so if granted an in-country  right
      of appeal.  Ms Revill accepted there  was  no  copy  of  the  one-stop
      notice served on this applicant in the bundle  of  documents  provided
      for the judicial review hearing.  She agreed that it would  have  been
      framed in mandatory terms: 'you must now disclose'.

  27. Ms Revill argued that the  mandatory  language  used  in  section  120
      notices did not mean  that  the  applicant  was  in  fact  obliged  to
      disclose all relevant circumstances at the  time  of  service  of  the
      section 120 notice.  In this case the applicant had what turned out to
      be a good student appeal which he exercised successfully. Overall, she
      contended that the ambit of the relevant circumstances  considered  by
      the respondent in this  refusal  letter  was  not  'generously  wide',
      applying the dicta of Mr Justice Stadlen in J at [139].

  28. Ms Revill reminded the Tribunal that nowhere in the interview had  the
      applicant been asked  when  the  LTTE  demonstrations  in  the  United
      Kingdom had taken place upon which he relied for the sur place  claim.
      After taking instructions, she was able to clarify that  the  earliest
      demonstration the applicant attended was on  27  November  2009,  long
      before the section 120 notice was served on 14 June 2011.

  29. Ms Revill reminded me of the distinction between the tests at sections
      96(1)(b) and section 96(2)(b), as set out at in J at [106]:

           "First she must be satisfied that the person was notified  of  a
           right of appeal under Section  82  against  another  immigration
           decision (Section 96(1)) or that the person  received  a  notice
           under Section 120 by virtue of an application other than that to
           which the new decision relates or by virtue of a decision  other
           than the new decision (Section 96(2)).

           Second she must conclude that the claim or application to  which
           the new decision relates relies on a matter that could have been
           raised in an appeal against the old decision (Section  96(1)(b))
           or that the new decision relates  to  an  application  or  claim
           which relies on a matter that should have been but has not  been
           raised in a statement made in response to that  notice  (Section
           96(2)(b))."

  30. Ms Revill noted that in the refusal letter, the respondent appeared to
      have conflated the two tests,  'could'  for  matters  which  were  not
      mentioned in an appeal against an earlier  decision,  but  the  higher
      'should' for matters not raised in response to a section  120  notice.
      She accepted that the applicant had provided an  explanation  for  the
      failure to disclose his protection claim in response  to  the  section
      120 notice, and that the respondent had considered it.  She  contended
      that the brevity of the respondent's consideration indicated a lack of
      anxious scrutiny of the explanation and that the respondent's argument
      was circular: her failure to accept the underlying  claim  was  not  a
      good reason not to exercise anxious scrutiny, given the seriousness of
      the consequences of any error, such that the  respondent's  discretion
      had not been properly exercised.

  31. Ms Revill relied on the observations of His Honour Judge Pelling QC in
      R on the application of Mahmood v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2014] EWHC 259 (Admin), but the fact set in that  judgment
      is different:  the decision was quashed because there was  no  attempt
      by the respondent to apply the four-stage test in J  and no  reasoning
      whatsoever in relation to the discretion element thereof.

  32. The merits of the underlying claim were not relevant  (see  R  on  the
      application of Vassell v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      (section 96 NIAA 2002 test; merits) IJR [2015] UKUT  404  (IAC).   The
      decision was unlawful and should be quashed.

  33. For the respondent, Mr Malik relied  on  his  detailed  grounds  which
      stood as the respondent's skeleton argument. The respondent's decision
      was plainly lawful and the  general  objective  of  avoiding  multiple
      appeals had been frequently approved by the Courts (see  for  example,
      JM (Liberia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006]  EWCA
      Civ 1402 at [23]; MS (Ivory Coast) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
      Department [2007] EWCA Civ 133 at [51]; AS (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary
      of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA  Civ  1076  at  [45];  BA
      (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009]  UKSC  7
      at [7] and Mirza v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2009]
      EWCA Civ 159 at [22]).

  34. The test was not whether  this  was  an  application  which  was  'not
      necessarily bound  to  fail':  that  applied  to  certification  under
      section 94 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
      amended), not section 96, for which the merits of the underlying claim
      played no material part.  The first and second stages of the test in J
      were met:  a section 120 notice was served, the applicant did not deny
      that such was the case,  and  the  applicant  could  have  raised  the
      substance of all the matters now relied upon  when  served  with  that
      notice.  The duty under section 120 was a continuing one.

  35. The applicant's explanation for not advancing  his  protection  claim,
      that he was pursuing a student appeal, was one which the Secretary  of
      State was entitled not  to  regard  as  satisfactory:  that  view  was
      plainly open to her. The respondent had considered her discretion  and
      her decision to certify was a rational one.

  36. The applicant had rightly  chosen  not  to  challenge  the  underlying
      decision.  The Court of Appeal in  TN  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department at [15] and [16] and the  Supreme  Court
      in TN (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
      [2015] UKSC 40 had held that judicial review was an  effective  remedy
      in relation to the refusal of a right of appeal in protection  claims.
      The applicant should have raised any challenge he had to that decision
      in these proceedings: it was not open to him to reserve that challenge
      until he had a right of appeal in-country.

  37. Mr Malik's oral submissions developed those arguments.   He  submitted
      that the applicant both could and should have  raised  this  claim  in
      response to the section 120 notice, such that the error in the refusal
      letter was immaterial. If the Tribunal were to accept the existence of
      an ongoing claim on another ground as a reason not to  advance  asylum
      grounds in response  to  a  section  120  notice,  that  would  be  to
      undermine the  statutory  scheme.   The  applicant's  explanation  was
      plainly unsatisfactory and the respondent's exercise of discretion was
      both lawful and rational.

Discussion

  38. The form of one-stop notice with which the applicant would  have  been
      served is set out in AS (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
      Home Department & Anor [2009] EWCA Civ 1076 at [69]:

           "You must now make a formal statement about any reasons why  you
           think you should be  allowed  to  stay  in  this  country.  This
           includes why you wish to stay  here  and  any  grounds  why  you
           should not be removed or required to leave. . . .You do not have
           to repeat any reasons you have already given us but  if  you  do
           have any more reasons you must now disclose them. If  you  later
           apply to stay here for a reason which you could  have  given  us
           now, you may not  be  able  to  appeal  if  the  application  is
           refused.

           If after you have completed this form the reasons why you  think
           you should be allowed to stay in this  country  change,  or  new
           reasons arise, you must tell us as soon as possible. Do not wait
           until your appeal has been heard.

           If you later apply to stay here for a  reason  which  you  could
           have raised earlier, you may  not  be  able  to  appeal  if  the
           application is refused."               [Italics added]

  39. The applicant was aware of his history in India before coming  to  the
      United Kingdom, the secondary risk allegedly generated by  the  Indian
      authorities telling the Sri Lankan authorities what he had been doing,
      and of his history  of  demonstrating  for  the  LTTE  in  the  United
      Kingdom, beginning 2 years before the section 120 notice was served.

  40. It is right therefore that he could have disclosed that information in
      response to the section 120 notice.  It is also right that the test is
      not whether he could have done so, but whether he should have done so,
      and that the respondent in her refusal letter erred  in  applying  the
      lower test.  However, the statutory scheme allows  the  respondent  to
      require the applicant to 'put his cards on the table' in response to a
      section 120 notice and I am satisfied that the applicant  should  have
      done so, given the clear wording of the notices in use at the time  as
      set out above.  I note, particularly, that the section 120 notice says
      in terms that a party should not first exhaust an appeal before  doing
      so.

  41. The decision to refuse protection and  the  decision  to  certify  are
      separate (see the decision of Lord Justice Moses, sitting as  a  first
      instance Judge of the Administrative Court, in Mirza  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department at [37]).  The  applicant  has  not  and
      does not challenge the refusal of protection, though if he is  granted
      a right of appeal he says he will  do  so.   He  challenges  only  the
      certification.  I am satisfied that the first three  limbs  of  the  J
      test are met.  I have had regard to Ms Revill's submissions  that  the
      underlying merits of the application are irrelevant, applying Vassell,
      but that is to misstate the ratio decidendi of Vassell, as set out  in
      the Upper Tribunal's judicial headnote:

           "In J v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] EWHC
           705 (Admin), Stadlen J set out a four stage process that must be
           undertaken by the Secretary of State before she could certify  a
           claim under s.96 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
           2002. The merits of any new matter raised by  an  applicant  are
           not relevant to this process."

  42. Ms Revill's submission in  this  respect  is  based  on  her  previous
      understanding of the applicant's case, that the facts relating to  the
      sur place claim,  the  United  Kingdom  demonstrations,  had  not  yet
      occurred in 2011, or alternatively, that the respondent's  failure  to
      exercise anxious scrutiny meant that she was not entitled to  discount
      that possibility.  But the instructions given by the applicant at  the
      hearing torpedo  that  argument:   the  demonstrations,  or  at  least
      several of them, are said to have taken place before 2011.  Vassell is
      not applicable as no 'new matter' is here raised.

  43. As regards the respondent's exercise of discretion, she  has  set  out
      her workings in relation to tests (1) to (3) and  has  considered  and
      exercised discretion, on the basis that there is no merit  at  all  in
      the underlying claim.  That exercise of her discretion was  unarguably
      open to the respondent.

  44. I refuse judicial review of the decision to certify.

  45. Following discussions between the parties on receipt of the  embargoed
      draft of this judgment, the parties  discussed  consequential  matters
      and agreed  the  question  of  costs.   The  Applicant  will  pay  the
      Respondent's agreed costs of �4229 subject to any  representations  in
      writing to be received within 21 days of  the  date  of  sending  this
      Order.

  46. The applicant seeks permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal on two
      grounds:  ground 1 argues that at [40]  above,  I  have  impermissibly
      erred in substituting my  own  conclusion  that,  had  the  respondent
      applied the correct J  test  of  whether  the  applicant  should  have
      disclosed the present claim in response to the section 120  notice  in
      2011, rather than whether he could have done  so,  the  outcome  would
      have been the same.  Judicial review is a discretionary remedy  and  I
      do not consider it appropriate to quash the respondent's decision when
      the applicant both could, and in my assessment, should have  disclosed
      this claim in 2011, at a time when all material facts  were  known  to
      him.

  47. Ground 2 is a rationality challenge: the  applicant  contends  that  I
      have erred in concluding at [41] above that the  respondent's  reasons
      for exercising her discretion to  certify  under  section  96  at  the
      fourth J stage are adequate, in that her reasoning impermissibly takes
      into account the merits of the underlying claim (see Vassell,  supra).
      The fourth stage test is expressed thus in J:

           "Fourth she must address her mind to whether, having  regard  to
           all relevant factors, she  should  exercise  her  discretion  to
           certify and conclude that it  is  appropriate  to  exercise  the
           discretion in favour of certification."

  48. I was and remain satisfied that, in circumstances where  the  decision
      to refuse asylum stands unchallenged, for the reasons I give above  at
      [20]-[22], the respondent's approach to the fourth  stage  is  neither
      perverse nor Wednesbury unreasonable.  The respondent is  required  to
      apply anxious scrutiny to the asylum claim: but the applicant does not
      seek to challenge that part of her decision (unless, of course, he  is
      given a right of appeal, in which case he reserves  the  right  to  do
      so).  The relevant factors therefore are the section  120  delay,  for
      which no satisfactory explanation was provided and, indeed, it appears
      that  until  the  hearing,  the  applicant  had  not  instructed   his
      representatives correctly in relation to the sur place element of  the
      claim.

  49. The respondent's assessment was unarguably open to her on that basis.

  50. I refuse permission to appeal because I am not satisfied that there is
      any arguable error of law in the judgment  given,  nor  any  important
      point of principle or practice or other compelling reason engaging the
      second appeals test. -----------------------------
-----------------------
      11


