
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: LP/00293/2020 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On the 15th June 2021              |On the 28th June 2021              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     MAT

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)



For the appellant:     Mr R  Bednarek  of  counsel,  instructed  by  Broudie
                    Jackson Canter

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable,  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I reserved my decisions and reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. The appellant, who is an Iraqi national of Kurdish ethnicity  and  with
    date of birth given as 27.6.91, has appealed  with  permission  to  the
    Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal
    promulgated 3.12.19 (Judge Handler),  dismissing  on  all  grounds  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 5.7.19, to
    refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted  on  all  grounds  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 20.12.19, the judge considering in particular that  "It  is
    arguable, given the matters raised in  Ground  2  that  the  judge  has
    failed adequately to allow  for  cultural  pressures  leading  to  late
    disclosure and which may, arguably have wrongly  affected  the  judge's
    approach generally to credibility."

 3. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in
    the light of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. I first bear in mind the counsel of  Lewison  LJ  in Fage  UK  Ltd.  v
    Chobani UK Ltd. [2014] EWCA Civ 5, who at [114] explained the caution
    to be exercised by appellate  courts  in  interfering  with  evaluative
    decisions of first instance judges,  including  that  Appellate  courts
    have been repeatedly warned, by recent cases at the highest level,  not
    to interfere with findings of fact by trial judges, unless compelled to
    do so. This applies not only to findings of primary fact, but  also  to
    the evaluation of those facts and to inferences to be drawn from them."

 5. In MR (permission to appeal: Tribunal's approach)  Brazil  [2015]  UKUT
    00029 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal  held  that,  "A  judge  considering  an
    application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  must  avoid
    granting permission on what, properly  analysed,  is  no  more  than  a
    simple quarrel with the First-tier Tribunal judge's assessment  of  the
    evidence." Having carefully considered the submissions of Mr  Bednarek,
    I find that much  of  the  grounds  and  submissions  fall  within  the
    criticism described in VW (Sri Lanka) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  522  at  [12],
    where LJ McCombe stated, "Regrettably, there is an increasing  tendency
    in immigration cases, when a First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has  given  a
    judgment explaining why  he  has  reached  a  particular  decision,  of
    seeking to burrow out industriously areas of evidence  that  have  been
    less fully dealt with than others and then to use this as a  basis  for
    saying the judge's decision is legally flawed because it did  not  deal
    with a particular matter more fully. In my judgment, with respect, that
    is no basis on which to sustain a proper challenge to a judge's finding
    of fact."

 6. I also bear in mind the  high  threshold  for  demonstrating  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was irrational or perverse so  that
    no reasonable and  properly  directed  judge  could  have  reached  the
    findings made.

 7. In relation to the second ground (taken first in submissions)  and  the
    judge's reliance at [29] of the decision on the appellant's failure  to
    mention any risk from his family  in  his  screening  interview,  I  am
    satisfied that, contrary to the assertions in the grounds, in assessing
    the credibility of the claim the judge did take account of the cultural
    sensitivity of disclosing having been a victim of male sexual  assault.
    That is specifically and clearly set out within [29] but as  the  judge
    pointed out, the appellant need not have given the alleged  details  in
    the screening interview. Having considered the explanation for  failure
    to disclose, also set out within the decision, it was open to the judge
    to reach the conclusion that this explanation was  unsatisfactory  and,
    therefore, undermining of the appellant's credibility. Nothing  in  the
    decision was inconsistent with the guidance in YL (China) [2004]  UKAIT
    00145 (IAC) and no error of law is disclosed. There was  a  discrepancy
    and the appellant could reasonably have been expected  to  mention  the
    alleged threat from his family within the screening interview.

 8. The essence of the first ground is that  the  judge  erred  in  holding
    against the appellant his inability to explain various actions of third
    parties, notably GA, for which actions the appellant cannot  reasonably
    or rationally be expected to account. However, it has  to  be  recalled
    that it was incumbent on the appellant to prove his  factual  claim  to
    the lower standard of proof. He  cannot  simply  present  an  otherwise
    implausible and incredible account and hide behind the mantra  that  he
    cannot read the mind and motivation of a third party. In essence,  this
    ground misrepresents the judge's process of assessing  the  credibility
    of the appellant's claim. The judge was not  asking  or  expecting  the
    appellant to read the mind or account for the actions of third  parties
    but in considering whether the appellant had demonstrated to the  lower
    standard of proof that the claimed events involving GA  did  happen  at
    all, the judge was entitled to consider,  for  example,  why  GA  would
    steal  the  appellant's  car  and  thereby  open  himself  to  criminal
    prosecution. It is to be noted that in post-interview and post-decision
    further submissions some suggestions for such actions were proffered on
    the appellant's behalf. Mr Bednarek also acknowledged that in interview
    the respondent was entitled to ask the appellant why GA would  do  what
    the appellant claimed he had done. The reality of what  the  judge  was
    engaged in was a reasoned  consideration  of  the  credibility  of  the
    account. Similar complaint about [28] and  [33]  of  the  decision,  in
    relation to the sending of the video and  why  the  appellant  did  not
    claim asylum in France or Italy, beg the same  question  and  have  the
    same answer. These were  legitimate  considerations  in  assessing  the
    credibility of  the  appellant's  account  and  not  a  demand  of  the
    appellant to enquire into the mind of others. One of  the  difficulties
    of Mr Bednarek's  submissions  is  the  presumption  that  these  third
    parties existed and did the actions alleged by the  appellant,  whereas
    the judge was considering whether these actions happened at all and  in
    doing so was entitled to ask questions such as,  'why  would  he?'  The
    absence of explanation from the appellant was  but  one  part  of  that
    exercise and was not an irrational approach. In the premises, no  error
    of law is disclosed.

 9. Grounds 3 and 4 are in essence extensions  of  the  first  ground.  The
    third ground alleged irrational reasoning in  the  judge's  credibility
    assessment at [26] and [27] of the decision, involving consideration of
    the logic of carrying out alleged kidnapping and video recording of the
    alleged sexual assault of the appellant in order to threaten him not to
    release CCTV footage of the car theft by GA when the video was, on  the
    appellant's account, sent straight to his  brother,  thereby  allegedly
    causing problems for the appellant with  his  family.  This  ground  as
    drafted offers what  can  be  no  more  than  speculation  as  to  GA's
    motivation in allegedly sending the video. The judge was not obliged to
    agree with that or any other speculative  suggestion  and  entitled  to
    point out the  apparent  illogicality  of  the  account  given  by  the
    appellant, seeking a  plausible  or  credible  explanation.  It  cannot
    properly be said that the reasoning of the judge in this aspect of  the
    credibility assessment reaches the high threshold for irrationality. No
    error of law is disclosed.

10. As stated above, in essence, the fourth ground advances the same  point
    as the first ground. It is clear however that at  [28]  the  judge  has
    considered the evidence in the round and taken account of Mr Bednarek's
    submissions at the First-tier Tribunal  appeal  hearing.  At  [11]  the
    judge carefully set out all the material  under  consideration  and  at
    [13] explained that she had had regard to the totality of the evidence,
    taking it in the round, before making any of her findings of  fact.  It
    was not necessary for the judge to set out or  summarise  the  evidence
    but rather to justify with adequate reasoning the findings made so that
    the appellant could understand why they were made against him.  Nothing
    in the ground or [28] of the decision itself demonstrates irrationality
    or other error of law. In essence, the ground is  a  mere  disagreement
    with the decision.

11. The fifth ground asserts that the "core factor running throughout  (the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal) is that of the plausibility of A's
    account." This is followed  by  a  treatise  on  the  requirements  for
    assessing credibility and the warning to decision-makers that something
    may be implausible, or inherently unlikely, but  that  alone  does  not
    mean that it is untrue. It  is  vaguely  asserted  within  the  drafted
    ground that when GA's actions are considered set within the context  of
    tribal identity,  political  association  and  the  country  background
    information, the  judge's  findings  amount  to  errors  of  law.  With
    respect, this ground is  little  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    judge's findings and an attempt to reargue the appeal, disguised as  an
    alleged error of law.

12. The final ground asserts  that  the  judge  failed  to  follow  country
    guidance in relation to the appellant's ability to obtain a replacement
    CSID, with reference to the considerations set out in AAH,  the  extant
    country guidance at the date of promulgation of the impugned First-tier
    Tribunal decision. However, the primary findings, in respect of which I
    find no error of  law,  led  inevitably  to  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant's factual claim was rejected in  its  entirety,  so  that  he
    faces no risk on return to the IKR. In essence, the appellant  and  his
    account were found not credible. At  [36]  the  judge  found  that  his
    family will be able to send his CSID card to him, which will enable his
    return to Baghdad and onward journey to the IKR. Given  those  findings
    and my decision in respect of the alleged  errors  of  law,  the  other
    findings challenged in the sixth ground, obtaining a  replacement  CSID
    and internal relocation within the IKR, were  in  the  alternative  and
    need not be addressed further.

13. In the circumstances and for the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

    The appeal of the appellant to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the  appeal  remains
    dismissed on all grounds.

    I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup
Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       15 June 2021





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup
Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       15 June 2021
