
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: LP/00281/2020
                                                       (CCD: PA/500066/2019)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (Via Microsoft Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 July 2021                           |On 04 August 2021                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SH
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Johnrose instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter
(Manchester)
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge N Malik ('the Judge'), promulgated on 19 March 2020,
        in which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal was granted by a Resident Judge of the  First-
        tier Tribunal on the basis it is said to be arguable that the Judge
        erred as to the evidence before him.
     3. Directions given  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  include  the  following
        paragraph:

           The appellant was  granted  permission  to  appeal  against  the
           decision of Judge Malik by Resident Judge  Zucker.  There  is  a
           single point in this case. It is asserted that the  judge  erred
           in relying on something said in a screening  interview,  because
           that was not a screening interview in this case. The  allegation
           is simply that the judge confused the evidence in this case with
           the  evidence  in  another.  Whilst  it  is  obviously  for  the
           appellant to make good that assertion, the respondent will  wish
           to consider carefully whether the allegation is made out. If she
           accepts that it is, there should be a timely indication  of  any
           such acceptance so as to prevent any  unnecessary  cost  to  the
           public purse. For the time being, however, the proper course  is
           to move towards a hearing, as  a  result,  which  I  issued  the
           following directions....


Error of law

     4. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq whose wife is dependent  on  his
        appeal. The Judge noted the evidence in the appeal  including  that
        the appellant had claimed to have  worked  as  a  civil  government
        staff member in Iraq, that his passport was still in Germany  where
        he and his wife had previously claimed  asylum,  and  that  he  had
        family in Sulaimaniyah  where  his  parents,  mother,  brother  and
        sisters all live, although the appellant and his  wife  claimed  to
        have no contact with them.
     5. The Judge sets out his findings from [28] of the decision  and  the
        challenge concluding at [30]  that  it  was  not  found  reasonably
        likely that the appellant or his wife will face a  real  risk  from
        any of the claimed agents of harm relied upon by the appellant; for
        the reasons set out at paragraphs [30 (I) - (VII)] of the  decision
        under challenge.
     6. The Judge also finds there is no reason why the appellant  and  his
        wife cannot return to Iraq, especially as there are family  members
        living in the IKR who could provide the required documents.
     7. The reference to Germany  arises  as  the  appellant's  immigration
        history shows he and his wife left Iraq on  25  December  2015  and
        travelled to Turkey where they stayed for 15 days, then  travelling
        by boat to Greece where they remained for five days,  and  then  to
        Germany, arriving on 16 January 2016,  where  they  stayed  for  10
        months before travelling to the  United  Kingdom,  arriving  on  28
        November 2016, claiming asylum on the same day.  A  EURODAC  search
        showed the first  appellant  was  fingerprinted  in  Greece  on  10
        January 2016 and in Germany leading to a request being made to  the
        German authorities that he be returned on  third  country  grounds;
        which the German authorities accepted on  23  January  2017,  after
        which the claim made in the UK was refused and certified.
     8. The first appellant claimed asylum, but his application was refused
        in Germany, and he  left  there  in  April  2017,  passing  through
        Belgium and France before arriving back in the UK on 24 August 2017
        and claiming asylum again.  On 3 November  2017,  Germany  accepted
        responsibility as a result of  which  the  asylum  application  was
        refused and certified on 7 March 2018 although the deadline for the
        date of return had passed and the case dropped out  of  the  Dublin
        Convention deadline on 12 August 2018, leaving  responsibility  for
        the claim in the hands of the UK authorities.
     9. In an initial address to the court Mr Tan highlighted an issue that
        explained the  Judges  reference  to  a  screening  interview,  the
        existence of which was the only challenge in  the  grounds  seeking
        permission to appeal on the basis that there was no  such  document
        as that referred to by  the  Judge,  as  there  were  in  fact  two
        screening interviews, one before  the  appellant  was  returned  to
        Germany and the second one when  he  returned.  This  is  factually
        correct. Those documents were disclosed in the Secretary of  States
        bundle of papers filed before the Judge.
    10. Mrs Johnrose accepted before the Upper  Tribunal  that  there  were
        copies of the two interviews undertaken by  the  appellant  in  the
        bundle and that they were before the  Judge,  but  then  sought  to
        argue that the Judge conflated evidence when hearing the appeal. It
        was also argued the screening interview only set out general issues
        not referring to the main issues in the appeal and that the Judge's
        findings in relation to documents the second appellant had a  phone
        was evidence not relied upon by the  Secretary  of  State.  It  was
        argued that there was no relevant screening interview in 2017,  and
        that if the Judge wished to rely on the 2016  screening  interview,
        she should have told the appellant, which she did not,  making  the
        decision unsafe and unfair.
    11. Mr Tan submitted that the point relied upon the appellant following
        the issue of  the  two  screening  interviews  having  been  noted,
        undermining the sole ground  on  which  permission  to  appeal  was
        sought, fell outside the scope of the application for permission to
        appeal on which permission to appeal was granted.
    12. Mr Tan argued, in any event, that the Judge was  entitled  to  note
        the information in the screening interviews and  all  the  evidence
        that had been made available and that it was important to note  the
        Judge's findings  rejecting  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
        claim, and the finding that the appellant's can have  contact  with
        family members and obtain relevant documents from them in Iraq,  as
        well as the ability to obtain the passport from the authorities  in
        Germany.
    13. I find there was no evidence before the  Judge  to  show  that  the
        passport held by the authorities in Germany could not  be  obtained
        or to show that it is still not a live valid  passport  which  will
        enable travel to and re-entry to Iraq and the holder's identity  to
        be ascertained from officially issued documents.
    14. It is not made out that any fairness point arises in the manner  in
        which the Judge assessed the evidence.  The  burden  was  upon  the
        appellant to establish if they could not be the documented and they
        failed to establish that this was the case. It is not made out  the
        Judges reliance upon the evidence is a material error of law.
    15. At [36] Judge writes:

           "36.   Effectively it is the appellant (and  his  wife's)  claim
                 that the contact numbers for family members have been lost.
                 I found this  evidence  to  be  contradictory,  lacking  in
                 credibility and not  reasonably  likely  to  be  true.  The
                 appellant says he lost all the data  on  his  phone  as  it
                 needed to be reformatted. Yet his wife said  she  left  her
                 paternal uncle's number in his mobile and from  there  they
                 were able to contact her uncle in the UK. If the  appellant
                 lost all the data, I find it incredible  that  her  uncle's
                 number would be the only number that would remain - even if
                 it  was  in  the  notebook  of  the  mobile.  Further,  the
                 appellant makes no mention  of  the  number  being  in  his
                 mobile, but stated it was his wife who got the  number;  he
                 did not know how. Maybe she had it  before.  Yet  his  wife
                 also stated she lost her contact numbers as she got  a  new
                 phone and did not know how to transfer  the  numbers  over.
                 Given she says she cannot remember  numbers,  there  is  no
                 reasonable explanation then as to how they had the  contact
                 number for the Appellant's Wife's uncle  in  the  UK.  This
                 causes me to find  the  appellant  and  his  wife  to  have
                 fabricated their claim to have  lost  contact  numbers  and
                 also contact with their family  members.  Whilst  his  wife
                 says her uncle cannot assist as he has not been to Iraq  in
                 a long time, this does not, even  to  the  lower  standard,
                 suggest he does not main contact with his own family  there
                 - or why, if as the appellant and his wife claim, there  is
                 a family disagreement because of their marriage, they would
                 contact her paternal uncle in the first place. I also  note
                 the appellant  and  his  wife  gave  inconsistent  evidence
                 regarding contact with this uncle. His wife  spoke  of  her
                 uncle coming to visit them. The appellant only  alluded  to
                 having spoken on the phone twice. This again causes  me  to
                 find the parties are not credible  witnesses  as  to  their
                 account of contact with family members - and that they have
                 downplayed their contact with  this  uncle  in  the  UK  to
                 fabricated acclaim that they are unable to  contact  family
                 in the IKR."

    16. The above findings were  not  challenged  in  the  grounds  seeking
        permission to appeal. The Judge was entitled  having  examined  the
        evidence to conclude that this was not a  genuine  claim.  Adequate
        reasons have been given as to why there is no merit in  either  the
        protection claim or the claim by those before the Judge  that  they
        had no contact with family in Iraq and accordingly could not obtain
        required documentation.
    17. I find the appellant has failed to  establish  any  arguable  legal
        error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal on  the  basis
        of the original grounds of appeal on which permission was  granted.
        The Judge did not rely on a screening  interview  that  was  not  a
        screening interview in this case, or evidence  that  had  not  been
        disclosed to the parties.  It  was  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
        bundle, meaning the appellant was informed of it and had notice  of
        it. In particular, it is not made out that the Judge  relied  on  a
        screening  interview  from  another  case  which  was  the  concern
        relating to the fairness of the proceedings which led to the  grant
        permission to appeal.
    18. I do not find it made out the Judge  conflated  evidence,  a  claim
        which went beyond the grounds on which  permission  to  appeal  had
        been sought and granted. The Judge's findings  are  clearly  within
        the range those available to the Judge on the evidence and, indeed,
        having considered the evidence together with the decision  for  the
        purposes of considering this judgement, it  is  hard  to  see  what
        conclusion the Judge could have reasonably arrived at,  other  than
        the one he did.
    19. Whilst the  appellant  and  his  wife  disagree  with  the  Judge's
        findings and clearly wish to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom,  as
        demonstrated by their immigration  history,  the  grounds  fail  to
        establish arguable legal error material to the decision to  dismiss
        the appeal sufficient to warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any
        further in this matter.

Decision

    20. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

    21. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 26 July 2021












