
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: LP/00098/2020

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester (via Microsoft Teams) |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 May 2021                            |On 14 June 2021                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                                     MMG
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance.
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant appeals with permission a decision of a  panel  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal ('the Panel') promulgated following a hearing  on
       19 July 2019, in which the Panel found the appellant to have  made  a
       disingenuous claim, to not be a genuine  Christian  convert,  and  to
       face no real  risk  on  return  sufficient  to  warrant  a  grant  of
       international protection.
    2. Permission to appeal was refused by a Resident Judge  of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal but granted on a renewed application by a judge of  the
       Upper Tribunal on 26 August 2020.
    3. The appellant was represented at the  hearing  before  the  Panel  by
       solicitors who advised the Upper Tribunal on 24  November  2020  that
       they were no longer acting for him.
    4. A notice was sent by first class post on 26 April 2021  to  the  last
       known address for the appellant in the following terms:

           'Your appeal is to be listed for a remote Skype hearing  and  it
           is understood that you are currently not represented.


           Could you provide your email address which is required in  order
           for you to join the remote Skype hearing.


           On receipt of your email address details, the notice of  hearing
           will be sent to you with joining information.


           The Tribunal looks forward to hearing from you.'

    5. The letter has not been returned  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  as  being
       marked "gone away" or for any other reasons  and  nor  is  there  any
       other evidence provided to show that it  was  not  delivered  to  the
       appellant. I find it has.
    6. Mr McVeety confirmed the address to which the notice was sent is  the
       same address held by the Home Office for the appellant.
    7. The grant of permission was because the judge was "just persuaded" in
       light of the subsequent decision in PS (Iran) [2020] UKUT 46 that the
       grounds were arguable, but a reading of that decision does  not  show
       that a person in the appellant's circumstances will face a real  risk
       in light of the findings made by the Panel, and especially  in  light
       of [140] of AB (Iran) [2015] UKUT 257 in which it was found  that  an
       individual  in  the  appellant's  circumstances  would  not   attract
       particular attention, meaning there will be  no  questioning  of  him
       during the 'pinch point' in relation to his activities in the UK.
    8. I find  the  failure  of  the  appellant  to  attend  to  pursue  his
       application warrants the appeal being  dismissed  on  the  basis  the
       appellant fails to establish any arguable legal error material to the
       decision of the Panel  to  dismiss  his  appeal.  It  was  found  the
       appellant is disingenuous and that he faces no real  risk  on  return
       which are findings clearly opened to the Panel on the evidence.

Decision

    9. There is no material error  of  law  in  the  Panel's  decision.  The
       determination shall stand.

  Anonymity.

   10. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 1 June 2021
