
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: LP/00003/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|Remotely via Teams                   |                                     |
|On 15 July 2021                      |On 28 July 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

     RO                                                            Appellant
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bednarek
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born in 1995. He appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State
    made on 24 July 2019 refusing his claim for  international  protection.
    The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on  10  March  2020,
    dismissed his appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed by  legal
    error such that it should be set aside. I have  reached  that  decision
    for the following reasons.

 3. First, the First-tier Tribunal failed  to  make  any  findings  on  the
    evidence which was provided the appellant's two witnesses, HOI and HWQ.
    The Tribunal acknowledged the participation  in  the  appeal  of  these
    witnesses at [30-32], summarising (very briefly)  the  main  points  in
    their evidence; in HWQ's case, that the appellant had worked for him at
    a private hospital in Iraq and, in the case,  of  HOI  that  a  patient
    treated by the  appellant  (as  a  nurse)  had  died  at  the  hospital
    following an allergic reaction to medication. It was this  death  which
    the appellant claimed had led to him becoming the subject  of  a  blood
    feud instigated by the  deceased's  family.  In  its  analysis  of  the
    evidence at [67] et seq, the Tribunal gives a  number  of  reasons  for
    finding that the account provided by the  appellant  was  not  credible
    (although it does not so find in terms). Those findings do not  include
    any assessment of the evidence of the witnesses  HOI  and  HWQ.  In  my
    opinion,  that  omission  constitutes  a  serious  error  of  law.  The
    appellant, the unsuccessful party in the appeal, was entitled  to  know
    why the evidence of witnesses, who supported his account of past events
    which the Tribunal has found to be unreliable,  had  been  rejected  or
    accorded little or no weight.

 4. Secondly, I agree with Mr Bednarek, who appeared as  advocate  for  the
    appellant before the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal, that  such
    reasons which the Tribunal has  given  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
    account of the patient's death are, at least in part, unsound. Whilst a
    lack of detail in the appellant's  evidence  concerning  the  patient's
    cause of death may legitimately have led  the  Tribunal  to  doubt  the
    veracity of that evidence, I can identity no basis for  the  Tribunal's
    finding at [73] that 'it  [was]  not  credible  that  tests  would  not
    already have been carried out to see whether or not the  appellant  was
    allergic to a medication that was being prescribed.' The  Tribunal  had
    no reason to speculate as to treatment or  testing  practices  at  this
    particular  hospital  nor  is  it  clear  what  'tests'  the   Tribunal
    (comprising lay individuals with no medical training) had in  mind.  In
    my opinion, the Tribunal has here  strayed  into  an  area  beyond  its
    knowledge and expertise and has rejected the appellant's account on the
    basis of speculation rather than evidence.

 5. In the circumstances, I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal must be set aside for errors of law which go to  the  core  of
    the credibility assessment. Accordingly, there will need to be a  fresh
    fact-finding exercise which I find will  be  better  conducted  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo.


    Listing Directions: first available  date  at  Manchester;  not  Judges
    McClure or Hollings-Tennant; 2 hours; Kurdish Sorani interpreter; First-
    tier Tribunal to determine if remote or face to face.



         Signed                              Date 15 July 2021

        Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
