
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: LP/00139/2020


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester (via Microsoft   |Decision promulgated                 |
|teams)                               |                                     |
|On 8 July 2021                       |On 11 August 2021                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 FODAY DABOH
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Khan instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Sierra Leone, born on  3  January  1975,
      who appeals against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cole
      ('the Judge'), who dismissed his appeal against  the  refusal  of  his
      protection appeal or for leave to remain in the United Kingdom on  any
      other basis, promulgated on 31 March 2020.
   2. The appellant's application for permission to appeal was refused by  a
      Resident Judge of the First-tier Tribunal but  granted  on  a  renewed
      application by a judge of the Upper Tribunal, the  operative  part  of
      the grant being in the following terms:

      This is an unusual case, in which the appellant claims to be  at  risk
      as a result of his association with  his  former  employer  in  Sierra
      Leone. That risk is said to have increased significantly as  a  result
      of the appellant having given evidence before the High Court in London
      in 2018. Judge Cole accepted all that he said and found that he  would
      be at risk on return to his home area for  these  reasons.  The  judge
      concluded that any risk to the appellant in a place of relocation  was
      too remote, however, and dismissed his appeal on grounds  of  internal
      relocation. I am satisfied that it is arguable that the judge erred in
      reaching that conclusion, in that he arguably left out of account  the
      matters noted in  grounds  one  and  two.  I  consider  grounds  three
      decidedly less impressive, but it is just arguable that the judge left
      out of account the relevant background  material  in  concluding  that
      relocation would be reasonable. In the  circumstances,  permission  is
      granted on all three grounds.

   3. At [53 - 54] of the decision the Judge wrote:

      53.     I therefore find that the appellant would be  safe  in  Lungi,
        Pepple or Freetown. Thus, it is  necessary  to  assess  whether  it
        would be reasonable for him to relocate. The Appellant asserts that
        he will be unable to find work  and  housing  in  another  part  of
        Sierra  Leone.  I  accept  that  this  may  be  difficult  for  the
        Appellant, especially as he worked for one employer for such a long
        time. However, the Appellant clearly has skills having worked as  a
        carpenter and doing building works as well as working as a  driver.
        He has no significant health problems or other  impediments.  There
        is no evidence to suggest that the Appellant would not be  able  to
        find work to support  himself  and  his  family  if  they  were  to
        relocate to the capital, Freetown, or another part of Sierra Leone.
        I find that relocation may be difficult, but it will not be  unduly
        harsh and it would not be unreasonable.


      54.     Therefore,  in  summary,  I  find  that  the  Appellant  is  a
        generally  credible  witness  who  has  established  to  the  lower
        standard of proof that he will be at real risk of serious  harm  in
        his hometown of Bumbuna. However, I find that  internal  relocation
        to somewhere such as Freetown, Lungi or Pepple would  be  safe  and
        reasonable for the Appellant.


Error of law


Background

   4. As noted by the judge granting permission this is an unusual case.  In
      addition to the appellant's activities in Sierra Leone he was  also  a
      witness in a case in the Administrative Court in the UK,  reported  as
      Kadie Kalama & Ors v African Minerals Ltd & Ors [2018] EWHC 3506 (QB),
      in which Turner J dismissed claims arising from African  Minerals  Ltd
      (AML) mining activities in Tonkolili in Sierra  Leone.  The  appellant
      was one of the witnesses  for  AML  before  the  High  Court  and  his
      evidence is referred to in that judgement.
   5. The appellant relies on three grounds  of  challenge  to  the  Judge's
      decision.  Ground  1  challenges  the   reasonableness   of   internal
      relocation by reference to the situation in Sierra  Leone  and  cross-
      references to aspects  of  the  decision  of  the  High  Court  before
      concluding at [25]:

      25.     It is therefore submitted the FTT has  erred  in  its  finding
        that  A's  fear  of  being   identified   in   all   locations   is
        "speculative": given period of time A was visibly employed  by  and
        associated with AML  in  all  three  locations,  Lungi,  Pepel  and
        Freetown, given the acceptance of the high profile. AML had  within
        Sierra Leone as a result of  its  business  activities  within  the
        country and the High Court challenge against it, and of  the  clear
        resentment held by members of the Bumbuna community against AML and
        the threats made against witnesses, it  is  submitted  that  rather
        being "remote" A has established  to  the  low  standard  the  real
        possibility  of  being  identified  in  all  locations,   of   that
        information being sent back to Bumbuna, and thus placing A at  real
        risk in all potential identified  locations  from  members  of  the
        Bumbuna community, of whom, the FTT has accepted, A has established
        he has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.  It  is  reasonably
        submitted the FTT has erred in reaching its finding on  the  safety
        of A relocating to the identified locations.

   6. Ground 2 refers to the appellant's political  profile  and  that  when
      employed by AML, during the 2012 Presidential Elections, the appellant
      campaigned for the APC candidate Mr Koroma; although that  party  lost
      in the 2018 elections to the SLLP. Since then, it is stated there  has
      been violence against APC members and supporters. The appellant's past
      political activities were accepted as being credible by the Judge  who
      is criticised for providing no reasoning  for  finding  the  appellant
      will not be perceived as a high-level support of the APC. It  is  also
      asserted the Judge failed to consider or provide adequate reasons  for
      rejecting the appellant's claim during 2012 he went from department to
      department within the AML. It is also asserted at [32] of the Grounds:

      32.     Thirdly, A's evidence is that his political profile would  not
        solely be limited to his explicit activities in the 2012  election.
        His political profile, imputed or otherwise, will be based  on  his
        high-profile association with AML having  acted  as  their  defence
        witness in the high-profile High  Court  case,  together  with  his
        previous  role  as  the  chairperson  of  a  five-member  committee
        associated  with  the  company.   Given   the   findings   by   the
        Administrative Court confirming the close association  between  the
        former APC Government and AML, and given the acceptance by the  FTT
        of ongoing political  violence  within  Sierra  Leone  against  APC
        supporters, it was A's evidence that the risk he faced  based  upon
        his political opinion was a result of both his past activities  and
        his association with the AML, themselves  associated  closely  with
        the APC. The failure of the FTT to consider this material  evidence
        amounts to an error of law.

   7.  Ground  3  refers  to  the  reasonableness  of  relocation  and   the
      appellant's evidence that to obtain  employment  depends  upon  having
      contacts and that without links to an area employment is not possible.
      It is stated, it was not disputed that the appellant's  only  previous
      connection within the three suggested relocation locations  was  based
      on his  past  employment  with  AML  and  is  not  disputed  that  the
      employment with AML no longer exists.  At  [37]  of  the  grounds  the
      appellant writes:

        Having found A to be generally  credible,  no  reasoning  has  been
        provided as to why A's evidence on this matter is not accepted. The
        failure to provide any reasoning as to why A's evidence is disputed
        amounts to an error of law, as is the failure to consider  material
        evidence.

   8. Ms Khan in her submissions relied upon the pleaded grounds and  argued
      that what was required was a fair and holistic assessment of  all  the
      issues  which  are  interrelated,  which  makes  internal   relocation
      unreasonable.
   9. . Mr  Tan  on  behalf  the  Secretary  of  State  accepted  the  final
      submission regarding the issues  being  entwined,  but  submitted  the
      Grounds are no more than an attempt to reargue the case as  the  Judge
      set out the submissions at [38] in which there is  specific  reference
      to the points made in Grounds including that regarding  the  publicity
      in the case and the link to the company and link to the APC  political
      movement. It is also submitted that many of the points relied upon  by
      the appellant are set out by the Judge at  [40]  and  that  the  Judge
      accepted there was a real risk to the appellant in his home  area  and
      needed  to  look  at  the  risk  in  other  areas  as  part   of   the
      reasonableness assessment. It is argued that that is  what  the  Judge
      did, and no legal error arises. It is argued that the challenge is, in
      reality, a rationality challenge to the Judge's conclusions which have
      not been shown  to  be  irrational  or  outside  the  range  of  those
      available to the Judge on the evidence.
  10. Mr Tan argued the Judge took into account  the  appellant's  political
      activities and his role within the company,  which  was  when  he  was
      based in Bumbuna. It is  not  disputed  the  appellant  is  no  longer
      politically active or committed to politics, which means  that  if  he
      internally relocates he is not likely to have a  profile  that  places
      him at risk.
  11. Mr Tan  also  argued  that  ground  3  is  a  reasons  challenge  with
      sufficient reasons having been given by the  Judge  for  the  findings
      made.

Discussion

  12. It is not disputed there was a requirement upon the Judge to  consider
      all the evidence with the required degree of anxious scrutiny  and  to
      give sufficient  reasons  in  support  of  the  findings  made.  Those
      findings commence from [40] of the decision under challenge.
  13. At [38] the Judge refers to submissions made by Mr  Bednarik,  Counsel
      who appeared on behalf of the appellant before Judge Cole.  A  reading
      of the submissions shows the Judge was clearly  aware  of  the  points
      that were being raised on the appellant's behalf including any link to
      the appellant's support for the AMC in court, being a supporter of the
      APC, and any related risk that may arise.
  14. At [40] the Judge confirms that he has considered all the evidence and
      there is no reason to believe that the Judge did not do  so.  This  is
      not a decision a reading of  which  indicates  that  although  such  a
      statement appears the author of  the  determination  clearly  did  not
      consider  all  the  evidence  with  the  required  degree  of  anxious
      scrutiny. The Judge was not  required  to  set  out  to  the  evidence
      verbatim and to record findings in relation to each and  every  aspect
      of that evidence. The fact he has not done so does not mean it was not
      properly considered.
  15. At [54] the Judge finds the appellant is a generally credible  witness
      who has established the lower standard of proof that  he  will  be  at
      risk of serious harm in his hometown  of  Bumbuna  but  who  finds  it
      internal relocation to somewhere such as  Freetown,  Lungi  or  Pepple
      would be safe and reasonable for the appellant.
  16. Paragraph  339O  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  is  intended  to
      incorporate the Directive, states:

     i) The Secretary of State will not make: (a) a grant of asylum  if  in
        part of the country of origin a  person  would  not  have  a  well-
        founded fear of being persecuted, and the person can reasonably  be
        expected to stay in that part of the country; or  (b)  a  grant  of
        humanitarian protection if in part  of  the  country  of  return  a
        person would not face a real risk of suffering  serious  harm,  and
        the person can reasonably be expected to stay in that part  of  the
        country.


    ii) In examining whether a part of the country of origin or country  of
        return meets the requirements in (i) the Secretary of  State,  when
        making his decision on whether  to  grant  asylum  or  humanitarian
        protection,  will  have  regard  to   the   general   circumstances
        prevailing in  that  part  of  the  country  and  to  the  personal
        circumstances of the person.


   iii) (i) applies notwithstanding technical obstacles to  return  to  the
        country of origin or country of return.

  17. In SSHD v AH (Sudan) and Others [2007] UKHL  49  the  House  of  Lords
      pointed out that the test to determine whether internal relocation was
      available was the test set out in Januzi v SSHD [2006] UKHL 5,  namely
      that the decision maker should decide whether, taking account  of  all
      relevant circumstances pertaining to  the  claimant  and  his  or  her
      country it would be reasonable to expect the claimant to  relocate  or
      whether it would be unduly harsh to expect him or her to  do  so.  The
      test was one of great generality. In applying the test enquiry had  to
      be directed to the situation of the particular claimant;  very  little
      was excluded from consideration other  than  the  standard  of  rights
      protection which a claimant would enjoy in the  country  where  refuge
      was sought. Baroness Hale said that all the circumstances of the  case
      had to be assessed holistically, with specific reference  to  personal
      circumstances   including   past   persecution   or   fear    thereof,
      psychological or health conditions, family and social situations,  and
      survival capacities, in the context of the conditions in the place  of
      relocation, including basic human rights, security and socio  economic
      conditions, and access to health care facilities: all with a  view  to
      determining the impact on the claimant of  settling  in  the  proposed
      place of relocation and whether the claimant could live  a  relatively
      normal life without undue hardship
  18. That test was  discussed  further  in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
      relocation) (CG) [2018] UKUT 212 and also by the Court of Appeal in KS
      (Iran) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 6 and, discussing Januzi and AH (Sudan),
      the decision of the Court of Appeal in AS  (Afghanistan)  [2019]  EWCA
      Civ 873 in which the Court of Appeal said that  they  entirely  agreed
      with AAH and that the test of whether  relocation  was  reasonable  or
      would be unduly harsh was  of  great  generality  save  only  that  it
      excluded comparison of the  conditions  in  the  safe  haven  and  the
      country of refuge. The applicant must be able  to  lead  a  relatively
      normal life in the context of the country concerned but the test is  a
      holistic one.
  19. It is not made out the approach taken by the Judge to  the  assessment
      of the relocation question was contrary to the guidance in relation to
      the method in which the reasonableness of internal relocation  was  to
      be assessed.
  20. In relation to the place of relocation, the Judge does not find  those
      three named locations are all those it is  reasonable  to  expect  the
      appellant to relocate to, clearly stating at [54] that they are places
      which he could safely relocate to (note the use of the  wording  'such
      as') without limiting the decision to only these places.  In  AMM  and
      others (conflict; humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)  Somalia  CG
      [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) the Tribunal  held  that  there  is  no  legal
      burden on the Secretary of State to prove that there is a part of  the
      country of nationality etc of an appellant, who has established a well-
      founded fear  in  their  home  area,  to  which  the  appellant  could
      reasonably be expected to go and live. The appellant bears  the  legal
      burden of proving entitlement to international  protection;  but  what
      that entails will very much  depend  upon  the  circumstances  of  the
      particular case. In practice, the issue of internal  relocation  needs
      to be raised by the Secretary of State in the  letter  of  refusal  or
      (subject to procedural fairness) during the appellate proceedings.  It
      will then be for  the  appellant  to  make  good  an  assertion  that,
      notwithstanding the  general  conditions  in  the  proposed  place  of
      relocation, it would not be reasonable to relocate there.
  21. The appellant's  claim  was  effectively  that  as  a  result  of  his
      involvement in politics and with the AML case in the High  Court,  the
      combination of his profile and the feelings of those affected  by  the
      actions of the AML and of opposing political parties, this has created
      a real risk for him in all of Sierra Leone, and that there is no where
      he could live lead a relatively normal life  in  the  context  of  the
      country concerned. The challenge can only be read in these terms as it
      is not conceded on any account by the appellant that there is anywhere
      else within the country to which he can reasonably relocate.
  22. A map of Sierra Leone shows a number of urban settlement, the  biggest
      city in  a  country  of  over  7,000,000  people,  being  the  capital
      Freetown, which is located in the Western region of the  country,  and
      it is a major port city on the Atlantic Ocean whose economic growth is
      dependent on the harbour. The city has a culturally diverse population
      of different religions and ethnicities with no particular ethnic group
      that dominates the population since  it  is  home  to  all  of  Sierra
      Leone's people. It was not found out that in such an  environment  the
      appellant will face a real risk of being identified or at risk of harm
      as a result of earlier political activities or  his  association  with
      the AML. This has not been shown to be finding outside  the  range  of
      those available to the Judge on  the  evidence.  The  mining  town  of
      Bumbuna is a town in the central of Tonkolili District in the Northern
      Province of Sierra Leone. The  town  lies  about  30  miles  from  the
      district capital of Magburaka and approximately 124  miles  (by  road)
      northeast  of  Freetown.  The  appellant's  assertion  regarding   the
      entwined links arising from matters considered by the High Court,  his
      employment and, earlier political activities, were not  found  by  the
      Judge to establish a real risk outside his immediate home area.
  23. The city of Bo is located in the Southern Province  of  Sierra  Leone,
      and the whole urban centre is commonly known as Bo  Town.  It  is  the
      second largest city in Sierra  Leone  and  the  biggest  city  in  the
      southern province serving as the administrative centre and capital  of
      Bo district. The population of Bo is estimated at about  233,684.  The
      city has an ethnically diverse  population,  is  about  120  miles  or
      thereabouts from Bumbuna, with there  being  no  evidence  before  the
      Judge that those who have been found to have created a  credible  real
      risk of harm to the appellant in his home area would  have  sufficient
      influence connections or lines of communication to such that they will
      be aware of the appellant's return, or that those living in that  area
      could themselves be interested in the appellant such as  to  create  a
      real risk of harm to him.
  24. Kenema in the Eastern Province of Sierra Leone is  the  third  largest
      city in the  country  and,  like  Freetown  and  Bo,  is  home  to  an
      ethnically diverse population.
  25. There are other urban settlements within Sierra Leone, both cities and
      towns, and I find the appellant failed to  produce  before  the  Judge
      sufficient evidence to establish a real risk in other  than  his  home
      area, as found by the Judge, or that  expecting  him  to  relocate  to
      another area other than that identified as  creating  the  real  risk,
      would be unreasonable in all the  circumstances.  At  [50]  the  Judge
      writes:

      50.     The core issue in this case is whether it  will  be  safe  and
        reasonable for the Appellant to relocate to another part of  Sierra
        Leone. It is of note that the  Appellant  previously  relocated  to
        Lungi and Pepple and did  not  have  problems  in  those  areas.  I
        acknowledge, though,  that  this  was  before  the  Appellant  gave
        evidence for AML and so it is likely  the  tissues  have  escalated
        since this time (as evidenced by the attack on the family home that
        led to the Appellant's daughter serious  injuries).  However,  this
        does not necessarily mean that a higher degree of risk  in  Bumbuna
        means heightened risk across Sierra Leone.

  26. As noted above, the burden of proving his case was upon the  appellant
      and the decision in the High Court whilst  recording  aspects  of  the
      evidence was not a decision on the reasonableness of relocation of the
      appellant to any part of Sierra  Leone.  It  was  a  civil  commercial
      dispute in which the High Court gave reasoned findings on the  matters
      appertaining to the issues before it on the evidence. It is  also  the
      case that the High Court received no submissions on the reasonableness
      of internal relocation.
  27. It is accepted that an employee of AML died in 2013, which the country
      information indicates was as a result of a road  traffic  accident  on
      his motorbike whilst travelling to Bumbuna. This individual  had  been
      responsible for events leading to the strike in Bumbuna  in  2012  and
      had  refused  to  testify  against  AML.  Notwithstanding,  there  was
      insufficient evidence before the Judge to establish a real risk to the
      appellant in all of Sierra Leone in light of his own profile.
  28. As it cannot be said that the Judge was unaware of or failed  to  take
      the evidence into account, and as the findings are reasoned,  even  if
      the appellant disagrees with them, there is merit in the submission of
      Mr Tan of the nature of the challenge to the Judge's findings.
  29. It is necessary to read the decisions a whole, including [51] in which
      the Judge writes:

      51.     The Appellant argues that he is known as an  AML  employee  in
        Lungi and Pepple, and so word may get  back  to  the  community  in
        Bumbuna. In a similar vein, he submits that he was a driver for AML
        in Freetown, so once again he would be recognisable and so word may
        get back to the community in  Bumbuna,  I  find  this  is  far  too
        speculative to establish a real risk in these areas.  Even  if  the
        Appellant were recognised or  questioned  about  his  identity  and
        origins in one of those areas, the  prospect  of  such  information
        getting back to Bumbuna is remote and then the prospect of a member
        of the community in Bumbuna  then  travelling  to  the  Appellant's
        place of relocation  to  harm  him  is  even  more  remote.  I  can
        understand the Appellant's objective, fear, but I do not find  that
        they are objectively well-founded. Any risk  in  Lungi,  Pepple  or
        Freetown is so remote that it does not come  close  to  reaching  a
        real risk threshold.

  30. The Judge therefore recognises the  appellant's  subjective  fear  but
      assesses whether such fear is objectively well-founded on the basis of
      the available  evidence.  Whilst  the  appellant  disagrees  with  the
      Judge's findings that any risk is too remote to  cross  the  requisite
      threshold, for the reasons stated, it is  not  made  out  the  Judge's
      findings having considered the evidence as a  whole  are  outside  the
      range of those reasonably available to the Judge. AML is an  iron  ore
      mining company with no evidence that they have a  presence  throughout
      the whole of Sierra Leone or that the appellant's political activities
      or work undertaken whilst an employee of AML  or  as  a  witness  will
      place him at risk in all of Sierra Leone. The  Judge's  assessment  of
      the credibility of the claimed risk having assessed  the  evidence  is
      supported by adequate reasoning and has not been shown to  be  outside
      the range of findings reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence.
  31. At [52] the Judge writes:

      52.     The Appellant also asserts that he would be at risk because of
        his support for the APC during the 2012 election campaign. I  agree
        with the Respondent that the Appellant's activities were at such  a
        low level and so many years ago that they would not  place  him  at
        real risk now. I accept that there is political violence in  Sierra
        Leone and that supporters of the ruling SLPP to  attack  supporters
        of  the  APC.  However,  the  Appellant  accepts  that  he  is  not
        politically active or committed and  he  is  more  concerned  about
        perceptions from events many years ago. Again, I do  not  find  the
        Appellant's fear objectively well-founded. I do not find  that  the
        Appellant would be perceived as a high-level supporter of  the  APC
        such as to place at real serious risk of harm in Sierra Leone.

  32. It has not been shown this is a finding outside  the  range  of  those
      available to the Judge on the evidence, especially  as  the  basis  of
      this aspect of the appellant's claim appears to arise from  historical
      events in 2012 rather  than  current  ongoing  contemporary  political
      activity and that there was nothing in the evidence before  the  Judge
      to show that even if those identified as being supporters of  the  APC
      now  face  a  real  risk,  this  means  that  those  with   historical
      connections, with no ongoing political activity or commitment  to  the
      APC, especially if they are relocated to an area where they  have  not
      been politically active in the past, will face a real risk of harm for
      this reason.
  33. The reference in the grounds to the comments by the High  Court,  said
      to confirm  implicit  difficulty  in  finding  employment,  is  not  a
      decision of a judicial body specifically  tasked  with  analysing  the
      evidence in connection with  reasonableness  of  internal  relocation.
      Such comments will be  obiter  at  their  highest  and  whilst  it  is
      accepted that the unemployment rate in  Sierra  Leone  is  high,  with
      certain sections of the population having to live in relative poverty,
      it was not made out that with the appellant's past employment  history
      and skills, as  identified,  that  he  will  not  be  able  to  obtain
      employment or secure an income sufficient to meet his basic needs  and
      those  of  his  family,  such  as  to  make  it  unreasonable  in  the
      circumstances for him to internally relocate.
  34. As noted above,  whilst  the  appellant's  subjective  fears  are  not
      challenged by the Judge it has not been shown that the Judges ultimate
      decision to dismiss the appeal on the basis of an  availability  of  a
      reasonable internal relocation option, enabling the appellant to avoid
      any real risk from the nonstate actors the appellant claims  to  fear,
      is a finding outside the range of those reasonably open to  the  Judge
      on the evidence such as to  amount  to  an  irrational,  unlawful,  or
      unfair finding.
  35. Whilst the appellant may wish to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  the
      grounds fail  to  establish  arguable  legal  error  material  to  the
      decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  sufficient  to  warrant  the  Upper
      Tribunal interfering any further in this  matter.  The  Judge  clearly
      took the evidence into  account  and  has  given  adequately  reasoned
      findings  in  support  of  the  conclusions   in   relation   to   the
      reasonableness of internal relocation within Sierra Leone.




Decision

  36. There is no material error of law in the Immigration Judge's decision.
      The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

  37. The First-tier Tribunal made no order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
      Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
  38. I make no such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated 21 July 2021

