
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/00292/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 August 2015                     |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS


                                   Between

                            miss anterpreet kaur
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Balroop, Counsel instructed by Malik Law
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The      Appellant, a citizen of India, applied at the age  of  17  for
    entry clearance to the UK to join  her  mother.   Her  application  was
    refused.  Her ensuing appeal was heard by Judge Meah sitting at  Taylor
    House on 4 December 2014.  Both parties were represented, the Appellant
    by Counsel instructed by her former solicitors.  In a determination  of
    7 December, promulgated on 15 December, 2014, her appeal was  dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 human rights grounds.

2.    The  Appellant  sought  permission   to   appeal.    As   subsequently
    supplemented by procedural directions, this was granted on 4 March 2015
    by Judge Baker in the following terms:

         "1.  The appellant, an Indian national born on  29  November  1996,
             seeks permission to  appeal  the  decision  of  Judge  S  Meah
             promulgated on 15 December 2014.

         2.   The judge had dismissed her appeal against  refusal  of  entry
             clearance as a child of her  mother  who  was  living  in  the
             United Kingdom with limited leave to remain until  July  2017.
             That application had been refused on 22 November 2013  because
             the Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied the sponsor  had
             had sole responsibility for the appellant's upbringing or that
             her  exclusion  from  the  UK  was  undesirable.   The   Entry
             Clearance Officer was also not satisfied  that  the  appellant
             would be adequately maintained and accommodated in the  United
             Kingdom without recourse to public funds.

         3.   There is merit in the grounds which correctly  note  that  the
             judge  at  paragraph  24  of  the  decision  followed  Gulshan
             (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640,
             dismissing the appellant's Article 8 ground of  appeal  solely
             on the basis that the Immigration Rules were a 'complete code'
             and there was no need to separately consider Article 8.

         4.   That is no longer law as it cannot stand following  the  Court
             of Appeal's judgment in MM (Lebanon) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
             985.  It is arguable that  this  was  a  material  error  even
             having regard to the statement at paragraph 25  by  the  judge
             that the  same  conclusion  would  have  been  reached  had  a
             detailed assessment of Article 8 been undertaken.

         5.   This is having regard to the statement that there  is  limited
             family life at best between the appellant and the  sponsor  in
             the United Kingdom and the  sponsor's  family  in  the  United
             Kingdom and that this can easily  be  maintained  through  the
             usual modern means of communication.  It is arguable that,  as
             submitted  in  the  grounds,  for  example  the  statement  at
             paragraph 25 does  not  address  the  detail  of  close  links
             between  the  appellant  and  her  step-siblings   noting   in
             paragraph 16 that they had visited India for  three  weeks  in
             2013 and four weeks in 2014 and 'are all very  close  to  each
             other as a result'.

         6.   The grounds have merit."

3.   On 20 March the Respondent wrote to the Tribunal stating that,  without
    the determination nor the permission application, it was  not  possible
    to submit a  Rule  24  response.   Such  a  response  was  subsequently
    submitted  within  the  Respondent's  skeleton  argument  sent  to  the
    Tribunal before the hearing.

4.   The Sponsor, who is the Appellant's mother,  together  with  two  other
    people, attended the error of law  hearing.   This  took  the  form  of
    submissions, which  I  have  taken  into  account,  together  with  the
    permission application, the Rule 24 response and the skeleton  argument
    of the Respondent.  I reserved my decision.



Determination

5.   At paragraphs 20 and 21 of the decision, the judge  explained  why  the
    Appellant was unable to meet the Immigration Rules.  At paragraph 22 he
    stated that the  Appellant's  representative  had  submitted  that  the
    Appellant had a freestanding Article 8 appeal.  In  paragraphs  23  and
    24, the judge concluded that he did not.   In  paragraph  25  he  wrote
    that, even if he were wrong, such an appeal would not succeed.

6.   The permission application is a lengthy and  erudite  excursus  through
    the developing Article 8 jurisprudence.  Its essence is that, in citing
    at paragraph 24 Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640, the judge  had  relied  upon
    law already overtaken in MM (Lebanon)  v  SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985.
    However the judge did extract from this case at paragraph 23.

7.   The issue is whether the judge was correct  to  deny  the  Appellant  a
    freestanding  right  of  appeal  under  Article  8.    The   permission
    application submits that he was not.  The Respondent  replies  that  he
    was, especially in the  light  of  SS  (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387,
    especially at paragraph 40, and  SM  (Somalia)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  223,
    especially at paragraphs 5, 15 and 17.

8.   The judge gave his reasons for concluding that the  Appellant  did  not
    have a freestanding right of appeal on Article 8 human rights  grounds.
    However, at paragraph 25, he considered this right  of  appeal  on  the
    basis that the Appellant  did  have  it.   He  took  into  account  the
    evidence summarised in the determination and the  statutory  provisions
    of Section 117 introduced into the 2002 Act by the 2014 Act, concluding
    that the decision was in that event proportionate and necessary in  the
    interests of maintaining effective immigration control.

9.    For  the  Appellant,  Mr  Balroop  reviewed  the  factors  which,   he
    submitted, were cumulatively exceptional, arguing that  the  judge  had
    not sufficiently taken them into account.  However a  holistic  reading
    of  the  decision,  which  reviews  all  of  these  factors,  does  not
    substantiate that submission.

10.  I conclude that the decision does not reflect an error of law,  and  is
    accordingly upheld.

Notice of Decision

11.  The original decision does not contain an error of law, and is upheld.

12.  No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Dated: 4 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
