
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: OA/00223/2014
      OA/00226/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Promulgated |
|On 8 April 2015                        |On 20 April 2015          |
|Prepared 8 April 2015                  |                          |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                MD SAID DAKAK
                                AMAL ALHALLAK
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER BEIRUT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Saeed, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms Rackstraw, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The Appellants, born on  20  November  1939  and  29  January  1949
        respectively are husband and wife. Both are citizens of Syria. On 1
        September 2013 they applied for a grant of entry clearance for  the
        purpose of settlement as the dependent parents  of  their  youngest
        son, who held ILR, and was employed as a doctor in  the  UK.  Their
        applications were refused on 20 November 2013.
     2.    The Appellants' appeals were heard by First Tier Tribunal  Judge
        AJM Baldwin at Richmond on 21 August 2014, and in  a  determination
        promulgated on 29 August 2014 those appeals were dismissed.
     3.    By a decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein  of  23  January
        2015 the Appellants were granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
        Tribunal on the basis it was arguable the  Judge  had  fallen  into
        error in refusing  the  request  made  by  the  Appellants  for  an
        adjournment of the hearing of their appeals  in  order  that  their
        sponsor might attend to give evidence at that hearing.
     4.    The Respondent filed  a  Rule  24  Notice  on  29  January  2014
        complaining that the sponsor should not have simply assumed that an
        adjournment would be granted, and failed  to  attend  the  hearing.
        Neither party has applied  for  permission  to  rely  upon  further
        evidence pursuant to Rule 15(2A) of the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
        Rules 2008.
     5.    Thus the matter comes before me.


   The adjournment request
     6.    When the appeal was called on for hearing before the Judge,  the
        sponsor was not present, although the Appellants  were  represented
        by Mr Tablieh of Cham Solicitors.
     7.    At all material times the sponsor has lived  at  South  Shields.
        For  reasons  that   are   not   clear   the   Appellants'   former
        representatives did not request the Tribunal to list the hearing of
        their appeals at the hearing centre most conveniently situated  for
        him; instead the venue requested by letter dated 18  December  2013
        which accompanied the IAFT-2 forms, was London. At no point did the
        Appellants seek a transfer of the  hearing  to  the  North  Shields
        hearing centre.
     8.    The Judge noted at paragraph 4 of the determination the  history
        of the listing of the appeals. The salient points  are  these.  The
        appeals were first listed for hearing  on  24  November  2014.  The
        Appellants' representatives responded to that notice of hearing  by
        requesting the hearing of their appeals be  expedited,  and  listed
        for early June 2014. The Tribunal acceded to that  request  and  in
        consequence relisted the appeals for 13 June 2014, and notified the
        parties of that by notice dated 21 May 2014.  The  Appellants  then
        responded to that notice on 23 May 2014 requesting  an  adjournment
        on the basis the sponsor was by now outside the UK, and  would  not
        return until 14 June 2014. The Tribunal acceded  to  that  request,
        and on 28 May 2014 issued a notice to the  parties  informing  them
        that the hearing was now listed for 8 August 2014.
     9.    On 7 August 2014 the Tribunal  notified  the  parties  that  the
        hearing could not proceed for want of a judge, and that the  appeal
        had been adjourned until 21 August  2014.  On  8  August  2014  the
        Appellants sought an adjournment  of  the  hearing  listed  for  21
        August 2014 because  the  sponsor  could  not  rearrange  his  work
        commitments and be present. A series of dates were provided in that
        written request, when he would be available. For reasons  that  are
        unexplained, the Tribunal  did  not  respond  to  that  adjournment
        request, although the Judge appears to have  accepted  (perhaps  in
        part in the light of Mr Tablieh's fax letter to the Tribunal of  20
        August) that Mr Tablieh had sought on  a  number  of  occasions  to
        follow up the request by telephone and fax.
    10.    The Judge accepted that the failure of the Tribunal  to  respond
        to the request for  an  adjournment  (and  indeed  the  failure  to
        respond  to  Mr  Tablieh's  attempts  to  chase  it  up)  was   not
        satisfactory. Nevertheless he took the view that  the  sponsor  was
        not entitled to assume that the request would be  granted,  and  to
        simply fail to attend. That rather missed the point, which was that
        the sponsor had stated in terms immediately upon being notified  of
        the date of the hearing (two weeks ahead) that he could not attend,
        because he could not be released by his  employer  to  do  so.  The
        Judge was therefore expecting the sponsor to do something which  he
        had always said he was unable to do.
    11.    The Judge appears to have gone on to  find  that  there  was  no
        evidence before him as to why the sponsor could not attend, and  no
        evidence from his employer refusing to release  him.  The  evidence
        that was already before the  Tribunal  recorded  however  that  the
        sponsor was at all material times employed at an NHS hospital in an
        intensive care unit. It ought to be  common  knowledge  within  the
        judiciary that the re-arrangement of shifts within such a  unit  is
        not a simple matter,  and  that  it  is  dependent  upon  both  the
        goodwill, and the  physical  availability,  of  suitably  qualified
        professional colleagues  able  to  swap  shifts,  as  well  as  the
        employer's permission.
    12.     The  test  posed  for  the   appropriate   approach   to   such
        circumstances is set out in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness)  [2014]
        UKUT 418. It is one simple fairness. The Appellants do not need  to
        establish  that  the  decision   was   perverse,   irrational,   or
        unreasonable. Whilst the Appellants undoubtedly contributed to  the
        listing problems by requesting a hearing  in  London,  rather  than
        North Shields, the Tribunal  acceded  to  that  request,  and  then
        having offered a hearing on 8 August 2014, cancelled it at the last
        moment. When the Tribunal notified the Appellants on 7 August  2014
        of the proposed new hearing date of 21 August  2014  the  sponsor's
        immediate response was that he  would  be  unable  to  attend.  His
        reason for being unable to do so was not a spurious one;  far  from
        it. In all  the  circumstances,  the  refusal  of  the  adjournment
        sought, rendered the hearing of the appeal procedurally unfair. The
        Appellants had always sought an oral hearing of their  appeal,  and
        relied upon the sponsor's evidence in support of that appeal.
    13.    In the circumstances I am invited by both  parties  to  consider
        whether or not to remit the appeal to the First Tier  Tribunal  for
        it to be reheard. In the circumstances of the appeal I am satisfied
        that this is the correct approach. In circumstances where it  would
        appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been  considered
        by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that  error  of  law  has
        been to deprive the Appellants of the opportunity for their case to
        be properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a)
        of the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover the extent
        of the judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard to
        the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should
        be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal;  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the
        Practice Statement of 25 September 2012.
    14.    Having reached that conclusion, and with the  agreement  of  the
        parties I make the following directions;
           i) The decision upon the appeals is set aside  and  the  appeals
              are remitted to the First Tier Tribunal  for  hearing  on  22
              April 2015 at the North Shields Hearing Centre, with 2  hours
              allowed. The appeals are not to be listed  before  Judge  AJM
              Baldwin. No interpreter is required.
          ii) Any further evidence that the Appellants wish  to  rely  upon
              shall be filed and served by 5pm on 15 April 2015.  There  is
              no need for the  Appellants  to  re-serve,  or  re-file,  the
              bundle of 1 April 2015.




Decision

   1. The Determination promulgated on 29 August 2014 did involve the making
      of an error of law and accordingly the decision upon the appeal is set
      aside. The appeals are remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal  with  the
      following directions;
           i) The decision upon the appeals is set aside  and  the  appeals
              are remitted to the First Tier Tribunal  for  hearing  on  22
              April 2015 at the North Shields Hearing Centre, with 2  hours
              allowed. The appeals are not to be listed  before  Judge  AJM
              Baldwin. No interpreter is required.
          ii) Any further evidence that the Appellants wish  to  rely  upon
              shall be filed and served by 5pm on 15 April 2015.  There  is
              no need for the  Appellants  to  re-serve,  or  re-file,  the
              bundle of 1 April 2015.



Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 8 April 2015

