
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/00216/2015
     OA/00221/2015
     OA/00227/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 July 2016                               |On 14 July 2016               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                MRS S H SHAH
                                MISS H H SHAH
                                 MR H M SHAH
                       (ANNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State with permission  of
    Upper Tribunal Judge Storey from a determination of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Rastogi, promulgated on 9 December 2015.   The  three  appellants
    (as I shall call them,  to  reflect  their  status  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal) are Indian nationals. They are  part  of  a  family  (father,
    mother and daughter) but the  presenting  issue  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had to determine was whether there had been deception by
    the principal appellant in relation to ETS testing, as a consequence of
    which the appellants should be removed.

2.   On 16 December 2014 the appellants lodged their notices and grounds  of
    appeal.  On 12 March 2015 the Secretary of State was directed  to  file
    and serve all the evidence upon which she relied within 28 days of  her
    receipt of the notice of appeal that means by 9 April 2015.  Then on 12
    June 2015 both parties were directed to file bundles of the evidence on
    which they were to rely no later than five days prior to  the  hearing.
    The Secretary of State was further directed  to  supply  the  documents
    that had been required by 9 April 2015 "without  further  delay".   The
    direction issued at this time included the following  warning  "If  the
    documents are not filed with the Tribunal ten working days  before  the
    date of the hearing, subject to Rule 14, the appeal may  be  determined
    in the absence of those documents".

3.   When the matter came on for  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge, the evidence had not been served.  The judge dealt with the late
    service of evidence by the Secretary of State  and  by  the  appellants
    separately.  In relation to the late service by the Secretary of State,
    the judge said at paragraph 8:

         "I was asked to deal initially with  the  respondent's  application
         for permission to  file  and  serve  evidence  as  to  the  alleged
         deception on the day of the hearing as it had not  previously  been
         served upon the appellant within the appeal and neither had it been
         filed with the Tribunal in breach of the aforementioned directions.
          Mr Sharma had refused to accept service of the evidence for  these
         reasons.  Mr Collins  [the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer]  was
         unable to tell me why the evidence had not been filed or served."


    The late evidence which was sought to be introduced comprised what  are
    often called generic statements dealing with the alleged deception from
    witnesses  Rebecca  Collins,  Peter  Millington   and   Lesley   Singh,
    statements from two of whom had been filed in parallel judicial  review
    proceedings.

4.   As to the late service of evidence by the appellants, at paragraph  11,
    the judge records Mr Sharma

         "confirming that the appellant's bundle  was  served  late  as  his
         instructing solicitors were waiting for the respondent to serve her
         evidence of the alleged deception as the appellants  could  respond
         to it.  This was endorsed by the letter the solicitors sent to  the
         Tribunal when sending the appellant's bundle."

5.   The way the appeal is put today by  Mr  Duffy  is  two-fold.   He  says
    first that it was wrong of the judge to refuse to admit the evidence of
    the Secretary of State and secondly (in the alternative) it  was  wrong
    of the judge the to admit the evidence  of  the  then  appellants.   He
    argues there should be an equality of arms: what is good for one  party
    is good for the other party, and not to treat both the same amounted to
    is procedural unfairness.

6.   I regard  Mr  Duffy's  submissions  as  flawed  for  two  reasons.  The
    admission of evidence, particularly late evidence, is  case  management
    decision for First-tier Tribunal  Judges  exercising  their  discretion
    considering, amongst other things, whether  was  good  reason  for  not
    doing so. No reason at all was advanced on behalf of the  Secretary  of
    State; a reason which the judge obviously considered credible  was  put
    forward by the appellants. Since the considerations were  different  in
    each application, it is perfectly legitimate that the outcomes might be
    different.

7.   The judge clearly accepted the appellants' explanation that  they  were
    waiting until the  evidence  from  the  Secretary  of  State  had  been
    received before they responded to it; and that no assumption  could  be
    made that the Secretary of State would rely  upon  evidence  served  in
    parallel judicial review proceedings.

8.   Admission of evidence is a discretionary matter within the province  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge. It may be that a different  judge  might
    have come to a different conclusion but the rulings made in relation to
    each of the applications were properly determined within the  ambit  of
    the  judge's  discretion  and  I  can  find  no   reason   for   either
    admissibility decision being classified as an error of law.

9.   The second reason why I reject this appeal on the  'equality  of  arms'
    footing is that it was very fairly conceded by Mr  Duffy  that  if  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had taken  the  alternative  course  and  not
    allowed either party to adduce evidence, the outcome  would  have  been
    the same. The burden of proving deception lay on the Secretary of State
    and absent evidence, the appeal would have succeeded. Had  I  found  an
    error of law, I would have concluded that it was not material.

Notice of Decision
The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal Judge is affirmed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed        Mark Hill                      Date         14 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

