
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/00045/2015
     OA/00048/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 July 2016                               |On 4 August 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                       Ms ALIA RAHIM (first appellant)
                     Ms SHAFIQA RAHIM (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms G Brown, Counsel instructed by Farani Javid
Taylor Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Specialist Appeals Team

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against the decision of an
    Entry Clearance  Officer  to  refuse  them  entry  clearance  as  adult
    dependent relatives of a person present and settled here.   The  First-
    tier Tribunal did not  make  an  anonymity  direction,  and  I  do  not
    consider that the appellants require anonymity for these proceedings in
    the Upper Tribunal.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 2.  On  21st  June  2016  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Kelly  granted  the
    appellants permission to appeal in respect of  the  second,  third  and
    fourth grounds advanced in the permission application.  As Ms Brown did
    not pursue ground 4, for present purposes it is only necessary to refer
    to the judge's reasons for granting permission in respect of the second
    and third grounds.

 3. Judge Kelly held that it was arguable that the Tribunal  was  wrong  in
    law to dismiss the expert report of Ms Uszma Moeen on  the  basis  that
    she had relied "exclusively upon the instructions of the appellants and
    their representatives to arrive at her conclusions"  [paragraph  68  of
    the decision, emphasis supplied]  when  the  footnotes  to  her  report
    clearly referred to the external sources of information upon which  she
    had relied in reaching those conclusions (ground 2).

 4. It was also arguable that the Tribunal was wrong in law to conclude the
    apparent inconsistency between the contents of Dr  Khan's  two  medical
    reports was incapable  of  reasonable  explanation,  without  at  least
    providing the first appellant (sic)  with  an  opportunity  to  comment
    thereupon (ground 3).

 5. Judge Kelly added that it was arguable that these were  matters  which,
    singly or cumulatively, were material to the outcome of the appeal.

Relevant Background

 6. The appellants are nationals of Afghanistan who have resided  for  over
    ten years in the Peshawar region of Pakistan.  The first  appellant  is
    the daughter of the second appellant.  Their dates  of  birth  are  1st
    January 1946 and 1st January 1928 respectively.

 7. In her application for entry clearance, the second appellant  said  she
    was living with her daughter, the first appellant.  She had two sons in
    the UK, one of whom was her sponsor.  She suffered from  a  bad  liver,
    acute hypertension and swelling of the ankles.  She was unable to carry
    out day-to-day tasks such  as  personal  care,  toileting  and  feeding
    herself.  Her daughter was currently providing her with this care.  She
    had needed such care for about fourteen years.

 8. She was asked to explain why her current care  arrangements  could  not
    continue to meet  her  needs.   She  answered  that  her  daughter  was
    suffering from severe depression and found it difficult to  look  after
    herself, let alone her.  There was no-one  else  in  Pakistan  to  look
    after her in place of her daughter.  It was not possible to have a live-
    in carer in Pakistan who was trustworthy.  She was asked whether her UK
    sponsor or another close relative could pay for her  care  arrangements
    in the country where she was living.  She answered yes, and went on  to
    explain why she was nonetheless seeking to relocate  to  the  UK.   She
    said it was not about affordability.  Rather the risk of having a carer
    in Pakistan was too high, as it was common  for  carers  to  abuse  the
    elderly.  Her sponsoring son in the UK would be  able  to  provide  her
    with care and attention 24/7, and the sponsor would also be paying  for
    any medical treatment that she required in the UK.

 9. On 17th November 2014 an Entry Clearance Officer in Islamabad gave  his
    reasons for refusing the  application  of  the  first  appellant.   The
    letter from her doctor was self-serving and contained no explanation as
    to why her depression required her to receive long-term  personal  care
    to perform everyday tasks.  In addition, the letter stated she required
    help for her care "at present".  This did not demonstrate  a  long-term
    need for personal care as was required by  the  Rules.   She  currently
    lived in Pakistan with her mother.  Her mother's application  had  also
    been refused, and therefore she was not alone in Pakistan and she would
    not be alone as a result of the refusal decision.

10. Even if she did demonstrate that she required long-term  personal  care
    as described in the Rules, he also had to be satisfied  that  the  care
    could not be received in the country in which she lived.  Personal care
    was readily available in Pakistan.  It was not uncommon  for  Pakistani
    individuals to make private provision for their own personal care, such
    as by hiring care givers.  There was no satisfactory reason put forward
    in her application or in her mother's application for such arrangements
    not being put in place in Pakistan.  Such assistance was available  and
    they would be able to afford the care given the financial circumstances
    of their sponsor.

11. On the same day an Entry Clearance Officer in Islamabad issued a notice
    of refusal of entry clearance to the second appellant which  was  based
    on similar reasoning.

12. The Entry Clearance Manager subsequently gave his reasons for upholding
    the refusal decisions notwithstanding the grounds of  appeal.   In  the
    ECM appeal review statement directed to the first appellant, the  Entry
    Clearance Manager noted that the grounds of  appeal  stated  that  both
    appellants were in such a poor health that not only was  physical  care
    needed, but also the emotional support of a close family member.

13. Given that mother  and  daughter  were  currently  living  together  in
    Pakistan, he considered that each of them had the emotional support  of
    the other, and hence of a close family member.  The proposition that it
    was not possible to have a carer in Pakistan who  was  trustworthy  was
    not a sufficient reason for not accepting that care  was  available  in
    Pakistan.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

14. The appellants' appeal came before Judge Fox sitting in the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Hatton Cross on  8  December  2015.   The  appellants  were
    represented by Ms Braganza of Counsel, and the Entry Clearance  Officer
    was represented  by  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.   The  judge
    received oral evidence from the UK sponsor and his daughter,  and  this
    evidence is summarised in paragraphs [11] to  [26]  of  his  subsequent
    decision.

15. The first appellant could no longer care for the second  appellant  due
    to her age and illness.  Someone cared for them by visiting for one  to
    two hours per day, although they required 24 hour support.  They  lived
    with neighbours, who were also their landlords.  This  arrangement  had
    continued for ten years.  The person whom the sponsor had  arranged  to
    visit the appellants on a daily basis ("the visitor")  was  unreliable.
    The visitor cooked and cleaned for  the  appellants,  and  stocked  the
    refrigerator.

16. In her evidence, the sponsor's  daughter  said  that  they  employed  a
    domestic servant, but  he/she  was  unreliable  and  inadequate.   Also
    domestic staff could not assist with the administering  of  medication.
    The costs of residential care in Pakistan would be approximately 80,000
    Pakistani rupees per month, but a personal assessment of the appellants
    would be required for an accurate figure to be  ascertained.   She  did
    not know whether her father would be able to  afford  to  pay  for  the
    appellants  to  reside  in  a  care  home   in   Pakistan.    Sheltered
    accommodation  was  inappropriate  to  their  needs.   There  were   no
    privately funded care homes in the Peshawar region of Pakistan.   Also,
    the appellants did not speak Urdu, and there were no  care  homes  with
    the appropriate language available in  Peshawar.   The  appellants  had
    resided in Pakistan since 1990, and the sponsor's brother had lived  in
    close proximity to the appellants until 2013.   The  current  need  for
    daily care had arisen due to the deterioration in the first appellant's
    health.

17. In his closing submissions on behalf of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
    the Presenting Officer  submitted  that  carers  and  care  homes  were
    available.  The appellants' circumstances were not as grave as promoted
    by the witnesses.  The appellants had ample support from  the  landlord
    and  domestic  staff.   The  medical  support  available  to  them  was
    demonstrated by the documentary evidence.  They had lived together  for
    ten years, and they had coped thus far.  This care  could  continue  as
    before or they could relocate to a care home.  The  sponsor's  daughter
    was not  a  credible  witness,  as  she  provided  evidence  which  was
    inconsistent with the sponsor's ability to provide financial support.

18. On behalf of the appellants, Ms  Braganza  submitted  that  appropriate
    support for the appellants was not available  in  Pakistan.   Only  the
    appellants' family in the UK could provide  appropriate  support.   The
    Immigration Rules could not be interpreted in a manner  which  defeated
    that family support.   The  Immigration  Rules  required  more  than  a
    financial assessment.  The appellants would be vulnerable wherever they
    resided, but there  would  be  a  life-changing  improvement  in  their
    quality of life if they moved to the UK.  Entry  clearance  would  give
    the first appellant an incentive to live.  The expert report  addressed
    the issue of the appellants' vulnerability.

19. In his subsequent decision,  Judge  Fox  gave  extensive  and  detailed
    reasons for finding that neither the sponsor nor  his  daughter  was  a
    reliable witness on the matters in issue.  Between paragraphs [37]  and
    [67], the judge identified a number of respects in which their evidence
    was inconsistent or lacking in credibility or  unreliable.   The  judge
    then turned to address the expert  report  and  the  available  medical
    evidence, and for present purposes it is convenient to set out verbatim
    the judge's findings at paragraphs [68] to [76] and at paragraphs  [80]
    to [82]:

         68.  The expert report at page 17 of the appellants' bundle  is  of
             limited probative value.  The expert relies  exclusively  upon
             the instructions of the appellants and  their  representatives
             to arrive at her conclusions.  For the  reasons  stated  above
             the appellants and their witnesses cannot be  relied  upon  to
             provide a reliable or honest account of  their  circumstances.
             For the same reasons the expert report  does  not  assist  the
             appeal.

         69.  I have considered the available medical evidence.  I note that
             the first appellant's age is incorrectly documented at page 70
             of the appellants' bundle.  The medical evidence at  page  258
             is dated 8 December 2013 and states that the second  appellant
             has been under the care of Dr Musharaf Kamal Khan ("Dr  Khan")
             for one year ("first report").

         70.  However, Dr Khan provides another letter dated 8 December 2012
             in which he documents a follow-up consultation  in  which  the
             second appellant displayed no improvement  ("second  report").
             It follows that either the first report is  incorrect  or  the
             second report is incorrect.

         71.  In either event I can place no weight  upon  the  contents  of
             these documents and when the evidence  is  considered  in  the
             round I must consider the potential for the appellants to rely
             upon false documents to advance their claims.

         72.  In any event the  available  evidence  taken  at  its  highest
             demonstrates that  the  appellants  have  access  to  adequate
             medical treatment.  The issue in dispute is the  alleged  need
             for the appellants' presence in the UK  to  recover  from  and
             manage their conditions.

         73.  Despite the second appellant's alleged inability to cope  with
             her circumstances (appellants' bundle page 75) the  author  is
             silent on the consequences of this and the second  appellant's
             ability   to   maintain   stability   of   health   in   these
             circumstances.

         74.  Despite the absence of meaningful daily care arrangements  the
             second  appellant's  medical  practitioner   only   deems   it
             necessary to  review  the  second  appellant  every  3  months
             (appellants' bundle pages 76 and 78).  This is not  consistent
             with the appellants' claims that their health is  at  imminent
             risk due to daily neglect.

         75.  For the reasons stated above the  appellants  have  failed  to
             demonstrate that they require  long  term  personal  care  for
             daily  needs.   In  addition  and  in  the   alternative   the
             appellants  have  failed  to  demonstrate  that  care  is  not
             available or  affordable  in  Pakistan.   Upon  the  available
             evidence they have also failed to demonstrate that  they  live
             alone.

         76.  Their evidence taken at its  highest  demonstrates  that  they
             live within  their  landlord's  family  home  with  access  to
             domestic care  services  which  are  funded  by  the  sponsor.
             However for the reasons stated above I have concerns  relating
             to the true identity of the landlord.  For these  reasons  the
             appeals must fail under the Immigration Rules

              ...

         80.  If I am wrong about this, any interference with Article 8 ECHR
             is proportionate to the legitimate aim pursued; economic well-
             being of the country often expressed as effective  immigration
             control.  The appellants have failed to demonstrate that  they
             are entitled to entry  clearance  and  there  is  no  reliable
             evidence to demonstrate why the appellants should be  entitled
             to  employ  Article  8  ECHR  to  effectively  circumvent  the
             Immigration Rules.

         81.  As medical evidence has been made available  as  part  of  the
             appeals I consider Article 8 ECHR in the context  of  physical
             and moral integrity.  For the reasons stated above there is no
             reliable evidence to demonstrate that the appellants' physical
             and moral integrity will be compromised sufficiently to engage
             Article 8 ECHR.

         82.  While there is evidence of  suicidal  ideation  by  the  first
             appellant I approach the medical evidence with caution for the
             reasons stated above.  I also note  that  there  has  been  no
             meaningful assessment of the second appellant's intentions  by
             a medical practitioner to test the  veracity  of  her  claims.
             Nor is there any reliable evidence  to  demonstrate  that  any
             medical practitioner or  family  member  considers  the  first
             appellant's claims to be sufficiently serious  as  to  require
             active steps to supervise her.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

20. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms Brown developed grounds 2 and 3.  In reply, Ms Ahmed adhered to
    the Rule 24 response settled  by  her  colleague,  Mr  Tufan.   It  was
    apparent from the comprehensive determination the judge had  considered
    all the evidence presented,  including  the  medical  reports  and  the
    country  expert  report.   There  was  evidence  the  sponsor  had  the
    financial means to finance the appellants' care in Pakistan.  There was
    also evidence the appellants had hitherto been satisfactorily cared for
    by employed help.  On the factual matrices of these linked  cases,  the
    appellants could not satisfy the high threshold required by the Rules.

Discussion

21. It is convenient to deal first with ground 3.  Ms Brown submits that it
    was procedurally unfair for the judge to place weight on  the  apparent
    inconsistency which he identified at paragraph [70]  of  his  decision.
    She submits that a possible explanation for the inconsistency  is  that
    the second appellant had been seen by another  doctor  before  she  was
    seen for the first time by Dr Khan in December 2012.  She submits  that
    it was unfair that the  sponsors  were  not  given  an  opportunity  to
    address the perceived inconsistency in their  evidence.   (Judge  Kelly
    envisaged the first appellant being given the opportunity  to  comment,
    but clearly this was impossible as she was not present at the hearing.)



22. In oral argument, Ms Brown acknowledged that the leading authority upon
    which she relies, namely R (on the application of Maheshwaran)  v  SSHD
    [2002] EWCA Civ 173 is against her.  At paragraph  5  of  Maheshawaran,
    Schiemann LJ said as follows:

         Where much depends on the credibility of  a  party  and  when  that
         party makes several inconsistent statements which  are  before  the
         decision maker, that party manifestly has a forensic problem.  Some
         will choose to confront the inconsistencies straight  on  and  make
         evidential or forensic submissions on them.  Others will hope  that
         'least  said,  soonest   mended'   and   consider   that   forensic
         concentration on the point will only make matters worse and that it
         would be better to try and switch the Tribunal's attention to  some
         other aspect of the case.  Undoubtedly it is open to  the  Tribunal
         expressly to put a particular inconsistency to a witness because it
         considers the witness may not be alerted to the point or because it
         fears that it may have perceived something as inconsistent with  an
         earlier answer which in truth is not inconsistent.  Fairness may in
         some circumstances require this to be done but this will not be the
         usual case.  Usually the Tribunal, particularly  if  the  party  is
         represented, will remain silent and see how the case unfolds.

23. As Schiemann LJ went on to say in paragraph [6],  the  requirements  of
    fairness are very much conditioned by the facts of each case.  I do not
    consider that it was procedurally unfair for  the  judge  not  to  draw
    attention in the course of the hearing to any  of  the  inconsistencies
    upon which he later commented in his decision, including  the  apparent
    inconsistency between the report dated 8 December 2012 and  the  report
    dated 8 December 2013.  As the  appellants  were  legally  represented,
    there was no particular reason why the  Tribunal  should  have  alerted
    either  of  the  two  witnesses  who  gave  evidence  to  the  apparent
    inconsistency, so as to give one or both  of  them  an  opportunity  to
    comment upon it.  Moreover, since the apparent inconsistency  arose  in
    medical reports of which neither witness was the  author,  prima  facie
    this was not a  matter  on  which  either  of  them  could  assist  the
    Tribunal.  If Dr Kamala had been giving oral evidence,  the  appellants
    would have a legitimate complaint if the inconsistency had not been put
    to him in cross-examination. Fairness did not  require  that  a  matter
    which went to his credibility should have been put to the UK sponsor or
    his daughter.

24. The better point for the appellants is that the apparent  inconsistency
    is arguably an insufficient ground in  itself  to  justify  placing  no
    weight on the medical reports at all.  However, although  this  is  the
    finding which the  judge  makes  at  paragraph  [71],  he  goes  on  at
    paragraphs  [72]  to  [74],  and  at  paragraph  [82],  to  assess  the
    implications of the medical evidence, and it was open to the  judge  to
    find that, taken at its  highest  (i.e.  giving  it  due  weight),  the
    medical evidence did  not  establish  that  either  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

25. Turning to ground 2, it is helpful to bear  in  mind  the  requirements
    which the appellants needed to satisfy:

    E-ECDR.2.4    The applicant...must as  a  result  of  age,  illness  or
                  disability require  long-term  personal  care  to  perform
                  everyday tasks.

    E-ECDR.2.5    The applicant...must be unable, even with  the  practical
                  and financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the  required
                  level of care  in  the  country  where  they  are  living,
                  because-

                   a) It is not available and there is no  person  in  that
                      country who can reasonably provide it; or

                   b) It is not affordable.

26. Mrs Moen is not a medical professional, and she  does  not  purport  to
    give expert evidence  bearing  upon  the  question  of  whether  either
    appellant meets  the  requirements  of  2.4.  Her  expert  evidence  is
    directed at 2.5.

27. It is not true that Mrs Moeen relies exclusively upon the  instructions
    of  the  appellants  and  their  representatives  to  arrive   at   her
    conclusions on the availability of suitable care.

28. Mrs Moeen of the Asian Legal Advice Service is a former senior lecturer
    in Pakistani law who worked at several law colleges  in  Pakistan  from
    1996.  Her instructions were to express an opinion on the case advanced
    by the Entry Clearance Officer that personal care was readily available
    in Pakistan and it was not uncommon for individuals in Pakistan to make
    private provision for their own personal care such as  by  hiring  care
    givers.

29. She sets out her instructions at paragraph 8 of her  report.   She  was
    asked whether it was plausible  that  an  elderly,  infirm,  vulnerable
    mother  and  daughter  would  seek  adequate  care  facilities  through
    personal care givers in Pakistan with the financial assistance of their
    sponsor living in the UK?  Was there  any  social  stigma  attached  to
    leaving one's elderly mother and sister  at  the  mercy  of  paid  care
    givers/providers  in  Pakistan?   She  was  asked  to  comment  on  the
    vulnerability of, and risk to, the appellants at  the  hands  of  their
    care givers in Pakistan and, she was asked to comment on whether  there
    would be any reasonable or effective measures taken by  the  government
    or private sector to check any abuse or any other harm  that  could  be
    inflicted on the appellants due to their  vulnerability  in  the  event
    that they were taken care of by a paid worker in Pakistan or in a  care
    home or in a medical centre for the elderly?

30. Mrs Moeen's answers to these questions assume that the appellants  have
    the  level  of  serious  vulnerability  attributed  to  them   in   the
    instructions, whereas the judge found that the difficulties  they  were
    said to face had been exaggerated and that they were receiving adequate
    support and assistance from their neighbours/landlord  and  the  person
    who visited them on a daily basis. In  short,  he  rejected  the  basic
    premise upon which the instructions were founded.

31. Nonetheless in reaching her conclusions  on  issues  arising  under  E-
    ECDR.2.5 Mrs  Moeen  also  draws  upon  some  background  evidence  and
    personal research.

32. It is arguable that the judge's failure  to  engage  with  Mrs  Moeen's
    report is not material to the outcome, as the appellants had failed  to
    show that their current care arrangements were insufficient, and so the
    question of whether better, more reliable and more  comprehensive  care
    provision was available in Pakistan did not arise.

33. However, justice must not only be done, but must be seen  to  be  done,
    and so I decline to find that the error of  law  with  respect  to  the
    judge's treatment of Mrs Moeen's report is not material.   Accordingly,
    I find an error of law is made out such that the decision must  be  set
    aside and remade.

The Remaking of the Decision

34. Ms Brown's preference was for a rehearing if an error of law  was  made
    out, but she acknowledged in oral  argument  that  remaking  without  a
    further hearing was a possible avenue,  depending  on  the  nature  and
    extent of the error.

35. I do not consider that it is necessary for me to hear further  evidence
    for the purposes of remaking the decision, or to  disturb  the  judge's
    adverse credibility findings.

36. As canvassed in my discussion  above,  the  judge  reached  sustainable
    findings that the current arrangements for the appellants  in  Pakistan
    were adequate and the appellants did not need any  additional  care  or
    support at home beyond that which they  were  already  receiving.   Mrs
    Moeen's  report  does  not  impinge  on  these  findings.   Her  report
    addresses the alternative case advanced by the Entry Clearance  Officer
    which is that if both appellants do in fact require long-term  personal
    care to perform everyday tasks (and the first appellant  cannot  fulfil
    the role of carer for her elderly mother, the second appellant, who  is
    approaching 90 years of age)  such  care  will  be  available  to  them
    through a private care service.

37. I find that Mrs Moeen's evidence on this  topic  does  not  assist  the
    appellants.  At paragraph 15, she says that the cost of skilled nursing
    is much higher than the cost of full-time care by  unqualified  carers,
    which to her knowledge costs around 60,000 to 70,000 rupees per  month.
    She goes on to say that the assistance provided by private care  givers
    is not only inadequate, but it is also coupled with a lack of trust and
    accountability.  But it is only unqualified carers who  are  inadequate
    on this ground, precisely because they are unqualified and are not paid
    as well as qualified carers.  She  cites  no  background  or  objective
    evidence to support the proposition that it is not reasonable to expect
    to able to hire suitably qualified carers  in  Pakistan  who  can  give
    adequate care and who are trustworthy. The few examples  she  gives  of
    the elderly and vulnerable being abused by domestic staff, as  reported
    in the Pakistani press, do not present as examples of qualified  carers
    being untrustworthy.

38. The appellants did not seek to make out a case that the  sponsor  could
    not afford to pay for 24 hour care at home.  Their  case  was  that  in
    practice it was not possible to obtain such care in Pakistan.   I  find
    that Mrs Moeen's report does not provide support for such a  case,  and
    so the appellants have not shown that they meet the requirements of  E-
    ECDR.2.5. In addition, her report does not show that the appellants are
    highly vulnerable per se merely because of their  respective  ages  and
    infirmities, and because there is no adult male  family  member  living
    with  them  or  living  close  by.  So,  having  failed  to  meet   the
    requirements of  the  rules,  there  are  not  sufficiently  compelling
    circumstances justifying them being granted Article  8  relief  outside
    the  rules,  having  regard  inter  alia   to   the   relevant   public
    considerations arising under Section 117B. Although it is not  disputed
    that the sponsor has sufficient wealth to  ensure  that  they  will  be
    adequately maintained and accommodated in the UK  without  recourse  to
    public funds, the sponsor's promise to fund their medical care  in  the
    UK is unenforceable. So the public interest in protecting the country's
    economic  well-being  is  strong,  and  the  proposed  interference  is
    proportionate.

Notice of Decision

The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: these appeals are dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date 04/06/2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson






















