

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00767/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 28 April 2015                     |On 19 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                   ENTRY CLERANCE OFFICER (ECO), ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 sidra fiaz
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr N Ahmed, instructed by Syeds Solicitors


                      DECISION ON ERROR ON POINT OF LAW

 1. At the end of the hearing that took place on 28 April 2015 I  announced
    that I would allow the ECO's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  because  I
    found that there was a material error on a point of law in the decision
    and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lagunju  that  was
    promulgated on 26 January 2015.  I reserved  my  reasons  which  I  now
    give.

 2. By way of background, it is sufficient to record that Judge Lagunju was
    seized initially with determining whether Ms Fiaz met the  requirements
    of the immigration rules as a partner.  Judge Lagunju found, with  good
    reason, that Ms Fiaz could not be regarded as being lawfully married to
    the sponsor and that in any event she had not shown that the  financial
    requirements of appendix FM were  met.   Judge  Lagunju  reached  these
    conclusions based on the evidence presented, bearing in mind  that  she
    had to consider the situation at the date of  decision.   There  is  no
    challenge to these findings.  They are preserved  as  they  contain  no
    obvious legal error and there has been no cross appeal.

 3. These were not the only issues Judge Lagunju had to determine.  Ms Fiaz
    also relied on arguments that refusing her entry clearance violated her
    family life rights under Article 8 of the human rights  convention  and
    that the refusal was also contrary to EU law.  These issues arose  from
    the fact that Ms Fiaz was the primary  carer  of  her  son,  a  British
    citizen, who lived with her in Pakistan.

 4. In relation to the EU law issues, Judge Lagunju found against Ms  Fiaz.
    She considered the case of MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside EU)
    Iran [2013] UKUT 380 (IAC) but  found  that  the  child  would  not  be
    deprived of his citizenship rights as he could live in the UK with  his
    father.  Again, there is no challenge to these findings and there is no
    cross appeal.  Therefore, these conclusions are also preserved.

 5. It is the Article 8 decision that the ECO challenges.  In paragraph  24
    of her decision and reasons statement, Judge Lagunju said:

         "24. Accordingly I accept that [Ms Fiaz] shares  family  life  with
         her partner and child, thus the decision does interfere with family
         life as it would cause the applicant and her child to be separated.
          I find such interference  is  of  sufficient  severity  to  engage
         Article 8."

    In subsequent paragraphs, Judge Lagunju considered  the  impact  on  Ms
    Fiaz, her partner and their child on the basis  that  the  child  would
    move to the UK to exercise his citizenship rights  thereby  leaving  Ms
    Fiaz on her own in Pakistan.  In other words, it is  clear  that  Judge
    Lagunju considered the Article 8 issues on a hypothetical basis and not
    on the situation as it was at the date of decision.

 6. This approach has no basis in law.  The House of Lords confirmed in  AS
    (Somalia) & Anor v SSHD [2009] UKHL 32 that the  relevant  date  in  an
    appeal against refusal of entry clearance remained the date of decision
    even in relation to grounds of appeal relating to family  life  rights.
    As such, Judge Lagunju's approach is legally flawed and her conclusions
    regarding Article 8 cannot stand.

 7. Following this decision, I discussed with  the  parties  how  the  case
    should be determined.  I decided that it  should  be  retained  in  the
    Upper Tribunal because  of  the  fixed  findings  in  relation  to  the
    immigration rules and EU law.  However, in relation  to  Article  8,  I
    recognised the  fact  that  it  would  be  essential  to  consider  the
    wellbeing of the child and agreed to  give  Ms  Fiaz  time  to  present
    evidence on that issue.  There was some indication in the  papers  that
    there were some medical issues relating to the child and it would  seem
    necessary to have those issues ventilated and clarified before reaching
    a conclusion.  I reminded Mr Ahmed - although no reminder was  required
    -  that  the  Tribunal  would  only  be  able  to   consider   evidence
    appertaining to the date of decision.

 8. In choosing this path, I indicated to the parties that I would have  to
    have regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in SS (Congo) and  others
    v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387 because of what it says regarding the impact
    the  best  interests  of  a  child   overseas   might   have   on   the
    proportionality assessment.  I also reminded the parties that  I  would
    have to have regard to  the  fact  that  the  child  would  be  a  dual
    national, and currently would be regarded as exercising his entitlement
    to live in Pakistan.

Decision

The ECO's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed because the  decision  and
reasons statement of Judge Lagunju contains an error on a point of  law  and
must be set aside.

Directions

 1. The  resumed  hearing  will  be  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McCarthy.

 2. The issues are limited to consideration of the Article 8 rights  of  Ms
    Fiaz.

 3. Any further evidence must be filed and served at least 14 calendar days
    before the next hearing.






                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
