
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00341/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 26 August 2014                             |On 28 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                       lazaro redentor CASAPAO ortega
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant Mr Lazaro Redentor  Casapao  Ortega,  a  citizen  of  the
    Philippines, appealed against the refusal of the  Respondent  to  grant
    him entry clearance to the UK as the husband  of  his  wife  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on Article 8 human rights  grounds.   His  appeal
    was heard by Judge Sullivan sitting at Hatton Cross on 31  March  2014.
    Both parties were represented, the Appellant by Mr  Richardson.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 24 April 2014  the  appeal  was  dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules and  allowed  on  Article  8  human  rights
    grounds.

2.   In relation to Article 8, the Respondent sought permission  to  appeal.
    This was initially refused on 22 May 2014 by  Judge  Hemingway  in  the
    following terms:

         "1.  The  Appellant  is  a  national  of  the  Philippines.   In  a
             determination promulgated on 24th April  2014  the  First-tier
             Tribunal (Judge R Sullivan) allowed  his  appeal  against  the
             respondent's decision of 3rd October 2012  refusing  to  grant
             him entry clearance to come to the UK as a spouse.  The  Judge
             found, as was accepted on behalf of the  appellant,  that  the
             requirements of the Rules regarding maintenance were not  met.
             However, the appeal succeeded under  article  8  of  the  ECHR
             outside the Rules.


         2.   The Respondent has applied  for  permission  to  appeal.   The
             grounds  of  application  are  a  little  repetitive  but,  in
             essence, contend  the  Judge  erred  in  failing  to  identify
             compelling circumstances  such  as  to  justify  allowing  the
             appeal outside the Rules and in failing to take  into  account
             the facility open to  the  Appellant  of  applying  for  entry
             clearance again in the future.


         3.   The Judge, twice in the determination, refers to the  case  of
             Gulshan 2013 UKUT  640  (IAC)  and  the  need  for  compelling
             circumstances.  He then sets out the circumstances  which,  in
             his judgment, assist and do not assist the Appellant.   It  is
             clear, therefore, he found that the factors weighing in favour
             did amount to compelling circumstances.   The  Judge  did  not
             specifically refer to the possibility of a future  application
             but noted the parties to the marriage had  been  apart  for  a
             number of years and that the spouse was only able to work part
             time  given  that  she  was  tasked  with  looking  after  the
             Appellant's and her child.  Thus, it did not appear there  was
             any prospect of the financial requirements being  met  in  the
             relatively near future in any event.


         4.   The decision might, from one perspective,  seem  generous  but
             that does not, of itself, indicate an arguable error  of  law.
             I conclude that the grounds fail to identify any such arguable
             error and amount to no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
             ultimate conclusion.


         5.   Permission is refused."

3.   On second application, permission to appeal  was  granted  on  27  June
    2014 by Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt in the following  terms,  which  were
    subsequently supplemented by procedural directions:

         "1.  The appellant is a citizen of  the  Philippines  who  appealed
             against the respondent's decision to refuse entry clearance as
             a spouse and parent under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
             Article 8 of the ECHR.


         2.   First-tier Tribunal (FTTJ)  Sullivan  allowed  his  appeal  on
             Article 8 grounds.


         3.   It is arguable that although the FTTJ refers to the  need  for
             compelling circumstances where the appellant  could  not  meet
             the maintenance requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
             determination may be in  error  in  failing  to  consider  the
             possibility of  a  further  entry  clearance  application  and
             assessing the separation of the appellant and his daughter  as
             'compelling' in all the circumstances of this case."

4.   The refusal and the subsequent grant of permission to appeal  prove  to
    summarise concisely the arguments addressed to me at the error  of  law
    hearing, which the Appellant attended.  I have taken them into account,
    together with the Refusal Letter and the  arguments  for  both  parties
    reported by the judge at paragraphs 17 to 30 of the determination.

Determination

5.   Permission was granted on the basis that the judge may  have  erred  in
    assessing  the  separation  of  the  Appellant  and  his  daughter   as
    compelling and in failing to consider  the  possibility  of  a  further
    entry clearance application by the Appellant.  I  accordingly  consider
    those issues.  In the event of my deciding to re-determine the  appeal,
    I heard broader submissions, which in the event I need not consider.

6.   The judge considered the  financial  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules at paragraphs 24 (at which Mr Richardson appears to have accepted
    that the Immigration Rules could not for this reason be satisfied),  25
    and 36 of the determination.  From the evidence  it  is  clear  that  a
    further application under the Immigration Rules could not  succeed,  at
    least until the Appellant was  in  a  position  to  demonstrate  twelve
    months' requisite income.  As a statement of fact, the  judge  did  not
    mention the possibility of a further entry clearance application.  Even
    if this was an error of law, which is arguable,  it  was  not  material
    because a further application could not have succeeded.

7.   The judge applied the correct legal  test  for  considering  an  appeal
    under Article 8 outside  the  Immigration  Rules  (paragraph  34).   He
    considered the issue of legitimate purpose (paragraph 35) and concluded
    that the refusal served the economic interests  of  the  UK  (paragraph
    36).  Turning to proportionality,  he  initially  considered  the  best
    interests of a child aged about four who is a British subject  and  was
    at risk of being separated from a father between whom the  judge  found
    the  existence  of  a  meaningful  relationship  (paragraph  37).    He
    evaluated the weight to be given to the public interest (paragraph 38).
     He evaluated  the  Appellant's  poor  immigration  history,  which  he
    weighed against the best interests of the  child  (paragraph  39).   He
    noted  that  the  Immigration  Rules  did  not  differentiate   between
    deception practised recently and longer ago and  concluded  that  since
    this was not adequately recognised in  the  Rules  consideration  under
    Article 8 was appropriate (paragraph 40).  Taking into account  various
    other considerations,  including  those  advanced  for  the  Respondent
    (paragraphs 41 to 45)  he  concluded  the  balancing  exercise  in  the
    Appellant's favour (paragraph 46).  In the course of  this  discussion,
    especially at paragraphs 37 and 39, he gave reasons which were properly
    open to him from the evidence  for  assessing  the  separation  of  the
    Appellant and his daughter as compelling.

8.   I conclude that neither of the bases for the grant  of  permission  has
    been  established.   I  need  not  therefore   consider   the   further
    submissions.

Decision

9.   The original decision does not contain an error of law and is upheld.

Signed
    Dated: 27 August 2014



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis

