
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00733/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 31st March 2014                              |On 23rd April 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                               shumila pervez
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - Islamabad

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Janjua of Janjua & Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwncyz

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Saffer
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 23rd January 2014.



Background

 2. The Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.   She  applied  for  entry
    clearance to come to the UK as the spouse of a British citizen but  was
    refused  on  the  grounds  that  it  was  not  accepted  that  she  had
    established that she had passed a relevant English language test as SLS
    College was not an  authorised  test  provider.   She  appealed  to  an
    immigration judge.

 3. The judge set out the law, including a self-direction that  he  had  to
    consider the application as at the date of decision.

 4. He then wrote as follows:-

         "No challenge has been made to the assertion that SLS  College  was
         not an  authorised  provider.   The  Appellant  had  not  passed  a
         relevant English language test when she submitted  her  application
         on 5th July 2012 as she did not pass the subsequent test until  8th
         July 2012.  That application could not have succeeded.  It is not a
         matter of evidential flexibility  as  she  was  not,  for  example,
         missing a document in a series or  had  a  document  in  the  wrong
         format.  It was not a  near  miss.   She  did  not  have  with  her
         application a document showing that she spoke English."

 5. On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had made an error in law in not taking evidence into account which  was
    in existence before the date of decision.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on that basis by Judge McDade on  18th
    February 2014.

 8. The Respondent served a reply and said that she was in difficulties  in
    reconciling the contradictory findings of the judge, and accepted  that
    the possibility that there was an arguable error in law if  the  judge,
    despite making the correct self-direction that he had to  consider  the
    application as at the date of decision, still considered  only  matters
    as at the date of application.  Having said that, she could not concede
    without benefit of access to the file,  because  it  was  difficult  to
    verify conclusively whether the second certificate was from an approved
    provider.  Without access to that certificate, the Respondent  was  not
    in a position to comment on whether the judge had  erred.   Bearing  in
    mind the ambiguities in the determination she requested that the matter
    be referred back to the FTT Judge to comment on and  where  appropriate
    clarify and resolve in the first instance.

Submissions

 9. Mr Janjua said that the Entry Clearance Officer had made a  mistake  in
    considering SLS as the provider of the certificate.  SLS  provided  the
    tuition but  the  certificate  was  provided  by  TOEIC.   He  provided
    evidence which showed that TOEIC is approved for visa  use  by  the  UK
    Border Agency.

10. The minimum requirements for a spouse are a listening score of 60 and a
    speaking score of 50.  He provided both the  original  certificates  to
    the Tribunal and to Mr Diwncyz  for  inspection  which  show  that  the
    Appellant scored well above that level.

11. Mr Diwncyz having inspected the documents said that he was content that
    the decision be reversed.

Conclusion

12. The judge erred in law in not taking into account the test  certificate
    which was sent to the Entry Clearance Officer well before the  date  of
    decision and should have been considered by him  since  it  establishes
    that, as at the date of decision, the Appellant met the requirements of
    the Rules.

Decision

13. The judge erred in law.  His  decision  is  set  aside  and  remade  as
    follows.  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


