
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/00848/2014
                                                               OA/00849/2014
                                                               OA/00850/2014
                                                               OA/00851/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th November 2015                 |On 17th December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                              Mrs fatma senkoy
                                     ms
                                     as
                                     acs
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISTANBUL
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Nassar, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Sreeranam, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



The Appellants

 1. The appellants are citizens of Turkey and are mother and children  with
    the first appellant born on 1st May 1977.   The  subsequent  appellants
    were born on 5th November 1998, 14th June 2006 and 21st November  2009.
    They made an application under Appendix FM  to  join  the  husband  and
    father Mr Senkoy.  That application was  refused  under  paragraph  EC-
    P.1.1(c) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  and  with  particular
    reference to S-EC.2.2(a).  In respect of the  suitability  requirements
    the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  referred  to  Mrs   Senkoy's   previous
    application in 2010 in which she had stated that she  had  not  visited
    the United Kingdom in  the  preceding  ten  years.   It  was  when  the
    parentage of her third child was questioned that she admitted  she  had
    entered the UK illegally  in  2008.   In  respect  of  the  suitability
    requirements the Entry Clearance Officer was  not  satisfied  that  her
    relationship with her husband was genuine or subsisting  or  that  they
    intended to live together.

 2. In the event there was an Entry Clearance Manager's  review  dated  8th
    October 2014 where it was accepted  on  the  basis  of  the  additional
    evidence that the remaining issue was whether there is  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship between the sponsor and Mrs Fatma Senkoy.   The
    Entry Clearance Manager in his review stated

         "In any event it is respectfully requested that if the  Immigration
         Judge is satisfied that the relationship is genuine and  subsisting
         (and her illegal entry/exit to/from the UK forms part  of  reaching
         that conclusion) then the application is remitted back to  post  in
         order to consider the applications again with  specific  regard  to
         any  clandestine  activity  and  some  intention  to  significantly
         frustrate the Immigration Rules."

 3. The judge found that there was a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship
    and noted the submissions at paragraph 30 that  if  he  was  minded  to
    allow the appeal he was invited to remit the matter back to  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager and he was  referred  to  paragraph  320(11)  of  the
    Immigration Rules by the Presenting Officer.

 4. By way of counter submission the appellant's representative stated that
    the Tribunal had no power under the Rules to remit the matter  back  to
    the Entry Clearance Officer.

 5. At the hearing Ms Sreeranam accepted that the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    had not in fact recorded  a  reference  to  paragraph  320(11)  in  the
    initial refusal notice and accepted that the  factual  basis  had  been
    before the Entry Clearance Officer in which  to  make  a  discretionary
    ruling under paragraph 320(11) but it  was  not  raised  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.

 6. Miss Nassar stated that the judge was not invited to  consider  320(11)
    as it was not in the refusal letter and it was only now that the  Entry
    Clearance Officer wanted to attempt to re-refuse  on  the  facts.   She
    took issue with the grounds because the  judge  was  never  invited  to
    address the question of applicability of paragraph 320(11)  as  alleged
    and that was the full reason for permission to appeal being granted and
    as such could not stand and no other grounds could now be  argued.   If
    the judge's failure to remit was being permitted to be  argued  despite
    not being pleaded  then  paragraph  320(11)  could  not  apply  to  the
    children as they had not breached the UK immigration or other  law  and
    it could not apply to them either as there were no aggravating factors.
     It was not open to the Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  re-refuse  under
    paragraph 320(11) now as the evidence was known to the Entry  Clearance
    Officer at the time of decision and should be considered  at  the  time
    and in the event the failure to remit the matter had made  no  material
    difference to the outcome.  The power  to  remit  was  a  discretionary
    power and not mandatory and hence not material to an error  of  law  it
    was simply a non-exercise of discretion.

 7. In conclusion I find that the issue in the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    refusal related to EC-SC2.2 not to paragraph  320(11).   There  was  no
    challenge to the  finding  that  the  couple  were  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship and although there was merely an invitation  by
    the Entry Clearance Manager to remit the matter back  to  the  ECO  the
    judge chose not to do.  I fail to see that there is any error of law in
    this judge's determination.  The failure of  the  judge  to  remit  the
    matter back to the Entry Clearance Officer for reconsideration  is  not
    pleaded but in any event does not amount to a material  error  of  law.
    The Entry Clearance Officer did not address the issue of frustration of
    the Rules and it was merely a suggestion by the Entry Clearance Manager
    to that affect.  There was no refusal by the Entry Clearance Officer on
    the basis of 320(11) and the judge cannot be criticised for failing  to
    take the point that the Entry Clearance Officer did  not  exercise  his
    discretion when he could have done so on the factual basis before him.

 8. Even if the judge could have  considered  "the  question  of  paragraph
    320(11)" as this could not apply  to  the  children  as  they  had  not
    breached any Immigration Rules and it  is  clear  from  the  government
    guidance at RFL7.1 in respect to "frustrating  the  intentions  of  the
    Immigration Rules" that there should be  aggravating  circumstances  as
    well as being an immigration offender or in breach of UK immigration or
    other law.

 9. The aggravating circumstances which I accept are just a list but not an
    exhaustive list and do not in fact identify that the appellant has been
    and gone as an illegal entrant.  Paragraph S-EC.2.2(a)  refers  to  the
    following:

         "S-EC.2.2. Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge -

         (a)  false information,  representations  or  documents  have  been
             submitted in relation  to  the  application  (including  false
             information submitted to any person to obtain a document  used
             in support of the application); or

         (b)  there has  been  a  failure  to  disclose  material  facts  in
             relation to the application."

    That does not relate to past applications and was not raised as part of
    the application for permission to appeal.

10. I do not find that it is for the judge to search out for  the  question
    of the applicability of paragraph 320(11) in these  circumstances.   It
    was a matter raised after the refusal and as Ms  Sreeranam  points  out
    the Entry Clearance Manager review is to either concede or take forward
    grounds on which the Entry Clearance Officer relied.  As  such  I  find
    there is no error of law in the decision of Judge Clarke

11. The point was taken that there was no specifically  pleaded  aspect  to
    the application for permission to appeal  on  the  judge's  failure  to
    remit the decision back to the Entry Clearance Officer.

12. Nonetheless for clarity, there is no error  of  law  and  the  decision
    shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 4th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
