
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00806/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 23rd May 2017                      |On 8th June 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    [B M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - KINGSTON
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Vokes of Counsel instructed by French & Company
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge V A Cox of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 24th May 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a female Jamaican citizen born [ ]  2002  who  applied
    for entry clearance to enable her to join her mother [SB] (the Sponsor)
    who is settled in the United Kingdom.

 3. The application was refused on 9th October  2014,  the  Respondent  not
    being satisfied that the Sponsor had exercised sole responsibility  for
    the Appellant's upbringing, and there were no  serious  and  compelling
    family or other considerations which made exclusion  of  the  Appellant
    undesirable.  The appellant was therefore  refused  with  reference  to
    paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f).

 4. The appeal was heard on 19th May 2016 and dismissed.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
    and I set out below, in part, the grant of permission which  summarises
    the grounds seeking permission to appeal;

         2.   The grounds in support of the application  for  permission  to
             appeal assert that the judge erred materially in  law  (i)  in
             despite stating at [56] that she had not placed weight on  the
             letter, or its contents, at [45] she did place  weight  on  an
             assertion that the evidence contained in an unseen letter from
             [CW]  dated  12th  July  2014  submitted   by   the   previous
             representatives, which was not before the judge as no copy had
             been retained and no Respondent's bundle  had  been  prepared,
             was inconsistent with the VAF.   It  was  asserted  that  this
             forms an important building block in  the  judge's  assessment
             that the Sponsor did not  have  sole  responsibility  for  the
             Appellant; (ii)  in  failing  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
             rejecting the assertion that the Appellant moved to live  with
             [CW] in 2014 and  failed  to  take  account  of  the  evidence
             relating to telephone calls, which ceased  to  [PR]  in  March
             2014, consistent with the  Sponsor's  evidence  that  she  had
             fallen out with [PR] over the  care  of  the  Appellant  which
             necessitated a change of carer  and  other  material  evidence
             relating  to  financial  support  and  the  reasons  for   the
             separation between the  Sponsor  and  the  Appellant  and  its
             continuation and the Appellant's unmet  needs  and  failed  to
             conduct a full proportionality assessment outside  the  Rules;
             (iii) in failing to take into account and/or resolve conflicts
             of fact or opinion on material matters  viz  the  acknowledged
             inconsistencies in the ECO interviews of [PR] (53) and (iv) in
             committing a procedural irregularity at (54) where  she  found
             that the Sponsor could  have  provided  a  full  and  detailed
             statement from [PR],  in  circumstances  where  the  interview
             transcripts were only disclosed on the morning of the hearing,
             contrary to rule 23(2)(c) of the Procedure Rules  and  it  was
             procedurally unfair of the judge not to adjourn given her view
             that a statement was  required.   A  statement  from  [PR]  is
             attached to the grounds of appeal.

         3.   I consider that the matters raised in the  grounds  of  appeal
             disclose arguable errors of law in the decision and reasons of
             the First-tier Tribunal Judge and I grant permission to appeal
             on all grounds, particularly ground 4, given that the evidence
             in the form of interview transcripts between the ECO and  [PR]
             served only on the morning of the hearing  proved  crucial  in
             the judge's assessment in the credibility of the  Sponsor  and
             her findings regarding sole responsibility.

 6. Following the grant of permission the Respondent submitted  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, contending, in summary, that the grounds  disclose  no  error  of
    law.  It was contended that the FtT had  not  placed  weight  upon  the
    letter from [CW] which had not been produced by  either  party  to  the
    FtT.  It was contended that the FtT  had  given  adequate  reasons  for
    finding that the Sponsor did  not  have  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant's upbringing.

 7. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain  whether  the  FtT  decision
    contained an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 8. Mr Vokes relied upon his skeleton argument.  It was submitted that  the
    FtT had placed weight upon [CW]'s letter dated 12th July 2014 which had
    not been produced, as the FtT had found the letter to  be  inconsistent
    with the VAF, and the letter from [CW] that had been  produced  to  the
    FtT, dated 9th February 2016, was not inconsistent with the VAF.

 9. It was submitted that transcripts of a telephone  conversation  between
    the representative of the Respondent and  [PR]  were  produced  at  the
    hearing.  It was procedurally unfair of the FtT not to have offered  to
    the Appellant  an  adjournment  if  it  was  thought  that  a  detailed
    statement from [PR] was required to explain the nature of her telephone
    conversation  with  the  Respondent's  representative.   The  FtT   had
    commented that it would have been possible  to  have  obtained  a  full
    witness statement from [PR], but this was not  possible  prior  to  the
    hearing, as the contents of the telephone interview were only  produced
    at the hearing.  It was not a matter for the Appellant's representative
    to request an adjournment, as the representative had  no  knowledge  of
    the finding that the judge intended to make.

10. It was submitted that  the  FtT  had  erred  in  paragraph  57  in  not
    attaching weight to the letter from [CW] because  his  signature  could
    not be compared with any other evidence.  Mr Vokes submitted that there
    was no other letter to compare this signature against.

11. The FtT had at paragraph 58 referred to [CW]'s letter as  self-serving,
    but had failed to give reasons for reaching that conclusion.

12. The FtT had not taken into account evidence which indicated  that  when
    the application for entry  clearance  was  lodged,  the  Appellant  was
    residing with [CW], and the Sponsor was sending money to  him  for  the
    benefit of the Appellant.

13. Mr Vokes submitted that the  FtT  had  failed  to  make  a  finding  in
    relation to financial support that the Sponsor  had  provided  for  the
    benefit of the Appellant.

14. Mr Bates relied upon the rule  24  response.   With  reference  to  the
    letter from [CW] which has not been produced to the FtT,  the  FtT  had
    not erred because no reliance had been placed upon it and the  FtT  had
    made this clear in the decision.  With reference to  the  signature  of
    [CW], the FtT had  noted  that  no  identification  evidence  had  been
    produced which would be the normal method of verifying a signature  and
    identity of an individual who had written a letter to the Tribunal.

15. Mr Bates submitted that the FtT  at  paragraph  45  when  finding  that
    [CW]'s letter was inconsistent with the VAF, was referring to a  letter
    written by [CW] dated 9th February 2016 at page 42 of  the  Appellant's
    bundle.  The inconsistency  was  that  the  VAF  had  stated  that  the
    Appellant had been living with [CW] for five months, and as the VAF was
    dated 1st September 2014, this would have meant that the Appellant  was
    living with him from 1st April 2014 whereas  [CW]  in  his  letter  had
    stated that he became her guardian in May 2014.

16. With reference to the transcript of the telephone interview produced at
    the date of the hearing, Mr Bates  pointed  out  that  the  Appellant's
    representative had not applied for an adjournment and did not object to
    the transcript being considered in evidence.  There  was  therefore  no
    procedural unfairness.

17. In response, Mr Vokes pointed out that the  money  transfers  to  [CW],
    from the Sponsor, confirmed his address, which was the same address  as
    contained in his letter at page 42 of the Appellant's bundle.  Evidence
    of financial support is an  important  consideration  when  considering
    sole responsibility and the FtT had erred on this point.

18. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. The FtT did not err as contended in ground 1 by placing weight  upon  a
    letter from [CW]  dated  12th  July  2014  which  was  not  before  the
    Tribunal.  The FtT specifically  confirmed  at  paragraph  56  that  no
    weight had been placed upon this letter, and I accept that  to  be  the
    case.  In my view the FtT at paragraph  45  when  commenting  upon  the
    "evidence from  the  VAF  and  that  from  [CW]  is  inconsistent"  was
    referring to the letter from [CW] dated  9th  February  2016  which  is
    included in the Appellant's bundle of documents at pages 42 and 43.  It
    was suggested by the Presenting Officer before the  FtT,  at  paragraph
    33, that this letter was inconsistent with the VAF, and the  FtT  makes
    reference at paragraph 45 to the signature of [CW].  His signature  was
    contained in the letter dated 9th February 2016, and the FtT could  not
    have been referring to the letter dated 12th July 2014, because it  had
    not been produced and  therefore  the  FtT  could  not  have  seen  the
    signature.

20. I conclude that the FtT did not give weight to matters  not  before  it
    and therefore did not err in law on this issue.

21. The second ground contends  that  the  FtT  did  not  provide  adequate
    reasons at paragraph 45 as to why the letter from [CW] is  inconsistent
    with the VAF, and at paragraph 44 failed to give adequate reasons as to
    why it was not accepted that at some point in 2014, prior to refusal of
    entry clearance, the Appellant moved to live with [CW].

22. The FtT was entitled to note the  absence  of  any  identity  documents
    submitted on behalf of [CW] containing his signature.  Letters  written
    by other individuals, such as [LB], and [AD],  who  are  the  Sponsor's
    father and cousin, were supported by copies  of  passports,  containing
    the signatures of  the  authors  of  the  letters.   No  such  identity
    document was submitted in [CW]'s case.  However, I do find merit in the
    argument that adequate reasoning was not given by the FtT  in  relation
    to the findings contained at paragraphs 44 and 45.

23. The FtT does not explain the inconsistency between [CW]'s letter  dated
    9th February 2016, and the VAF.   Mr  Bates  in  his  oral  submissions
    suggested that the inconsistency was that in answer to question  21  of
    the VAF, the Appellant stated that she had resided with [CW]  for  five
    months, and the VAF was dated 1st September 2014.  That would mean that
    she had resided with him from 1st April 2014.   The  letter  from  [CW]
    stated that he had been the Appellant's guardian since May 2014.   This
    in my view is not a particularly significant inconsistency, and in  any
    event no adequate reasons were given by the FtT for finding the VAF and
    the letter from [CW] to be inconsistent.

24. At paragraph 44 the FtT finds that the  Appellant  did  not  live  with
    [CW].  There does not appear to be consideration of  evidence  pointing
    to a contrary finding.  For example, the FtT does not consider a letter
    from the Sponsor's father [LB] commencing at page 95 of the Appellant's
    bundle, in which he confirms taking money from the Sponsor, and handing
    this over to [CW] when he visited Jamaica.  The letter refers  to  [CW]
    as the Appellant's guardian, and makes reference to  giving  him  money
    for the benefit of the Appellant in November 2014 and September 2015.

25. There is also a letter from [AD] dated 23rd March  2016  commencing  at
    page 104 of the Appellant's bundle that also refers  to  travelling  to
    Jamaica and giving money to [CW] for the Appellant's benefit.

26. In addition, there was evidence of numerous phone calls  made  to  [PR]
    until March 2014, but not thereafter, which lends some support  to  the
    Sponsor's evidence that [PR] ceased being the Appellant's carer at that
    point, and [CW] took over.

27. There is also evidence of money being sent direct from the  Sponsor  in
    the United Kingdom to [CW], and copies of the remittance slips  are  at
    pages 87, and 89-90 of the Appellant's bundle.

28. The evidence referred to above tends to support the Sponsor's  evidence
    that before the  application  for  entry  clearance  was  made  on  1st
    September 2014, the Appellant was living with [CW], and the Sponsor was
    providing financial support to him, for the benefit of  the  Appellant.
    In my view it is an error of law not to  analyse  potentially  material
    evidence, and the FtT has  failed  to  conduct  such  an  analysis  and
    provided inadequate reasons for the conclusions reached  at  paragraphs
    44 and 45 of the decision, in relation to [CW].  I find that this error
    is material, as it was  the  Sponsor's  evidence  that  in  the  months
    preceding the application for entry clearance, the Appellant  had  been
    living with [CW], the Sponsor was sending financial  support,  and  was
    taking the important decisions  in  relation  to  the  Appellant.   The
    finding by the FtT that the Appellant did not live with [CW], adversely
    affected the Sponsor's  credibility,  and  I  find  also  infected  the
    findings subsequently made by the FtT.

29.  At  paragraph  54  the  FtT  found  that  it  would   have   been   "a
    straightforward matter for  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  to  have
    provided a full  and  detailed  statement  from  [PR]".   There  is  an
    assertion  made  in  the  refusal  decision  that  [PR]  had  told  the
    Respondent's  representative  in  a  telephone  conversation  that  the
    Appellant had continued to live with her.  A  letter  from  [PR]  dated
    15th December 2014 was contained at page 39 of the Appellant's  bundle,
    and this was written after the refusal decision.   This  simply  states
    that she told the Respondent's  representative  that  the  arrangements
    regarding the Appellant were "not the same since March 2014".  What was
    not possible for the Appellant, was to obtain a detailed statement from
    [PR] in relation to the contents of the telephone interview  that  took
    place on 9th October 2014,  because  this  was  only  produced  at  the
    hearing before the FtT on 19th May 2016.  It is of course correct  that
    the Appellant's representative did not  oppose  that  interview  record
    being submitted into evidence, and  did  not  request  an  adjournment.
    Notwithstanding that, it is my view  that  the  FtT  erred  by  placing
    substantial weight upon the record of the telephone interview, when  it
    was clear that  this  was  not  accepted  by  the  Appellant,  and  the
    Appellant was not given an opportunity to clarify with  [PR],  what  it
    was contended that she had said in that telephone  interview  with  the
    Respondent's representative.

30. In my view the FtT made cogent findings at paragraphs 47-49 in relation
    to the Sponsor's lack of contact with the Appellant's school, but I  do
    find that the conclusion made that the  Appellant  did  not  live  with
    [CW], is not adequately reasoned, and material evidence  has  not  been
    analysed.  Therefore the FtT materially erred in law on this point, and
    I cannot be satisfied that this conclusion did not in fact infect other
    findings, in relation to credibility of the Sponsor.

31. I therefore find because of the  error  of  law  described  above,  the
    decision of the FtT is unsafe and must be set aside.

32. When I indicated at the hearing that I was  reserving  my  decision  in
    relation to error of law, both representatives  indicated  that  if  an
    error was found as contended by the Appellant, the  appropriate  course
    would be to remit the appeal back to the FtT for a fresh hearing.

33. I have taken into account  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements, because credibility is in issue, and  there  is  a
    substantial fact-finding undertaking, I consider it is  appropriate  to
    remit this appeal back to the FtT to be decided afresh with no findings
    preserved.

34. The parties will be advised of the time and date of the hearing in  due
    course.  The appeal is to be heard by an FtT Judge other than Judge V A
    Cox.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error of law such that  it
is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that it  is  remitted  to
the FtT with no findings of fact preserved.

Anonymity

The FtT made  no  anonymity  direction.   There  has  been  no  request  for
anonymity and I see no need to make an anonymity order.






Signed                              Date         30th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made by the Upper Tribunal.  The  issue  of  any  fee  award
will need to be considered by the FtT.






Signed                              Date         30th May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

