
IAC-TH-CP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00697/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 February 2015                  |On 4 March 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                    Entry Clearance Officer, ACCRA, GHANA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Marie Therese Yaikoua Malinga Epse Bahoken
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms R Yko, Solicitor, of Joseph Mynah & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an entry clearance appeal, by the wife of  a  British  citizen,
    that was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith, in  a  decision
    promulgated on  5  November  2014.   The  appellant  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal is therefore the Entry Clearance Officer, but for clarity  and
    convenience I will refer to the parties as they were at the First-tier.

2.   The refusal of entry clearance,  dated  4  April  2013,  had  concerned
    three main grounds, but  there  is  only  one  aspect  of  the  judge's
    decision that has  been  challenged,  and  that  concerns  whether  the
    appellant  should  have  been  exempted  from  the   English   language
    requirement.

3.   The grounds seeking permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  argued
    that the medical  certificate  from  Cameroon,  about  the  appellant's
    dyslexia, was not a sufficient evidential basis to  conclude  that  the
    appellant had  a  disability  which  prevented  her  from  meeting  the
    language requirement.  Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Shimmin, on 12 January 2015, on the basis  that  it  was
    arguable  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  law  in  relation  to   the
    interpretation of the relevant Immigration Rule.

4.   The relevant Rule is as follows:

         E-ECP.4.2. The  applicant  is  exempt  from  the  English  language
         requirement if at the date of application -


         (a)  the applicant is aged 65 or over;


         (b)  the applicant has a disability (physical or mental  condition)
             which prevents the applicant from meeting the requirements; or


         (c)   there  are  exceptional  circumstances  which   prevent   the
             applicant from being able to meet  the  requirement  prior  to
             entry to the UK.


5.   At paragraph 23 of her determination the judge noted that there was  no
    definition of physical or mental condition in  the  Immigration  Rules.
    She  then  referred  to  a  medical  certificate  certifying  that  the
    appellant  suffered  from  dyslexia  and  would  have  difficulty  with
    language studies.  She then concluded, having noted that there  was  no
    challenge to the authenticity of the certificate, as follows:

         "I am prepared to accept on the face of this certificate  that  the
         condition the appellant suffers from is  sufficient  to  bring  her
         within the exemption in E-ECP.4.2."

6.   Mr Avery, for the Entry Clearance Officer,  submitted  that  the  judge
    had erred in not applying the Immigration Rule properly, and  that  she
    could not have come to the conclusion that she did on the basis of  the
    evidence before her.  The certificate had not been specific as  to  the
    severity of the appellant's dyslexia and was insufficient  evidence  to
    establish  that  the  appellant  was   prevented   from   meeting   the
    requirement.

7.   Ms Yko, for the  appellant,  produced  a  copy  of  the  November  2014
    Immigration Directorate Instructions (IDIs)  on  the  English  language
    speaking and listening requirement for family members under part 8, and
    for Appendix FM.  This had not been brought to  the  attention  of  the
    judge.  She referred to paragraph 6,  which  concerned  the  disability
    exemption, and concluded that every application for an exemption had to
    be considered on  its  merits  on  a  case  by  case  basis,  and  that
    satisfactory medical evidence had to be submitted.   Ms  Yko  submitted
    that the matter only had to be shown on balance of  probabilities,  and
    that the conclusion was open to the judge on the evidence before her.

Error of Law

8.   I have decided that it has not been shown that the judge erred  in  law
    in a manner material to the outcome.

9.   It appears to me that this is properly characterised as a challenge  to
    a factual matter that was within the  judge's  discretion  as  to  what
    weight to attach to a piece of  evidence.   The  challenge  was  partly
    framed in terms of her interpretation of the Rule, but this  aspect  of
    the challenge does not appear to me to have been made out.  The grounds
    themselves suggest that the Rule  could  have  been  satisfied  if  the
    medical certificate had  contained  more  detailed  information.   This
    gives an indication of the fact that the complaint is  in  reality  one
    about the way that the evidence was assessed, rather than the way  that
    the Rule was interpreted.

10.  The other way in which the  challenge  was  put,  in  oral  submissions
    rather than in the grounds, was that the judge could not have  properly
    come to the conclusion that she did on the  evidence  that  was  before
    her.  That challenge appears to me  to  be  closer  to  the  mark,  but
    nevertheless I have decided that this cannot be properly  characterised
    as a situation in which the judge's finding was not open to her on  the
    evidence.  It may well  be  that  different  judges  could  have  taken
    different  views  of  the  medical  certificate  and  whether  it   was
    sufficient to establish that the appellant was exempt from the  English
    language requirement, but that is not the test to  be  considered  when
    assessing whether there has been a legal error.  The judge considered a
    number of different  issues,  and  a  range  of  oral  and  documentary
    evidence.  Her overall impression of the  case  as  a  whole  may  have
    played some part in her decision on this  particular  issue.   Although
    the certificate is the central piece of evidence it is clear  from  her
    comments that she has not considered the issue in isolation,  and  took
    some account of the oral and other evidence relevant to  the  exemption
    issue.

11.  There is nothing in the guidance in the IDIs that alters the  position.
     If every exemption application has to be decided on its  merits  on  a
    case by case basis, then it cannot be said that there is some  specific
    requirement in the Immigration Rules, or in the IDIs, that renders  the
    judge's approach to the issue legally erroneous.  A complaint that  the
    judge should not have accepted the adequacy of  the  certificate  would
    perhaps have force if challenges were not limited to legal points,  but
    in essence this appears to me to be  a  matter  that  fell  within  the
    factual arena.  The challenge has not done  enough  to  establish  that
    this was not a finding open to the judge on the evidence before her, or
    that it amounted to a legal error through an  incorrect  interpretation
    of the Immigration Rule.

12.  No anonymity direction was made and neither side suggested  that  there
    was any need for such a direction.  The judge made a partial fee award,
    and neither side raised any issue about this.

Notice of Decision

The appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is
dismissed.  No material error of law having  been  established  in  it,  the
judge's decision allowing the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  remains
undisturbed.



Signed        Date 4 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb
