

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00271/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 10 February 2015                  |On 2 March 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DRABU CBE


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     MS MARIA SHAHID BINTE MEHMOOD MIRZA
                                                                  Respondent

                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms H Price of Counsel instructed by Addison & Khan,
Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  This  appeal  has  been  brought  by  the  Entry   Clearance   Officer
    (hereinafter called the appellant) against the decision of  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge James allowing the appeal of the respondent against  his
    decision refusing her  entry  clearance  as  an  adult  dependent.  The
    respondent is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan  born  on  20  July  1995.  Her
    application for grant of entry clearance was made on 23 August 2013 and
    it was refused on 18 November 2013.

 2. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal by
    Judge Fisher, a Judge of the First Tier Tribunal in his decision  dated
    30 December 2014.  In granting permission Judge Fisher inter alia said,
    "In paragraph 12 of her decision, the Judge noted there  was  no  issue
    about the nature of the relationship  between  the  Appellant  and  her
    sponsor. Under Paragraph E-ECDR 2.1the applicant must be a parent  aged
    18 years or older, a grandparent, a brother or sister aged 18 or  older
    or a son or daughter aged 18 or older. It would appear that  the  Judge
    disregarded this provision in allowing the appeal." He went on to say".
     As a result it is arguable that the Judge made an error of law, and so
    I grant permission to appeal. All grounds are arguable." The grounds of
    appeal as Judge Fisher commented in the  decision  granting  permission
    are "rather lengthy". Judge correctly summarised these  as  in  finding
    that the respondent is the niece of the  sponsor  the  Judge  erred  in
    allowing the appeal  and  in  finding  that  she  met  the  eligibility
    requirements of the Rules.

 3. At the hearing before  me  Mr  Stillwell  representing  the  respondent
    relied on the grounds submitted  in  support  of  the  application  and
    argued that the decision  of  Judge  James  was  unsustainable  as  the
    respondent being niece of the sponsor did not meet the requirements  of
    the Rules. He argued that guardianship has no relevance to the issue of
    relationship as defined in the relevant Rules, asking that  I  look  at
    the relevant pages such as pages 830 and 831  of  the  Immigration  Law
    Handbook Ninth Edition.

 4. Ms Price of counsel argued that the decision of Judge James was correct
    in law as in this case the transitional provisions applied and that the
    application for entry clearance was required to be  decided  under  the
    old Rules and under those Rules  the  respondent  qualified  for  entry
    clearance. She asked that I look at her skeleton argument and find that
    the decision does not suffer from a  material  error  of  law.  In  her
    skeleton  argument,  as  I  understand  it,  Counsel  argues  that  the
    respondent met the requirements of paragraph 318 of the Rules as it was
    at the time of the decision as the paragraph included  relationship  of
    uncle or aunt.  This document was tendered before the  First  Tier  and
    has not come about as a response to the appellant's grounds of  appeal.
    I asked the parties what they would like me to do if I were to find the
    decision contaminated by material error of  law,  both  requested  that
    depending on the nature and extent of  the  error  in  law  found,  the
    matter be remitted for a fresh hearing at the First Tier

 5. I reserved my decision which I now give with the following  reasons:  I
    have considered the determination of Judge James, the relevant Rules in
    the context of the facts and evidence in this case and the  submissions
    made  to  me  orally  and  in  writing.  I  have  concluded  that   the
    determination of Judge James is in material error of law. In  paragraph
    12 of the determination Judge James states, "In assessing the  evidence
    in the round, I find that the Respondent  does  not  dispute  that  the
    Appellant is the dependent niece of the Appellant. Moreover  the  court
    documents confirm the guardianship arrangement between the sponsor  and
    the Appellant, when the Appellant was a minor aged  17  years  of  age.
    Thus the Appellant meets the relevant relationship criteria  under  the
    applicable rules." The Judge has failed to explain the relevance of the
    Guardianship arrangement  to  the  issue  of  the  eligibility  of  the
    respondent  for  entry  clearance.   He   has   taken   an   irrelevant
    consideration  into  account  and  has  failed,  if  the  case  of  the
    respondent fell to be decided under paragraph  317  (i)  to  (vi),  the
    Judge has failed  to  address  the  requirement  of  "most  exceptional
    circumstances" as set out in paragraph 317 (i) and the absence of close
    relatives to turn to as it appears in  (vi).  The  Judge's  failure  to
    address herself to the crucial requirements  as  is  evident  from  the
    determination renders her decision unsustainable. The  Judge  has  also
    failed to state which eligibility rules  she  has  used  to  allow  the
    appeal.

 6. In the circumstances I allow this appeal and set aside the decision  of
    Judge James. I direct that the appeal be heard afresh at the First Tier
    Tribunal by a Judge other than Judge James.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal.
25 February 2015




DIRECTIONS REGARDING ANONYMITY:

No such direction is necessary.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal




To the Respondent
Fee Award

The decision of Judge Holder to make a fee award is vacated.



K Drabu CBE
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

