
IAC-TH-LW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00417/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 18 February 2015                  |On 14 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE THIRLWALL DBE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON


                                   Between

                              miss namita shahi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Duncan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis


  REASONS FOR FINDING THAT THE TRIBUNAL MADE AN ERROR OF LAW, SUCH THAT ITS
                       DECISION FALLS TO BE SET ASIDE

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on 29  December  1988.
    Her father is a retired British Gurkha.  He enlisted with  the  Brigade
    of Gurkhas in 1966.  His certificate  of  service  dated  22  May  1990
    stated that  his  military  conduct  was  exemplary  and  that  he  had
    completed 24 years loyal service in the British Army.  The  appellant's
    parents came to the UK in August 2011.  She applied for entry clearance
    to settle in the UK with her parents.  This was refused  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.

 2. The appellant appealed the decision and her  appeal  was  heard  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on 30 September 2014.  The appeal  was
    dismissed.  Grounds of Appeal are dated 20th November 2014.

    The Permission Grant

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that:-

         "It is arguable that there was a material error of law  that  could
         have made a material difference to  the  outcome  for  the  reasons
         given in the application which I will not simply repeat".

 4. This is not an  approved  form  of  grant  in  this  jurisdiction.  The
    President of the Upper Tribunal (IAC) reiterated in MR  (permission  to
    appeal: Tribunal's approach) Brazil [2015] UKUT 00029 (IAC)  that  when
    granting  permission  to  appeal  to  the   Upper   Tribunal,   it   is
    unsatisfactory  merely  to  state  that  the  applicant's  grounds  are
    arguable. The requirement, emphasised in Nixon (permission  to  appeal:
    grounds) [2014] UKUT 368 (IAC), to engage with each and every ground of
    application,  need  not  involve  anything  of  an  unduly   elaborate,
    burdensome or analytical nature. The reasons for granting  or  refusing
    permission to appeal, in whole or part, in any given case  will  almost
    invariably be capable of being  expressed  in  a  concise  and  focused
    manner.

 5. Stripped to their essentials the grounds are that the judge erred in
    law in

         i) adopting a confused and incorrect approach to the
         proportionality exercise required under Article 8

         ii) erroneously purporting to adopt a test of exceptionality (see
         paragraph 23)

         iii) having found that there was family life between the appellant
         and her parents then found that she was living an independent life
         from her family, notwithstanding the fact that she is financially
         reliant on her father

         iv) finding that family life could be maintained through visits and
         modern means of communication the judge failed to have any or any
         adequate regard to paragraph 113 of Ghising (family life - adults -
         Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) .

         As a result he came to the wrong conclusion in dismissing the
         appeal.

    Rule 24 Response

 6. A Rule 24 response dated 9 January 2015 refers to the judge noting that
    the parties have not lived together since 2005 when the appellant, 24
    years of age at the date of decision, went to study dentistry in India
    and who leads an independent life.  Essentially the respondent
    disagrees with the finding that there was family life.

 7. Mr Jarvis explained that the respondent had also applied to the First-
    tier Tribunal out of time for permission to appeal in order to
    challenge the finding that family life is engaged.   This struck us as
    an extraordinarily cumbersome procedure.  Mr Jarvis explained that it
    was necessary in light of the decision in EG and NG (UT rule 17:
    withdrawal; rule 24; scope [2013] UKUT 143.   He understood the
    decision to require a respondent to seek permission to appeal out of
    time where he seeks to uphold a decision for reasons other than those
    given by the FTT judge.   That is not correct.  The respondent is
    content with the decision of the FTT judge, but she disagrees with the
    route he took to reach his decision.  Litigants are not permitted to
    appeal a decision with which they agree.   We have reminded ourselves
    of the decision in AN (Only loser can appeal) Afghanistan [2005] UKIAT
    00097.   Given our ultimate conclusions in this case we have not asked
    the parties for their views on that decision.   In our judgment the
    case the respondent wishes to advance here may properly be advanced by
    operation of Rule 24(3)(f).   There is no need for a separate appeal to
    the FTT and, as we said at the hearing, the application for permission
    should be withdrawn.    We understand that has now been done.  We
    should add that Mr Duncan, for the appellant, did not seek to persuade
    us that a notice of appeal was necessary in order for us to consider
    the issue raised by the respondent.

    The Law

 8. For the appellant to succeed in her application for entry clearance  to
    settle in the United Kingdom as the adult dependent daughter of an  ex-
    Gurkha soldier she had to satisfy  all  the  requirements  set  out  in
    paragraphs E-ECDR.2.1. to 3.2. of the Immigration Rules.   It  was  not
    argued on behalf of the appellant that  she  was  able  to  meet  those
    Rules.  There is no complaint about the FTT judge's  finding  that  she
    could not satisfy the Rules.  That decision was correct.

 9. Her inability to  meet  the  rules  is  not  the  end  of  the  matter.
    Consideration also  has  to  be  given  to  the  applicability  of  the
    respondent's  policy  as  outlined  in  IDIs  (Immigration  Directorate
    Instructions) Chapter 15 Section  2A  which  is  guidance  provided  in
    relation to applications for leave (in this case) as  the  child  of  a
    Gurkha discharged from service before 1 July 1997.  13.2 of those  IDIs
    states as follows:-

         "13.2    Dependants over the age of 18

              Dependants over the age of 18 of foreign and Commonwealth  HM
              Forces members (including  Gurkhas)  who  are  not  otherwise
              covered in this guidance would normally need to  qualify  for
              settlement in the  UK  under  a  specific  provision  of  the
              Immigration Rules.

              In exceptional circumstances discretion may be  exercised  in
              individual cases where the dependant is over the age of 18.

              ..."

10. Also of relevance is Annex A of the IDIs which states as follows:-

         "Annex A

         Discretionary Arrangements for Former Gurkhas Discharged  Before  1
         July 1997

         In May 2009 the Home Secretary announced that any Gurkha with  more
         than four years service who had been discharged from the Brigade of
         Gurkhas before 1 July 1997 would be eligible for settlement in  the
         UK.

         Applications  from  former  members  of  the  Brigade  of   Gurkhas
         discharged before 1 July 1997 should be considered for the exercise
         of   discretion   under   this   guidance.    These   discretionary
         arrangements are supplementary to the existing  provisions  of  the
         Immigration Rules.

         This scheme recognises the unique nature of the  service  given  by
         the Brigade  of  Gurkhas  and  is  offered  to  them  alone  on  an
         exceptional basis.  It applies to those who served in  the  Brigade
         of Gurkhas from January 1948 when it became  part  of  the  British
         Army.  Applications from former Gurkhas who were discharged  before
         January 1948 should be considered on a case by case basis.

         Discretionary settlement criteria

         Settlement applications from  former  members  of  the  Brigade  of
         Gurkhas who were discharged before 1 July  1997  will  normally  be
         approved, provided the former Gurkha served for at least 4 years in
         the Brigade.

         ...

         Dependants

         Discretion will normally be exercised  and  settlement  granted  in
         line with the main applicant for spouses, civil partners, unmarried
         and same-sex partners and dependant children under the age of 18.

         Children over the age of 18 and other dependent relatives will  not
         normally qualify for the exercise of discretion in  line  with  the
         main applicant and would be expected to qualify for leave to  enter
         or remain in the UK under the relevant provisions of Article  8  of
         the Human Rights Act.  Exceptional circumstances may be  considered
         on a case by case basis.  For more information on  the  exceptional
         circumstances in which discretion  may  be  exercised  see  Section
         13.2."- (13.2 is set out at paragraph 9 above).

11. Thus, in order to succeed the  appellant  must  show  that  exceptional
    circumstances apply in accordance with  the  policy  or  that  she  can
    succeed under Article 8 ECHR. Otherwise the appeal will  fail.   As  to
    the policy the Court of Appeal in Gurung & Ors [2014]  EWCA  Civ  8  at
    paragraph 22 said this:-

         "22. It is inherent in any policy which permits a departure from  a
             general rule  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  there  may
             legitimately be scope for different views as to whether  there
             are exceptional circumstances on the  facts  of  a  particular
             case.  There is implicit in the exercise of any discretion the
             risk that  different  decision-makers  can  legitimately  make
             different decisions on what  appear  to  be  indistinguishable
             facts. The range  of  reasonable  (and  therefore  legitimate)
             responses may be wide.  This is the inevitable consequence  of
             giving a decision-maker a discretion.  But that does not  mean
             that a discretionary rule or policy is unlawful on grounds  of
             uncertainty."

    At paragraph 26 of Gurung:-

         "26. ... Mr Drabble submits that the purpose of the  policy  is  to
             facilitate the settlement in the UK of the families of  Gurkha
             veterans.  But the purpose of  the  policy  as  regards  adult
             dependant children is clearly stated on the face of the policy
             itself and it is far narrower than this.   It  draws  a  clear
             distinction between dependant children who are  under  18  and
             those who are over that age. The purpose of the policy is  not
             to facilitate the settlement in  the  UK  of  adult  dependant
             children.  The policy recognises that  such  children  may  be
             granted leave to enter under Rule 317(i)(f) and if  Article  8
             requires it.  Otherwise, they are not granted leave  to  enter
             unless  there  are  exceptional  circumstances.  This   policy
             objective  is  not  inconsistent  with  any   broader   policy
             statement.  We reject the submission that it  is  unlawful  on
             the grounds that it frustrates the purposes of the policy."

12. There is then a discussion from paragraph 27 onwards  in  Gurung  about
    the historic injustice and Article 8(2) of the ECHR.  At paragraph 35:-

         "35. It is accepted  on  behalf  of  the  SSHD  that  the  historic
             injustice is a relevant factor to be taken into  account  when
             the proportionality  balancing  exercise  is  undertaken.  The
             question is what weight  should  be  given  to  it.  Normally,
             questions of weight are a matter for  the  decision-maker  and
             the court does not intervene except on well-established public
             law grounds. But  the  present  appeals  raise  the  point  of
             principle whether the historic injustice suffered  by  Gurkhas
             should be  accorded  limited  or  substantial  weight  in  the
             Article 8(2) balancing exercise."

13. Then, at paragraph 38:-

         "38. We accept the submission  of  Ms  McGahey  that  the  historic
             injustice is only one of the factors to be weighed against the
             need to maintain a firm and fair immigration  policy.   It  is
             not necessarily determinative.  If it were, the application of
             every adult child of a UK-settled Gurkha who establishes  that
             he has a family  life  with  his  parent  would  be  bound  to
             succeed.   Mr  Drabble  does  not  contend  for  this  extreme
             position and it is not supported by the  approach  adopted  in
             the BOC cases to which we have referred."

14. At paragraph 42:-

         "42. It follows that we do not accept the submission of Mr  Drabble
             that the weight to be given to the historic injustice  in  the
             Gurkha cases is just as strong as the weight to  be  given  to
             the injustice caused to the BOCs.  The fact that the right  to
             settle enjoyed by Gurkhas is less secure than that enjoyed  by
             the BOCs is a relevant factor.  But it also follows that we do
             not agree with the UT that the weight to be given is generally
             'substantially less' in the Gurkha cases.   If  a  Gurkha  can
             show that, but for  the  historic  injustice,  he  would  have
             settled in the UK at a time when  his  dependant  (now)  adult
             child would have been able to accompany  him  as  a  dependant
             child under the age of 18, that is a strong reason for holding
             that it is proportionate to permit the adult child to join his
             family now.  To that extent, the  Gurkha  and  BOC  cases  are
             similar.  That is why we cannot agree that, as a general rule,
             the weight accorded to the injustice should  be  substantially
             different in the two cases.

         43.   ...  The  flexibility  of  the  'exceptional   circumstances'
             criterion is such  that  it  does  not  require  the  historic
             injustice to be taken into account at all.  It certainly  does
             not prescribe the weight to be  given  to  the  injustice,  if
             indeed it is to be taken into  account.   The  requirement  to
             take the injustice into account in  striking  a  fair  balance
             between the Article 8(1) right  and  the  public  interest  in
             maintaining a firm immigration policy is inherent  in  Article
             8(2) itself, and it is ultimately for the court to strike that
             balance. This requirement does not derive from the  fact  that
             the policy permits an adult dependant child to settle here  in
             exceptional  circumstances.  Accordingly,   we   reject   this
             additional reason given by the UT for holding that the  weight
             to be given to the historic injustice is limited."

15. There is then further discussion as to what constitutes family life and
    the point is made that ultimately the question  whether  an  individual
    enjoys  family  life  is  one  of  fact  and  depends  on   a   careful
    consideration of all the relevant facts of the  particular  case.   The
    Court of Appeal accepted that as a matter of law in some  instances  an
    adult child (particularly if he does not have a partner or children  of
    his own) may establish that he has a family life with his parents.   It
    all depends on the facts.  Ghising  (family  life  -  adults  -  Gurkha
    policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) at paragraphs 50-62  is  recognised  as
    containing a useful review of some of the jurisprudence and the correct
    approach to be adopted in relation to decisions relating to  Article  8
    family life.

16. We have reminded ourselves of the decision of the Court of Appeal in
    Patel v ECO Mumbai [2010] EWCA Civ 17.  As Sedley LJ said:-

         "You can set out to compensate for a historical wrong, but you
         cannot reverse the passage of time.  Many of these children have
         now grown up and embarked on lives of their own.  Where this has
         happened, the bonds which constitute family life will no longer be
         there, and Article 8 will have no purchase."

    The judge's findings (paragraphs 11-23)

17. We regret we do not find this section easy to follow.  It begins with
    short references to two of the relevant authorities and a summary of
    some law at paragraph 13.  The paragraph concludes "it seems that if
    the respondent  can point to matters over and above the public interest
    in maintaining a firm immigration policy which argue in favour of
    removal or the refusal of leave to enter, these matters must be given
    appropriate weight in the balance in the respondent's favour".   So far
    as we can tell there was no argument to that effect here.

18. The judge then moves to a formulaic reference to the principles set out
    in Beoku Betts [2008] UKHL 39 and to "the proportionality exercise as
    laid down in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27."   He says no more about how (or
    even whether) he has applied them.

19. In paragraph 15 the judge set out the following matters:

       . The sponsor and his wife had been in the UK for  3  years.   During
         that time the appellant was in India

       . The appellant had been  separated  from  the  sponsors  since  2005
         because she was studying in India

       . The appellant had visited her parents  in  Nepal  but  the  overall
         period of separation was 8 years (as at  the  date  of  hearing  in
         Decembr 2014).

20.  The judge concluded the paragraph thus "Nevertheless bearing  in  mind
    the nature of the relationship I am prepared to accept that there is  a
    family life".    This might strike the reader as surprising in light of
    the three points to which we refer in paragraph 19 above but the  judge
    made further findings in his paragraph 16 having said  "I further  find
    that such interference would  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
    potentially to engage the operation of article 8."  The interference is
    not identified but the judge must have meant refusal of leave.  In  the
    same paragraph and we think by way of explanation  of  his  finding  in
    relation to family life he found that "bearing in mind  the  nature  of
    the relationship, I am  prepared  to  accept  that  there  are  genuine
    emotional ties and that the appellant to some degree has  been  reliant
    on her father financially."

21. The evidence appears to have been that the sponsor was the  appellant's
    sole means of financial support (see paragraph 4).  In paragraph 17 the
    judge finds first that the appellant was  financially  reliant  on  her
    father and, three lines later, that she is reliant upon him financially
    "to some degree".  This is then repeated in paragraph 20.   It  is  not
    clear what the  judge  meant.   Either  the  appellant  is  or  is  not
    financially reliant on her  father.   The  fact  that  she  was  living
    separately from her parents for most of the time did not mean that  she
    was independent of them.   It is not clear that  the  judge  took  that
    into account when coming to his conclusions as to  the  nature  of  the
    family life here.

22. We entirely understand why both the appellant and  the  respondent  are
    dissatisfied with this decision.    Having  concluded  that  there  was
    family life the judge seems to dilute his own  findings  to  the  point
    where it is not clear whether he was satisfied that  there  was  family
    life here at all - but he did not go as far as to say  that  the  bonds
    were broken (unlike in Patel above).   Then, having correctly  accepted
    that there was a historic injustice and it was a  factor  to  be  taken
    into account it is not clear that he took  it  into  account.    Having
    said earlier that more was required from the respondent than the public
    interest in maintaining a firm immigration  policy  he  concluded  that
    "interference in the  appellant's  family  life  is  necessary  in  the
    interests of maintenance of effective immigration policy".

23. It may well be that the decision the judge came to is  correct  but  we
    have spent some considerable time  since  the  hearing  reviewing  this
    decision.  We are unable to say that the  reasoning  is  sufficient  to
    explain, still less justify, any of the conclusions.  There is  nothing
    to be gained from any further analysis of the decision.

24.  We are satisfied that there were material errors of law.  We quash the
    decision.  We remit the case to the FTT for a fresh hearing.   None  of
    the findings of the FTT shall stand.  No anonymity direction  is  made.
    There has been no application for one  and  the  circumstances  do  not
    warrant such a direction being given.



Signed   Date 7 May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

