
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
OA/00747/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|on 14th March 2016                        |on 7th April 2016                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before


                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between


                                  jan shair
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                     Entry Clearance Officer, islamabad

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Shafaatulla, of Five Star (International) Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms S Aitken, Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 4th October  1987.   He
    has not asked for an anonymity order.  Being married to a  UK  citizen,
    he sought entry clearance  as  a  partner  under  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. The respondent refused the application by notice dated 4th  and  issued
    on 5th December 2004, giving three reasons:-

      i) There were no photographs submitted after  the  wedding  day.   The
         parties had not met in person for over two years.  The ECO was  not
         satisfied that their relationship was  subsisting.   Further,  chat
         records "raised concerns".  The ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  the
         relationship  was  genuine  and  subsisting  or  that  the  parties
         intended to live together permanently in the UK.

     ii) The financial aspect of the application was based on the  appellant
         being in receipt of disability living allowance, but the  necessary
         documentation from the Department of Works & Pensions (DWP) had not
         been submitted.

    iii) There were no exceptional circumstances to warrant a grant of entry
         clearance under Article 8 of  the  ECHR,  outside  the  Immigration
         Rules.

 3. The applicant filed  notice  of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   No
    additional  evidence  was  submitted.   An  Entry   Clearance   Manager
    maintained the adverse decision.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Wallace dismissed the appellant's appeal by a
    decision promulgated on 2nd September 2015.  The  judge  noted  that  a
    letter dated 7th February 2014 from the DWP to the necessary effect had
    now been produced, but the sponsor had no good  explanation  for  being
    unable to find it earlier, for failing to obtain a duplicate  while  it
    was missing, or for producing it only at such a late  stage  (paragraph
    44).

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  on
    grounds which are somewhat discursive and argumentative.   In  essence,
    the grounds:

         (i) criticise the judge's finding on whether there  is  a  genuine
        and subsisting relationship (if there is a concluded finding);

         (ii) maintain that the DWP letter  should  have  been  taken  into
        account; and

        (ii) seek to argue the case further in respect of Article 8 of  the
        ECHR outwith the Rules, including the best interests of  the  child
        of the marriage.

 6. The submissions for the appellant in the Upper Tribunal (correctly) did
    not focus on (iii).  There is no  real  scope  for  the  appeal  to  be
    allowed, outwith the terms of the Rules.

 7. The ECO's reasons for not being satisfied of a genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship are not irrational, but they are not particularly  strong.
    This was very much a live issue at the hearing.  The sponsor  explained
    why she had been reluctant to return to Pakistan while their child  was
    an infant.  There was evidence from other relatives.  In her assessment
    of the evidence at paragraph  45  the  judge  noted  that  there  is  a
    marriage certificate and a child.  She said that neither party appeared
    to have been "proactive in the maintenance of  this  relationship"  and
    that it was anomalous that the appellant had not applied earlier for  a
    visa to see his son.  Although the sponsor  had  gone  to  Pakistan  on
    holiday prior to her marriage [and for the wedding], it  took  her  two
    years to go and see her husband again.  "There are photos on  file  but
    these photos do not advance the appellant's claim.  They  could  be  of
    anyone".

 8. The observation about the photographs is  surprising.   The  presenting
    officer (who, as it happens, was also the representative  in  the  FtT)
    acknowledged at the hearing in the Upper Tribunal that the  photographs
    produced do show the sponsor (who was also present in the  FtT  and  in
    the UT) and the appellant  (whose  photograph  is  on  his  application
    form).

 9. This was not a point well taken by the judge, and it plainly  played  a
    part in her adverse assessment.

10. Regarding chat conversation records, the judge said  at  paragraph  47,
    "The respondent's concerns are legitimate.  There has been no effort to
    address these concerns".

11. That observation is also problematic.  A large part of the evidence for
    the appellant, including the sponsor's evidence, was directed precisely
    to address these concerns.

12. The respondent did not identify at any stage which particular  passages
    might yield an adverse conclusion about the  relationship.   The  judge
    did not refer directly to the records, which are on  the  file.   There
    are  passages  which  disclose  bickering  and  a  feeling   that   the
    relationship  is  not  working  out.   There  are  passages  which  are
    affectionate.  There  are  passages  which  discuss  how  many  further
    children the couple might have, and how they might be named.

13. The judge's observations about the  relationship  express  doubts,  but
    they do not reach an explicit final conclusion.  Some  of  the  reasons
    given for doubting the genuineness of the relationship are, as observed
    above, difficult to support.  In my view, the grounds  and  submissions
    for the appellant show that the judge did not  reach  a  legally  sound
    conclusion on this point.

14. A different outcome on the nature of the relationship would not  assist
    the appellant unless it were shown that he should also  have  succeeded
    in respect of the documentation from DWP.  In a rule 24 response to the
    grant of permission, the respondent founds  upon  the  failure  of  the
    appellant to make  his  case  in  that  respect.   The  response  cites
    Appendix FM-SE paragraph 4D(ii), in terms of  which  a  decision  maker
    "may contact the applicant" where a specified  document  has  not  been
    provided.

15. As Ms Shafaatulla pointed out, the other documents  provided  with  the
    application showed that the sponsor was in receipt of disability living
    allowance, which corresponded with payments into her bank records, also
    produced.  In that context, it would have been a small and obvious step
    to request the missing item.

16. The counter to this point by Ms Aitken was that the respondent's policy
    is not to request missing documents  where  an  application  is  to  be
    refused for other reasons anyway.  That seems generally sensible, but I
    am not disposed to find it a good reason for the decision maker failing
    to exercise discretion, where  the  reasons  for  the  other  point  of
    refusal are so weak.

17. It is unfortunate that there has been so much delay.  That is not  only
    the fault of  the  respondent  or  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    appellant's side largely contributed.  The DWP letter should  not  have
    been omitted from the first application.  Once the omission was clearly
    pointed out in the refusal notice, the missing item  should  have  been
    provided with the notice of appeal.  Its  production  should  not  have
    been delayed until the hearing stage.  The fact that the appellant  and
    sponsor dragged their heels is a matter which  also  weighed  with  the
    judge (paragraph 50).

18. In the end, however, I am satisfied that error has been shown  on  both
    grounds (i) and (ii).  The decision requires to be remade.

19. Having revisited the evidence, I find that despite some ups and  downs,
    these are no more than may be  expected  in  many  relationships.   The
    evidence as a whole shows it to  be  more  likely  than  not  that  the
    relationship is genuine and subsisting and the parties intend  to  live
    together  permanently  in  the  UK.   The  document  missing  from  the
    application was obviously one which was likely to be readily available.
     The decision maker ought to have exercised discretion to  request  it.
    Once the document is seen, the application is perfected.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.   The  following
    decision is substituted: the  appeal,  as  brought  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, is allowed under the Immigration Rules.


                           [pic]


                           17 March 2015
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
