


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00523/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|(by video link to Birmingham IAC)             |                             |
|On : 27 May 2014                              |On : 30 May 2014             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                MADIHA AFTAB
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Mahmood of Zenith Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO). However, for  the
   purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the ECO as the respondent and
   Mrs Aftab as the appellant, reflecting their positions as  they  were  in
   the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 3 July 1989.  On  4  July
   2012 she applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  a  spouse.
   Her application was refused on 3 December 2012 on the  grounds  that  she
   could  not  meet  the  English   language   requirements   in   paragraph
   281(i)(a)(ii) of the Immigration Rules. She had not provided an  original
   English language test certificate  in  speaking  and  listening  from  an
   approved English language test provider  and  was  not  exempt  from  the
   English language requirement. The respondent considered that she did  not
   hold  an  academic  qualification  recognised  by  NARIC  UK  to  be  the
   equivalent to the standard of a Bachelor's or Master's degree or  PhD  in
   the United Kingdom which was taught in English.

3. The appellant lodged an appeal against that decision,  stating  that  she
   was enclosing a TOEIC test certificate and that she had not provided  one
   earlier  because  she  was  wrongly  informed  at  the  Embassy  that   a
   qualification taught in English would suffice. Following a review  by  an
   entry clearance manager (ECM), the decision was maintained, with the  ECM
   noting that no new  documentary  evidence  had  been  produced  with  the
   appeal.

4. The appellant's appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 25  October
   2013 and was allowed in a determination promulgated on 12 November  2013.
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford  was  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
   produced her TOEIC test certificate with her Notice of Appeal  and  noted
   that, whilst the test certificate post-dated the ECO's decision,  it  did
   so by less than a fortnight and  confirmed  that  she  had  the  required
   English language ability  at  the  relevant  date.  She  found  that  the
   respondent  had  failed  to   follow   her   own   established   internal
   administrative review procedures because the ECM had failed to notice the
   English language certificate and failed to take it into account. On  that
   basis, and on the basis that the British High Commission  had  given  the
   appellant incorrect advice, she found the respondent's decision unfair as
   per Thakur (PBS decision -" common law fairness) Bangladesh  [2011]  UKUT
   151. She went on to consider Article 8 and concluded that  the  appellant
   met the requirements of E-ECP.4.1(b) of Appendix FM  of  the  immigration
   rules as she had met the English language requirements. She  allowed  the
   appeal under the Immigration Rules and on the grounds that  the  decision
   was not in accordance with the law.

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the basis that  the  judge  had  misdirected  herself  by  relying  on
   evidence arising after the date of the decision. Permission  was  granted
   on 8 April 2014.

Appeal hearing and submissions

6. Mr Smart relied upon an old judgment of the Administrative  Court  in  ex
   parte Maya Banu [1999] A R 161 in submitting that the ECM review was  not
   part of the  original  decision-making  process  and  that  the  date  of
   decision remained the date of the original refusal. The judge  had  erred
   by allowing the  appeal  when  the  appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the
   requirements of the immigration rules at the date of the decision.

7. Mr Mahmood submitted that the judge was  entitled  to  take  the  English
   language test certificate into account. He also produced  in  evidence  a
   letter dated 12 May 2014 from UK NARIC confirming  that  the  appellant's
   MSc in Sociology from the International Islamic University, Islamabad was
   comparable to a British Bachelor degree and submitted that the ECO  ought
   to have granted entry clearance on the basis that her  qualification  was
   recognised by NARIC UK at the time the decision was made.

8.  Mr  Smart,  in  response,  submitted  that  there  was   an   evidential
   requirement  which  had  nevertheless  not   been   met,   as   paragraph
   281(i)(a)(v) required the application to be accompanied  by  confirmation
   from NARIC UK.

Consideration and findings

9. It is not in dispute that, at the time of the decision  to  refuse  entry
   clearance,  the  appellant  did  not  have  an  English   language   test
   certificate from an approved English language test provider. It was  only
   after her application was refused, on 16 December 2012, that she took and
   passed the TOEIC test, achieving the required level. It  is  not  claimed
   that she fell within any of the exemptions in paragraph 281(i)(a)(ii) and
   accordingly it is the case that she was not able to meet the requirements
   of the rules on that basis at the relevant time, the date of the decision
   to refuse entry clearance, 3 December 2012.

10. Judge Ford, however, decided to allow the appeal on the basis  that  the
   requirements of E-ECP.4.1 of Appendix FM had been met. In so  doing,  she
   relied upon the fact that the appellant passed the TOEIC test less than a
   fortnight  after  the  respondent's  decision;  that  the  appellant  had
   produced her TOEIC test certificate to the ECM with her Notice of Appeal;
   that the test certificate  showed  that  she  had  the  required  English
   language ability at the date of the decision to refuse  entry  clearance;
   and that the ECM  had  ignored  the  certificate  in  the  administrative
   review. However in allowing the appeal on that basis she clearly erred in
   law. Contrary to the judge's understanding, the  rules  did  not  require
   simply that the appellant had the relevant level of  ability  in  English
   language at the time of the decision to refuse entry clearance. Paragraph
   281(i)(a)(ii) contained  an  evidential  requirement,  that  an  original
   English  language  test  certificate  actually  be  provided   with   the
   application. On that basis the appellant simply could not succeed and the
   fact that she  subsequently  passed  the  TOEIC  test  and  produced  her
   certificate with her Notice of Appeal was irrelevant, given that it post-
   dated the original refusal decision. Likewise, the fact that the ECM  may
   have failed to consider  the  test  certificate  in  his  review  was  an
   irrelevant consideration and an erroneous basis upon which to  allow  the
   appeal. In the same way, the appellant could not rely  upon  the  claimed
   erroneous advice from the British High Commission, given  that  that  did
   not undermine the fact that the rules simply had not been met.

11. Mr Mahmood went on to pursue  a  different  argument,  namely  that  the
   appellant was nevertheless able to meet the alternative  requirements  of
   paragraph 281(i)(a), in paragraphs 281(i)(a)(v) and (vi), at the date  of
   the respondent's decision, since her qualification had been deemed by  UK
   NARIC to be comparable to a United Kingdom degree. He produced  a  letter
   dated 12 May 2014 from UK NARIC confirming that her MSc in Sociology from
   the International Islamic  University  was  considered  comparable  to  a
   British bachelor degree. However that does not appear  to  have  been  an
   argument pursued before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Indeed  the  judge's
   comments at paragraph 9 of her determination in relation  to  fee  awards
   make it clear that it was  not  known  at  that  time  whether  UK  NARIC
   considered the appellant's qualification to be  comparable  to  a  United
   Kingdom degree.

12. In any event, as Mr Smart submitted, the rules again have an  evidential
   requirement  which  was  not  met  at  the   relevant   time.   Paragraph
   281(i)(a)(v)  requires  that  confirmation  from  UK  NARIC,   that   the
   qualification was taught or researched in English, be  available  at  the
   time of the application, which it clearly  was  not  in  the  appellant's
   case. It is  also  relevant  to  note,  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
   281(i)(a)(vi)  as  well  as  paragraph  281(i)(a)(v),  that  whilst   the
   appellant had produced with her application a letter dated 26  June  2012
   from the International Islamic University confirming that the  medium  of
   instruction was English, she did not provide evidence to  show  that  she
   actually had the qualification at the time. What she produced at the time
   of the application was the letter of 26 June 2012 together  with  several
   "result intimation" documents, but there was no  evidence  that  she  had
   actually been awarded her degree. The bundle of  documents  now  produced
   before me contains a certificate of award but the date of issue  has  not
   been included. Indeed it is clear from  the  refusal  decision  that  the
   relevant  evidence  had  not  been   produced   with   the   application.
   Accordingly, the letter now relied upon by the appellant  from  UK  NARIC
   cannot assist her in this appeal as it was not available at the  relevant
   time.

13. Accordingly, Judge Ford's decision contains material errors of  law  and
   has to be set aside. For the same reasons as giving rise to the error  of
   law, Mrs Aftab's appeal has to be dismissed. She was not able to meet the
   requirements of paragraph 281(i)(a)  at  the  time  of  the  respondent's
   decision to refuse entry clearance. The  fact  that  she  may  have  been
   advised by staff at the British  High  Commission  that  a  qualification
   taught in English would suffice for the purposes of  her  application  is
   unfortunate but cannot now assist her. There is no evidence of what  that
   advice specifically consisted of, but in any event the rules are clear in
   what they require and the  appellant,  as  an  educated  and  intelligent
   woman, would have been able to establish what  was  required  of  her  by
   consulting the UKBA website.

14. Mr Mahmood sought to persuade me that the appellant  could  nevertheless
   succeed under Article 8 of the ECHR, given the unfairness of the  outcome
   and the passage of time  keeping  her  and  her  husband  apart.  However
   Article 8 applies also only to the date of decision.  At  that  time  the
   appellant simply could not meet the requirements of the  rules.  Had  she
   taken the TOEIC test prior to making her application or provided evidence
   of her qualification taught in the medium of English, as clearly required
   by the rules, she would probably have been granted entry  clearance,  but
   she did not. It was open to her at that time to make a fresh  application
   with the required evidence after passing the TOEIC test and obtaining her
   qualification, but instead it was her choice to pursue  an  appeal  which
   unfortunately had no chance of success. It still remains open to  her  to
   make a fresh application. There is plainly no  merit  in  any  Article  8
   grounds and Mr Mahmood did not seek to make any  further  submissions  in
   that regard.

15.  Accordingly, and for the reasons given above, I dismiss the  appeal  on
   all grounds.

DECISION

16. The making of the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside and
   to that extent the appeal made by the  ECO  is  allowed.  I  re-make  the
   decision and substitute a decision dismissing Mrs Aftab's appeal  on  all
   grounds.










                               Signed                                  Date

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
