
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/00532/2015
     OA/00531/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 June 2016                                |On 3 August 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN


                                   Between

                                     AAO
                                     OAO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION PRESERVED)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jaffar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellants are  citizens  of  Nigeria  and  are  brothers  born  in
    December 2005 and September 2007 respectively.  They have appealed  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bird who, sitting at Taylor House
    on 21 October 2015 and in a decision  subsequently  promulgated  on  16
    November 2015 allowed their appeals under paragraph  297(i)(e)  of  the
    Immigration Rules but dismissed their appeals under  paragraph  297(v).
    The Appellants had sought to  appeal  against  decisions  of  an  Entry
    Clearance Officer refusing to grant them entry clearance to come to the
    United Kingdom to join their father.

2.   At the outset of the hearing before me, Mr  Duffy  for  the  Respondent
    informed me as follows:

         "This is a case where the  Appellants  made  an  application  under
         paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellants  have  been
         granted  permission  to  appeal  complaining   that   the   judge's
         assessment of Article 8 outside  the  Rules  was  inadequate,  more
         particularly  there  was  inadequate  reasoning  in  terms  of  the
         consideration of the best interests of these  minor  children.   It
         does seem that the First-tier Judge has failed to engage with  this
         matter and I therefore agree that the case needs to be  listed  and
         heard again in terms of Article 8 outside of the Rules."

3.   In light of Mr Duffy's helpful and indeed realistic  concession  I  did
    not trouble Mr Jaffar to address me.

4.   However after further discussion with the parties and having regard  to
    the error of law found, I agreed  with  them  that  there  were  highly
    compelling reasons  falling  within  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement as to why the  decision  should  not  be
    remade by the Upper Tribunal.  It  was  clearly  in  the  interests  of
    justice that the appeal on this issue be heard and considered afresh in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

5.   For the reasons I have above given and by agreement with the parties  I
    have concluded therefore that the appeal should be remitted to a First-
    tier Tribunal Judge at Taylor House Hearing Centre before a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge other than Judge Bird on the first  available  date.   I
    was informed that for this purpose no interpreter was required.   There
    was a suggested time estimate of one hour.

6.   As was made clear at the hearing, the  appeal  is  remitted  solely  in
    relation to a consideration of the Appellants' appeal under  Article  8
    of the ECHR outside of the Immigration Rules.

Decision

7.   The making of the decision in the First-tier  Tribunal  insofar  as  it
    related to the Appellant's Article 8 ECHR appeal, involved an error  on
    a point of law such that that  this aspect of the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision has accordingly been set aside.

8.   The anonymity direction of the First-tier Tribunal is preserved.


Signed                                  Date 3 June 2016

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

