
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/00889/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 November 2015                  |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                             Miss CHANDA NDASHYE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Pretoria
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Rahman (counsel) instructed by The Immigration
                    Law Practice.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Turquet promulgated on 27 March  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born on  4  December  1995  and  is  a  national  of
Zambia.

4.    On 28 November 2013 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for entry clearance to join her mother, Maureen Ndashye, in  the
UK in terms of paragraph 297 of the immigration rules.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Turquet  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision.

6.    Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 26  August  2015  Upper  Tribunal
Judge Goldstein gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "This renewed application demonstrates  that  the  first-tier  tribunal
    Judge may have made an error of law in her approach to paragraph 297 of
    the  immigration  rules,  not   least   on   the   question   of   sole
    responsibility, that is one fact in each particular case. Such was  the
    guidance in TD [2006] UKIAT 49. See also Baydov v  ECO,  Moscow  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1739 that may have further and arguably  informed  the  first-
    tier tribunal's approach. In that regard it is further  submitted  with
    arguable merit the Judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  her
    findings on material matters and raises arguable issues as  to  whether
    the Judge was entitled in law to reach the conclusions that she did for
    the reasons given.

The Hearing

7.    Mr Rahman, for the appellant, adopted the  terms  of  the  grounds  of
appeal, and argued that the Judge had taken an inconsistent approach to  the
evaluation of the sponsor's evidence  and  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor's
witness. He argued that the  Judge  had  made  material  errors  of  law  by
failing to record the evidence of the sponsor's witness and  by  failing  to
make any findings in relation to  the  reliability  or  credibility  of  the
sponsor or her witness. He argued that  throughout  the  decision  reference
can be found to the sponsor's oral evidence, but  that  the  Judge  did  not
properly engage with the oral evidence and did not  draw  findings  of  fact
from the oral evidence. He argued that the Judge's analysis of the  evidence
is inadequate and that the Judge reached conclusions which were not open  to
the Judge. He effectively argued that the Judge's  findings  are  irrational
and, on the evidence produced, the Judge should have found that the  sponsor
has sole responsibility (within the meaning  of  paragraph  297  immigration
rules) for the appellant.

8.    Ms Holmes for the respondent argued  that  the  decision  is  a  well-
reasoned decision which does not  contain  a  material  error  of  law.  She
argued that the Judge reached conclusions which were properly  open  to  the
Judge to reach; that the Judge adequately records the reasons  for  reaching
those conclusions after a careful analysis of the evidence. She urged me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

9.    In TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006]  UKAIT
00049 the Tribunal said that "Sole responsibility" is a  factual  matter  to
be decided upon all the evidence.   The  test  is  whether  the  parent  has
continuing control and direction  over  the  child's  upbringing,  including
making all the important decisions in  the  child's  life.   However,  where
both parents are involved in a child's upbringing, it  will  be  exceptional
that one of them will have "sole responsibility".

10.   In Buydov v ECO Moscow 2012 EWCA Civ 1739, as part  of  their  written
divorce agreement, the parents had agreed that the mother  would  have  sole
responsibility for the claimant's  upbringing.  The  judge  (in  that  case)
found that in practice the claimant's father retained  some  responsibility.
It was held that the judge had misdirected himself when  he  found  that  it
was necessary to show that the father had abdicated responsibility  for  the
child before the mother could have sole  responsibility.  The  finding  that
the father had not abdicated responsibility was clearly  relevant  but  that
was not the same as treating the finding as conclusive. The residence  order
for the child was clearly evidence but it would be  wrong  to  treat  it  is
necessarily sufficient evidence to  prove  sole  responsibility.  The  Upper
Tribunal's conclusion that it could  not  derive  assistance  from  the  IDI
could not be characterised as an  error  of  law.  The  Upper  Tribunal  was
entitled to find that the mother did not have sole responsibility.

11.   Between [6] and [13] the Judge  sets  out  the  appellant's  claim  in
detail. At [2] & [3] the Judge clearly sets out  the  oral  and  documentary
evidence placed before  her.  At  [2]  the  Judge  records  that  she  heard
evidence from the appellant's witness, Veronica Sibanda.  Between  [17]  and
[25] the Judge sets out findings in fact made on the basis of  the  evidence
presented. Between [26] and [13] the Judge sets  out  her  consideration  of
the law and conclusions.

12.    The  criticism  made  by  counsel  for  the  appellant  amount  to  a
suggestion that the judge has ignored material aspects of  the  evidence  in
this case and has failed to make findings  in  fact  after  considering  the
credibility and reliability of individual witnesses. A fair reading  of  the
decision indicates that there is no merit  in  that  argument.  Perhaps  the
judge could have made greater use of subheadings, indicating  which  chapter
of the decision she was moving on to. The Judge could have  dealt  with  the
evidence of each witness individually & explained  which  findings  of  fact
relate to which strand(s) of evidence. But those are  criticisms  of  style,
not of substance.

13.   A fair reading of the Judge's decision  would  satisfy  the  objective
reader that the Judge considered each source of evidence, and made  findings
of fact based on  the  evidence  presented.  The  Judge  correctly  directed
herself in law at [26], before drawing  conclusions  which  were  manifestly
based on the evidence driven  fact  finding  exercise  that  the  Judge  has
carried out. The suggestion that the Judge has either ignored or  completely
forgotten about a witness is entirely without foundation.

14.   The fulcrum of this case is the question of sole  responsibility.  The
first sentence of [26] clearly  indicates  that  the  Judge  identifies  the
determinative question in this case. The Judge's self-direction  in  law  in
that same paragraph cannot be criticised.

15.   It was for the Judge to decide whether or  not  the  sponsor  has  had
sole responsibility for the  appellant.  A  fair  reading  of  the  decision
clearly indicates that the Judge fully engaged with both the legal test  and
the  crucial  factual  questions.  A  fair  reading  of  the   determination
indicates that the Judge fully considered the evidence  presented  in  order
to make findings of fact before asking the correct question in  law.  Having
done that the Judge reached a conclusion.  The  conclusion  that  the  Judge
reached is not one that the appellant likes, but there is no error  of  law.
The Judge applied the correct legal test of the facts as she found  them  to
be; that is precisely what a Judge should do.

16.   It is not an arguable error of law for a  Judge  to  give  too  little
weight or too much weight to a factor, unless irrationality is alleged.  Nor
is it an error of law for a Judge to fail to deal with every  factual  issue
under  argument.  Disagreement  with  a  Judge's  factual  conclusions,  her
appraisal of the evidence or assessment of credibility,  or  her  evaluation
of risk does not give rise to an error of law. Rationality is  a  very  high
threshold and a conclusion is not irrational just because  some  alternative
explanation has been rejected or can be said to be possible.

17.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the Judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

18.   A fair reading of the Judge's decision  indicates  that  there  is  no
misdirection of law and that the fact-finding process cannot be  criticised.
As I have already indicated, the Judge's conclusions are  conclusions  which
were reasonably open to her to reach.

19.   I find that the Judge's determination when read as  a  whole  set  out
findings that were  sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed  and  based  on
cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

20.   No errors of law have been established. The Judge's decision stands.

DECISION

21.   The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 3 December 2015

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
