
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00452/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Judgment given orally at hearing     |On 13 November 2015                  |
|On 29 October 2015                   |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mold, Counsel instructed by David Tang & Co


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of State.  For  the
    sake of clarity however, I refer to the parties as they were before the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 2. Thus, the appellant, whom I shall identify as S because of her age,  is
    a citizen of Jamaica born on 17 May 2001.  An application was made  for
    entry clearance as a dependent child.  That application was refused  in
    a decision dated 4 December 2013 with reference to paragraph 297 of the
    Immigration Rules.  There was in fact a contemporaneous  decision  made
    in respect of the appellant's brother K, whose appeal also came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal but whose appeal was dismissed  by  the  First-
    tier Judge.

 3. Returning to the case of this appellant, the appeal came before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Thanki at a hearing  on  29  May  2015  whereby  he
    dismissed the appeal of the appellant's brother but allowed the  appeal
    of this appellant.  He concluded,  in  summary,  that  the  appellant's
    mother, YF, who is a British citizen, has had sole  responsibility  for
    the appellant within the meaning of the Rules.

 4. The respondent's grounds of appeal before me focus on the question of a
    letter  apparently  provided  by  the  appellant's  father  in  Jamaica
    consenting to the appellant living in the UK permanently.  It is argued
    on behalf of the respondent in the  grounds  that  there  is  no  other
    independent evidence to confirm that the appellant's father had  indeed
    so consented or whether the signature on the letter was his.

 5. It is submitted that the appellant had failed to discharge  the  burden
    of proof by failing to prove that the appellant's father had  abdicated
    responsibility  for  her.   It  is  also  said  that  at  [14]  of  the
    determination there is a contradiction or inconsistency  although  that
    purported inconsistency was not relied on in submissions before me.

 6. The grounds also  raise  the  issue  of  there  being  no  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which  make  the  appellant's
    exclusion from  the  UK  undesirable;  although  again,  that  was  not
    supported by oral submissions before  me  and  is  not  a  factor  that
    features in the determination of the First-tier Judge.

 7. Ms Brocklesby-Weller's admirably succinct submissions  argue  that  the
    assessment of sole responsibility was flawed because  in  part  it  was
    based on evidence from the appellant's father  in  the  letter  to  the
    effect that he consented to the appellant coming to  the  UK.  However,
    the fact of the matter was that as at  the  date  of  the  decision  it
    appeared that he, even if not in direct contact with the appellant, had
    not disappeared from the scene as appeared to be the case by  the  date
    of the hearing. Nevertheless, the evidence recorded was that  they  had
    lost all contact with him.

 8. Furthermore, there was evidence that nearer to  the  date  of  decision
    remittances had been provided to the appellant by her father,  referred
    to in the determination, for example  at  [14].   It  is  submitted  on
    behalf of the respondent that the reasons for the judge's  findings  of
    sole responsibility are confined  to  one  paragraph,  and  in  reality
    confined to the evidence of the appellant's mother.

 9. Mr Mold on the other hand contends that  the  respondent's  submissions
    and grounds really amount only to a disagreement with the  findings  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal.   He  submitted  that  the  letter  dated  14
    September 2013 from the appellant's father indicates that  there  would
    be a permanent separation and indeed the last sentence of  that  letter
    states as follows: "I understand that by signing this letter I  may  be
    permanently separated from my child". It is submitted that  in  reality
    that letter is not properly characterised as a letter of consent.

10. For my part I do not think it  necessary  to  decide  how  that  letter
    should be described.  Suffice to say it  was  a  letter  written  about
    three  months  before  the  date  of  decision  and  states  that   the
    appellant's father has no objections to her going  to  the  UK  and  he
    understands that there would be permanent separation. More to the point
    it seems to me, is what is said at [26] of the  determination,  whereby
    Judge Thanki found the appellant's mother to be a credible witness who,
    in the judge's words, gave her evidence in a measured way  and  avoided
    the temptation to exaggerate issues before him.

11.  He  stated  that  he  believed  her  when  she  said  she   had   sole
    responsibility for the appellants  plural,  although  it  is  only  one
    appellant that this decision is concerned  with.  However,  it  is  not
    simply a case of the judge blindly and blandly accepting  the  evidence
    of a witness without reference to any other detail. In  that  paragraph
    the judge explains what it is about the  appellant's  mother's  contact
    and responsibility for the appellant that persuaded him  that  she  did
    have  sole  responsibility  for  her.   He  referred   to   the   daily
    communications, the six visits since 2010, the last being  in  February
    2015, to her provision of maintenance from  the  UK  and  crucially  he
    accepted that she makes all the important decisions in her life.

12. Further detail on the issue of sole responsibility  was  given  in  the
    letter in support of the appeal from the appellant's grandmother Mrs M.
     She gave the background to her having looked after the appellant since
    2010 but she states in the letter that she seeks  the  consent  of  her
    daughter, the sponsor (the  appellant's  mother)  in  all  the  matters
    concerning the appellant; receives money for  the  children,  and  that
    they maintain daily contact and that she visits regularly.  She  states
    in her letter that the sponsor buys school uniform, books, pays  school
    fees and when in Jamaica takes them to school  and  brings  necessities
    from the UK.  She discusses the details  of  school  reports  with  the
    sponsor.

13. Crucially, and earlier in the  determination,  the  evidence  from  the
    appellants' mother, whom again it is to be noted the judge found to  be
    a credible witness,  was  that  she  was  solely  responsible  for  the
    appellants' upbringing and "made all the important decisions  in  their
    life". Apart from maintenance that included choice of schools, guidance
    on medical care and almost daily contact.

14. There was also evidence from Mr EF, who  stated  that  the  appellants'
    mother had found schools for the appellants and paid their school fees.
    There was no cross-examination in relation to his evidence.  The  judge
    made findings insofar as he could as to the extent of the role  of  the
    appellant's father and it was noted  that  he  had  provided  financial
    assistance in the past.

15. Although the judge did not make a specific finding in relation  to  the
    letter from the appellant's father, I am satisfied that when one  looks
    at the determination as a whole and the specific findings  in  relation
    to the credibility of the evidence that was before him, supplemented by
    the  written  evidence  of  the  appellant's  grandmother,  he  reached
    sustainable conclusions in relation to sole responsibility.

16. It should also not be overlooked that there was  a  document  from  the
    Supreme Court of Jamaica dated 19 May 2014 in  the  appellant's  bundle
    stating that the appellant had sole legal custody and care and  control
    of both the appellants.  Even without that document  from  the  Supreme
    Court, the findings of the First-tier Judge would otherwise  have  been
    sustainable.

17. In all these circumstances, I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  reached
    legally sustainable conclusions on the basis of the evidence before him
    and there is no error of law in his decision.  Accordingly the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal is to stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  12/11/15

