

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
OA/00927/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent     | Determination Promulgated     |
|On 5 May 2016                              | On 16 May 2016                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MR SHUJAH JAVAID
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Moksud, Legal representative


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal. I find that no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case that give rise to the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO").  For  ease
       of reference, I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-
       Tier Tribunal albeit that the ECO is technically  the  Appellant  in
       this particular appeal.


    2. The ECO appeals against a decision of First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  M
       Davies promulgated on 11 August 2015 ("the Decision")  allowing  the
       Appellant's appeal against the ECO's decision dated 27 November 2014
       refusing the Appellant entry clearance as the spouse  of  a  British
       citizen.  The ECO's decision was upheld on administrative review  by
       the Entry Clearance Manager ("ECM") following  the  lodging  of  the
       appeal by a decision dated 11 March 2015.  The ECM upheld the  ECO's
       decision under paragraph 320(11) of the Rules.


    3. By the Decision, the Appellant's appeal was  allowed  on  the  basis
       that the ECO's decision was not  in  accordance  with  the  law  for
       failure by the ECO to follow the correct procedure when refusing  an
       application under  rule  320(11)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
       Rules") namely to have the decision reviewed by an  ECM.   For  that
       reason, the Judge allowed the appeal and required the ECO to re-take
       the decision in accordance with the procedure required  by  the  ECO
       guidance.


    4. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on  4  January
       2016 on the basis that it was unclear why the Judge  concluded  that
       the ECO had failed to obtain the necessary authorisation of the ECM.
        This matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains
       an error of law and if so to  re-make  the  Decision  or  remit  the
       appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal for re-hearing.


      Grounds and submissions

    5. It was common ground that the guidance given to ECOs in relation  to
       refusals based  on  rule  320(11)  requires  that  the  decision  be
       reviewed by an ECM prior to issue.


    6. The ECO appeals the Decision on the basis that it was not reasonably
       open to the Judge to decide the appeal on this  basis.   Mr  McVeety
       submitted, firstly, that the Judge had found that the  ECO  had  not
       followed the correct procedure based  on  an  allegation  which  was
       completely  unsupported  by  evidence.   He  should  at  least  have
       required the Appellant to provide some  evidence  that  the  correct
       procedure  had  not  been  followed.  He  also  submitted  that  the
       allegation was  based  on  a  misunderstanding  of  entry  clearance
       procedures.  It appears to have been assumed by  the  Appellant  and
       the Judge that, because there was a decision of the ECM on 11  March
       2015 after the decision to refuse that this in some way pointed to a
       failure of review prior to the decision being made and  issued.   Mr
       McVeety pointed out that the decision of 11 March 2015 was  part  of
       the usual review procedure followed on appeals  in  entry  clearance
       cases.


    7. Mr McVeety also showed me notes from the ECO system  which  disclose
       that the ECO's decision was in fact reviewed  by  an  ECM  prior  to
       issue.  He accepted that this evidence was not before the First-tier
       Tribunal at the date of Decision and he did not seek to rely  on  it
       as evidence.  He relied on it only to the extent of  supporting  the
       Respondent's position that there was no evidence that  the  ECO  had
       not followed the correct procedure.


    8. Mr  Moksud,  who  also  appeared  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       accepted that he could not point to any evidence that  the  ECO  had
       not followed the correct procedure.  There is nothing on the face of
       the ECO decision which shows that it was reviewed  by  the  ECM  but
       equally there is nothing to show that it was not.


    9. The position taken by the Appellant in the rule 24 reply is that the
       Respondent's legal representative did not produce  any  evidence  at
       the hearing to show that the decision was reviewed and that, if time
       were needed to  establish  this,  an  adjournment  could  have  been
       sought.  It was said that if the decision  had  been  reviewed  then
       that evidence could have been included in the Respondent's bundle.


   10. I pointed out to Mr Moksud  that  there  was  no  challenge  to  the
       decision on this issue in the  Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  and
       there was no reason why the Respondent would be on notice that  this
       was challenged or that evidence would be  required.     He  accepted
       this to be the case.  He also appeared to suggest at one point  that
       the issue was raised by the Judge and not by him.


   11. I also asked Mr Moksud why, even if it were the case that there  was
       no ECM review prior to the ECO's decision, that defect could not  be
       cured by the subsequent review which took place after the lodging of
       the appeal.  The Judge relied on the case of Gurpreet Singh  v  ECO,
       New Delhi  (OA/04089/2011) ("Singh") to support the proposition that
       this could not assist ([9] of the Decision).  Quite apart  from  the
       fact that this is an unreported decision of the  Upper  Tribunal,  I
       was unable to find any passage in that decision which supported  the
       Judge's conclusion that the ECM review after the decision could  not
       remedy any defect in the initial procedure.  Mr Moksud was unable to
       point me to any such passage; in that case there did not  appear  to
       have been any subsequent review.  Mr Moksud indicated  however  that
       he was unfamiliar with that decision and had not relied on it before
       the Judge.


   12. For completeness, and to the extent that the decision in  that  case
       was relied upon by the Judge, I note that the Upper  Tribunal  panel
       in that case pointed to two concerns about the guidance - one in the
       event that the ECO's decision had not been reviewed and one  in  the
       event that it had since it appeared to the panel that  the  guidance
       was not in accordance with the principle that  guidance  should  not
       fetter the discretion of an individual ECO.   However,  that  second
       concern forms no part of the Decision.


   13. In reply, Mr McVeety very fairly accepted that it  might  have  been
       possible for the Presenting Officer who appeared for the  Respondent
       to have sought an adjournment to produce evidence.   It  might  even
       have been possible to obtain that evidence quite quickly  after  the
       point was raised even though this is an entry clearance case if  the
       Presenting Officer had access to entry clearance electronic systems.
        However,  he  pointed  out  that  the  hearing  in  fact  proceeded
       substantively with evidence and cross-examination and  it  is  quite
       possible that the Presenting Officer did not see  the  need  for  an
       adjournment in relation to  something  which  he  did  not  consider
       decisive in the expectation that the Judge would also determine  the
       substantive issues.


   14. Mr McVeety also submitted that it was very unfortunate that,  having
       heard evidence, the Judge had not gone on to decide the substance of
       the appeal as the delay which would ensue  if  the  Respondent  were
       right in her challenge to the Decision was not  in  the  Appellant's
       interests either.


      Decision and reasons

   15. I indicated at the end of the hearing that there is a clear error of
       law in the Decision and that I  would  provide  reasons  in  writing
       which I now turn to do.


   16. The relevant passage of the Decision is as follows:-
            "[10]      It is not necessary for me to go into the  facts  of
       this particular appeal or  indeed  the  basis  of  the  Respondent's
       decision. It is clear  that  the  Entry  Clearance     Manager  when
       refusing the Appellant's application on 27th November  2014  did  so
       without obtaining the authorisation of the Entry Clearance  Manager.
       The Entry       Clearance Manager's subsequent review on 11th  March
       2015 cannot be regarded as       an authorisation of a decision made
       many months previously.
            [11] It is not necessary for me to go into the particular facts
       of this appeal in    relation to paragraph  320(11)  other  than  to
       find that the Appellant can discharge the   burden of proof upon him
       and  satisfy  me  that  the  Respondent's  decision   was   not   in
       accordance with the law for the reasons stated."


   17. Whilst that passage rightly records that the  burden  (at  the  very
       least the evidential burden) is on the Appellant to raise the  issue
       that the ECO had  not  followed  the  correct  procedure,  there  is
       nothing in the preceding part of the Decision which points  to  what
       that evidence was.  The only reference to why the Judge reached this
       conclusion is at [9] which  records  Mr  Moksud's  submission  that,
       based on Singh, the ECO's decision was not in  accordance  with  the
       law. Leaving aside Mr Moksud's submission before me that he did  not
       raise the issue (or at least not unprompted) and  that  he  did  not
       rely on Singh, that does not amount to evidence  at  all  let  alone
       evidence to show that "it is clear" that the ECO did not follow  the
       correct procedure.


   18. The Appellant's Rule 24 reply makes the  submission  that  when  the
       Appellant argued that the ECO  had  failed  to  follow  the  correct
       procedure, the burden shifted to the Respondent to  prove  that  she
       had and the Presenting Officer had failed to provide that  evidence.
       That is not the correct analysis.  The Appellant  could  not  simply
       rely on a  submission  by  the  legal  representative  without  more
       (particularly when the issue  was  not  raised  in  the  grounds  of
       appeal).  Whilst I readily accept  that  the  evidence  whether  the
       correct procedure was followed will lay with the ECO, there must  be
       something which gives rise to at least a reasonable  suspicion  that
       it was not.  At the very least, the issue should be raised in a  way
       which permits the ECO to counter it properly, particularly where, as
       here, the issue is considered by the Judge to be decisive.   I  note
       in particular that in Singh the issue was raised by the Appellant in
       that case at an early stage in the grounds of appeal  and  that  the
       Tribunal gave directions for the Respondent to produce  evidence  to
       show that the correct procedure was followed.   That  was  not  done
       here.  As Mr McVeety was  able  to  show,  had  that  happened,  the
       Respondent could have produced the evidence that the ECO did  follow
       the guidance.


   19. That is a sufficient basis on which to find a material error of law.
        Had it been necessary to do so, I would have accepted in any  event
       that the subsequent ECM review, coming as it did before the  hearing
       of the appeal, would cure any initial defect.  That  review  is  not
       without force as is shown in this case by the fact that the ECM  who
       conducted the review withdrew some of the basis of the original  ECO
       decision (whilst upholding the refusal based on rule  320(11)).  The
       decision in Singh does not deal with that issue (contrary to what is
       said at [9] of the Decision).


   20. There was some discussion at the end of the hearing  about  how  the
       appeal should proceed.  It is unfortunate that the Judge did not  go
       on to consider the substance and facts of the  appeal,  particularly
       when he had heard evidence and submissions on the substance  of  the
       ECO's decision.  There is no doubt that this has not benefitted  the
       Appellant who will suffer further  delay  due  to  the  need  for  a
       further hearing of his appeal.


   21. Although Mr Moksud did indicate that the Appellant may be willing to
       waive his right to have the substance of his case considered by  the
       First-tier Tribunal to avoid further delay, I am satisfied that this
       would not be in the  Appellant's  interest.  There  are  no  initial
       findings of fact about the genuineness, extent  and  nature  of  his
       relationship.  There  are  no  findings  about  the  extent  of  his
       previous immigration misdemeanours.   Both  of  those  elements  are
       central to the question  of  whether  discretion  should  have  been
       exercised in his favour  when  applying  paragraph  320(11)  of  the
       Rules.  It would be unfair for the Appellant to be deprived  of  the
       right  to  have  those  initial  findings  made  in  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.


   22. I therefore indicated at the end of the hearing that I  intended  to
       remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for the appeal to be re-
       heard before a Judge other than Judge M Davies.  I record  that  the
       ECO decision in this case is dated November 2014 and, as  Mr  Moksud
       noted, the Appellant and his spouse have been kept apart for  nearly
       eighteen months as a result of the  course  which  this  appeal  has
       taken.  It is desirable therefore that the appeal be heard  as  soon
       as possible.


    DECISION

          I am satisfied that the Decision contains an error  of  law.   The
Decision of      First-      Tier Tribunal Judge M Davies is set aside.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-Tier    Tribunal for re-hearing (as soon  as
possible) by a different Judge.

          Signed                  Date:   9 May 2016
[pic]
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
