
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00065/2012
                                                               OA/00069/2012
                                                               OA/00072/2012
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 10th June 2013                             |on 23rd August 2013          |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                           MICHAEL MAKAYA TATENDA
                               LENEKAR MAKAYA
                                MAKAYA CLARA
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mrs Gwashawanhu of Bake & Co Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Smart - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge Hubball promulgated on 19th June 2012 in which  he  dismissed
        the appellants' appeals against the  refusal  of  entry  clearance.
        They are all minors being born on 23rd August 1994,  11th  November
        1995 and 11th December 1999 respectively who wish  to  settle  with
        their mother in the United Kingdom. The date  of  decision  is  the
        29th November 2011.


     2. Judge Hubball comments upon the sponsor's immigration  history  and
        the evidence  made  available  to  him.  In  paragraph  81  of  the
        determination he finds the sponsor does not have continuing control
        and direction over the upbringing and the lives of the children  or
        that she has made all the important decisions in  their  lives.  It
        was found that it is their maternal grandmother  who  fulfils  this
        role.


     3. In paragraph 87 Judge Hubball he did not accept the appellants  are
        leading independent lives in Zimbabwe  as  they  have  been  living
        under the control and direction of the sponsor's mother. The  Judge
        was  therefore  not  satisfied  that   the   appellants   met   the
        requirements of paragraphs 297 (i) (e) and (f) of  the  Immigration
        Rules. He also dismissed the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.


     4. Permission to appeal was granted on 30th  August  2012  by  another
        judge of the First-tier Tribunal who notes that the Entry Clearance
        Officer does not appear to have disputed the fact the father of all
        three children had died although the application, for reasons  that
        are not yet clear, was not considered under paragraph 297 (i) which
        requires an applicant to  show  that  one  parent  is  present  and
        settled in the  United  Kingdom  or  being  admitted  on  the  same
        occasion for settlement and the other parent  is  dead.  The  death
        certificate says he died  on  26th  February  2000.  Permission  is
        granted on the basis that this was a 'Robinson obvious' point  that
        the First-tier Judge should have considered.


     5. The appeal is opposed by the ECO who does not accept that the  only
        issue is 297 (i) (d).  It is argued in the Rule  24  response  that
        the Judge having concluded the appellants were under the  care  and
        control of their grandmother should have concluded they  now  lived
        in a family unit independent of their  parents  and  therefore  the
        underlying purpose of paragraph 197 was no longer engaged.


     6. On behalf of the ECO Mr Smart did concede that it appeared  from  a
        reading  of  the  determination  that  Judge  Hubball  had   become
        'sidetracked' by a discussion in relation  to  the  issue  of  sole
        responsibility which it was agreed is not an issue in this  appeal,
        as  a  result  of  submissions  made  to  him  by  the   appellants
        representative. As a result he failed to determine the issue  under
        297 (iii) such  as  to  amount  to  an  error  of  law.  The  Judge
        considered an irrelevant matter before  going  on  to  dismiss  the
        appeal which amounts to a material error of law. The basis  of  the
        refusal by the ECO is that the appellants are  leading  independent
        lives and, although in paragraph  87  of  the  determination  Judge
        Hubball makes a specific finding with regard  to  this  matter,  Mr
        Smart submitted  this  paragraph  contains  inadequate  reasons  to
        address the concerns of the ECO who is unable to understand from  a
        reading of the determination why the decision has gone against him.


     7. I announced in court that I am satisfied Judge  Hubball  erred  for
        the reasons set out in the application for  permission  to  appeal,
        the grant  permission,  and  the  submissions  made  to  the  Upper
        Tribunal such that the determination must be set aside. There shall
        be no preserved findings although the sponsor's immigration history
        and the relationship between the appellants and the sponsor is  not
        in dispute.  Due to a lack of  time,  as  on  this  day  the  Upper
        Tribunal was dealing with two list which had been amalgamated as  a
        result of the Upper Tribunal Judge Coker being unable to attend  as
        a result of serious injury following a road traffic  accident,  the
        appeal was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  afresh
        on 21st October 2013.


     8. However, following consideration of the issues for the purposes  of
        drafting this document on 12th June 2013 it appeared appropriate to
        give the parties an opportunity  to  make  further  submissions  in
        light of the issues raised in the grant of permission to appeal.  A
        direction to this effect was sent to  the  parties  and  an  e-mail
        response received from Mr Smart on 20th June 2013  requesting  that
        the matter remains listed for the oral hearing  before  the  First-
        tier Tribunal on 21st October 2013.  In  all  the  circumstances  I
        accede to this request.


     9. The following direction shall apply to the future conduct  of  this
        appeal:

      i.   The  determination  shall  be  set  aside.  There  shall  be   no
preserved findings.

     ii. The appeal shall be remitted to  be  heard  afresh  by  a  salaried
      judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at  Sheldon  Court   in
Birmingham, to be nominated by Resident Judge Renton, on       21st  October
2013. Time estimate 1.5 hours.

     iii.     The appellants shall file and serve a  consolidated,  indexed,
and      paginated bundle containing all the  evidence  they  seek  to  rely
      upon  in  support  of  their  appeal  no   later   than   Monday,   14
October 2012.

     iv. No interpreter is required.

     v.  These directions shall remain in force unless  varied  by  Resident
     Judge Renton.  Applications  for  further  directions  or  a  variation
of these directions must be made in writing and addressed to        Resident
Judge Renton at Sheldon Court.


   Anonymity.


    10. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make no such order as there was no application for anonymity and
   no basis       for such an order established on the facts.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 21st August 2013
