

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/00050/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14 March 2016                         |On 31 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 DENIS MUCA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr A. Olufunwa of Immigration Law Practice
For the Respondent:     Mr A. McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle  has
      neatly summarised the issues to be addressed in  this  appeal  to  the
      Upper Tribunal and I shall gratefully reproduce what he  has  written.
      In proceedings before the Upper Tribunal, the SSHD  is  the  appellant
      and the child seeking entry clearance who succeeded before the  First-
      tier Tribunal is the respondent but, as  I  shall  need  to  reproduce
      extracts from the decision of the judge, it is convenient to refer  to
      the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.  Judge  Astle
      said:

           "The respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
           decision  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   (Judge   Lloyd-Smith)
           promulgated  on  26  October  2015  whereby   it   allowed   the
           appellant's appeal against the decision of  an  entry  clearance
           officer to refuse clearance as the child of someone present  and
           settled in the UK


           The grounds argue that the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
           sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  for   the   appellant.   The
           undisputed evidence was that  the  appellant  resided  with  his
           mother. At best the sponsor had shared responsibility. It  could
           not  be  said  that  the  mother  had  abandoned  or   abdicated
           responsibility for the appellant.


It is not clear to me if paragraph 297(i)(f) was argued but it is arguable
that the judge erred in finding that the sponsor had sole responsibility in
the circumstances. Permission is therefore granted."


   2. The appellant, who is a citizen of Albania, was born on 21  July  1998
      and so was 17 years old at the date of the  respondent's  decision  to
      refuse his  application  for  entry  clearance.  The  sponsor  is  the
      appellant's father, Mr Xhevahir Muca. The decision of the  respondent,
      made on 17 November 2014, set out the following reasons  for  refusing
      the application:


           "You have applied to join your parent in the UK.  I  acknowledge
           that you have submitted a  letter  from  Tirana  Notary  Chamber
           which states that your mother has handed over responsibility  to
           your father and has given permission for you to reside with him.
           Her reasons are that she is unable to afford your living  costs,
           despite your father claiming to subsidise you  from  the  United
           Kingdom and that she is psychologically  unwell.  This  has  not
           been medically evidenced.


However, I am not satisfied that you have demonstrated that you have had
regular contact with your father. There are only two photographs that you
have submitted. One of a small child and your sponsor and another of you
and your sponsor. There are no photographs of the interim period between.
As evidence of contact you have provided some screenshots of missed calls.
Your sponsor also states that he funds you from the United Kingdom but this
is not clearly evidenced in his bank statements."


      For  these  reasons,  the  respondent  did  not  accept  it  had  been
      established that the sponsor had demonstrated the sole  responsibility
      for the appellant's upbringing demanded by the applicable  immigration
      rule. The respondent went  on  to  examine  the  evidence  offered  in
      respect of the financial  requirements  applicable  and  as  specified
      documents in support of the  sponsor's  asserted  earnings  from  self
      employment were not submitted, the application was  refused  for  that
      reason also.


   3. Before  the  judge  it  was  agreed  that  the  application  had  been
      determined under  the  wrong  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
      Although it had been considered and refused by reference  to  Appendix
      FM, because the sponsor is a British citizen,  the  correct  rule  was
      para 297 of HC 395. The judge recognised that one option was to  remit
      the matter back to the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  reconsider  the
      application under the correct rule  but  it  was  agreed  between  the
      parties that  the  most  appropriate  course  was  for  the  judge  to
      determine the appeal substantively by reference to  paragraph  297  of
      the rules and this he agreed to do.


   4. Para 279 provides, so far as is relevant:

        Requirements for indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as
        the child of a parent, parents or a relative present and settled or
        being admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom

           297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite
           leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent,
           parents or a relative present and settled or being admitted for
           settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:
           (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent,
           parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:
                 ....
                 (e) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom
                 or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and
                 has had sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or
                 (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in the
                 United Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
                 settlement and there are serious and compelling family or
                 other considerations which make exclusion of the child
                 undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for
                 the child's care; and
                 (ii) is under the age of 18; and
                 (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and
                 is not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent
                 family unit; and
                 (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately by the
                 parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to join
                 without recourse to public funds in accommodation which the
                 parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to join,
                 own or occupy exclusively; and
                 (v) can, and will, be maintained adequately by the parent,
                 parents, or relative the child is seeking to join, without
                 recourse to public funds; and
                 ...

   5. Thus, for the purposes of this appeal  the  erroneous  application  of
      Appendix FM rather than para 297 was in one sense not  material  since
      both provisions require the applicant to establish  that  the  sponsor
      has had sole responsibility for the  child's  upbringing  or,  in  the
      alternative, that there are serious and  compelling  family  or  other
      considerations which makes the child's exclusion undesirable. True  it
      is that a  different  approach  is  taken  with  regard  to  financial
      requirements to be met,  but  as  that  does  not  form  part  of  the
      respondent's challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  in
      reviewing the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, it  is  simply  the
      matter of sole responsibility  that  is  in  issue  before  the  Upper
      Tribunal.


   6. The central facts are these. It is not in dispute that  the  appellant
      is the son of the sponsor. The sponsor left Albania and  came  to  the
      United Kingdom when the appellant was just 10 months old.  Since  then
      the appellant has lived with his mother in Albania although her health
      has deteriorated over the last three years. The sponsor is now married
      to his present wife in the United Kingdom. Although she  supports  the
      application for entry  clearance,  she  has  not  met  the  appellant,
      explaining that during each of her visits to Albania the appellant has
      either been away on holiday or a visit was not  possible  because  his
      mother was unhappy that the sponsor had married in the United Kingdom.
      The judge provided this summary of the evidence before him:

           "(The sponsor) ... confirmed that he last saw his  son  a  month
           ago and has been regularly  returning  because  the  appellant's
           mother's health has been deteriorating over  the  past  3  years
           because she suffers from depression and anxiety. His last  visit
           was necessary because his son  had  been  attacked  and  he  was
           concerned that he would be influenced by the wrong crowd of boys
           who take drugs and are violent. In cross examination the sponsor
           confirmed that his son attends  college,  having  completed  his
           school education. The sponsor was unable  to  specify  precisely
           what the course was that his son was undertaking and said he had
           yet to decide what he wants to do when he is older. He mentioned
           that his son was training to be a mechanic and later said he may
           be  a  policeman.  He  said  prior  to  the  last  3  years  the
           appellant's mother had cared for him well but  her  illness  has
           left her unable to cope. Whilst the sponsor has other family  in
           Albania he said that they have their own families or do not live
           close enough to help.  In  addition  his  son  has  very  little
           contact with them. When asked when he gained British citizenship
           the sponsor said he thought it was 3 years ago but  he  was  not
           sure. He said that  he  had  not  made  an  earlier  application
           because the appellant's mother had been coping and there was  no
           need to. The sponsor said that he  has  had  responsibility  for
           helping his son choose which college to attend  and  paying  the
           fees. He said that he has been married to  his  current  partner
           for 10 years and whilst she has never met the appellant she  has
           spoken to him on Skype regularly."

   7.  The  judge  recorded  submissions  made  by  the  parties.  For   the
      respondent, although it was accepted that there  had  been  "financial
      input" from the sponsor  it  was  said  that  there  was  insufficient
      evidence to demonstrate that he had had sole  responsibility  for  the
      appellant's upbringing and there was insufficient evidence of "serious
      or compelling reasons". It is not clear whether the  judge  recognised
      that the conjunctive link found in 297(i)(f) is "and" and not "or".


   8. The respondent's position was that reliance could not be placed on the
      medical evidence offered because the translations were  "garbled"  and
      did  not  serve  to  establish  that  the   sponsor   had   had   sole
      responsibility  for  the   appellant's   upbringing.   The   sponsor's
      understanding of the course his son was engaged  in  was  said  to  be
      "vague".

   9. On behalf of the appellant it  was  submitted  that  the  sponsor  had
      provided constant support for the appellant  since  he  moved  to  the
      United Kingdom and over the past 3-4  years  had  made  more  frequent
      visits to his son in Albania. That was because his mother's health was
      deteriorating so that he has become  more  directly  involved  in  the
      appellant's upbringing and care. The appellant's mother has now agreed
      that the appellant may have legal custody of the appellant so that the
      sponsor  and  his  wife  now  had  "primary  responsibility"  for  the
      appellant.

  10. In reaching his findings, the judge took as his starting point that:

           "... the sponsor and his wife  ...  have  the  appellant's  best
           interests at heart and are keen to enable him to  join  them  in
           this country  because  they  have  serious  concerns  about  his
           present circumstances and whether he is being suitably cared for
           ..."


      The judge then considered post  decision  evidence  provided  for  the
      purpose of a review by the Entry Clearance Manager who  he  criticised
      for failing to  have  proper  regard  to  the  evidence  now  produced
      establishing  that  the  appellant's  mother  does  have  the   health
      difficulties described and that she  was  now  content  that  her  son
      should join his father in the United Kingdom. His key findings are set
      out at paragraph 14 of his decision which I shall set out in full:


           "In assessing the issue of sole responsibility I have considered
           the  relevant  case  law.  In  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole
           responsibility" Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049  the Tribunal said that
           "Sole responsibility" is a factual matter to be decided  on  all
           the evidence. Where one parent is not involved  in  the  child's
           upbringing because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned  or  abdicated
           responsibility, the issue may arise between the remaining parent
           and others who have day to day care of  the  child  abroad.  The
           test is whether the parent has continuing control and  direction
           over the child's life. However, where both parents are  involved
           in a child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that one of them
           will have "sole responsibility". In Emmanuel v SSHD  [1972]  Imm
           AR 69 the Tribunal acknowledged in  this  respect  that  certain
           tasks would almost undoubtedly be delegated to a third party and
           in nearly all cases there must be some sort of responsibility of
           a relative or other carer with whom the child lives, or  who  is
           responsible for meeting the day to day needs of a child, such as
           food, clothing, medical attention, and ensuring that  the  child
           attends school. The Tribunal said that it is  necessary  to  see
           under whose directions these steps are taken  and  to  ask  were
           they taken under the direction of the UK  sponsor.  In  Nmaju  v
           Entry Clearance Officer IAT [2001] INLR 26 Court of  Appeal,  it
           was held that, although the duration of sole responsibility  was
           a relevant factor to the issue of whether a parent did  actually
           have sole responsibility has been exercised does not have to  be
           lengthy. In R (Philippines) [2003] UKIAT 000109 it was said that
           it was a question of fact and degree in each case as to  whether
           there was sole responsibility or not."


      For these reasons the judge concluded:


           "Having  assessed  the  evidence   I   find   that   since   the
           deterioration in the appellant's mother's health the sponsor has
           taken over sole  responsibility  as  opposed  to  having  shared
           responsibility with the mother which he previously had. There is
           evidence that the sponsor has paid for the appellant's education
           and has been financially supporting him as well  as  emotionally
           as  was  demonstrated  by  the  recent   visit   following   the
           appellant's disappearance.


           It follows therefore, that on the above finding I  am  satisfied
           that the concerns of  the  ECO  and  ECM  have  been  adequately
           addressed and I find that the decision meets the requirements of
           paragraph 297 and the appeal is allowed."


  11.  Presumably,  the  judge  meant  that  he  was  satisfied   that   the
      application, not the decision, met the requirements of paragraph 297.


  12. The challenge raised by the grounds, adopted before the Upper Tribunal
      by Mr McVeety is, effectively, that this was a perverse decision.  Put
      another way, on the evidence, taken at its very highest,  this  was  a
      conclusion not reasonably open to the judge. The  undisputed  evidence
      was that the appellant continues to reside with  his  mother  and  has
      done so since his father departed when he was 10 months old. It cannot
      be said that the  appellant's  mother  had  either  abandoned  him  or
      abdicated her  responsibility  to  him.  Reliance  upon  Emmanuel  was
      misconceived because that was concerned with  a  situation  where  the
      child had neither parent caring for him so that an absent  parent  who
      did have responsibility for his upbringing delegated day to day  tasks
      to a third party non-parent, as a matter of necessity.  That  was  not
      the position here because the appellant lived with his mother.

  13. I have no doubt at all  that  those  grounds  are  made  out.  On  the
      evidence, even taken at its very  highest,  it  cannot  rationally  be
      concluded that the sponsor can be described as a parent  who  has  had
      sole responsibility for the child's upbringing. It is  plain  that  he
      has not. The medical evidence came nowhere even close to  establishing
      that the appellant's mother had become unable to continue  caring  for
      her son. The  translation  of  that  medical  report  which  offers  a
      diagnosis  of  "chronic  permanent  Cefalea  and  depressive   anxious
      disorder" includes:

           "Beginning of the disease,  the  past  2  years  with  insomnia,
           anorexia, permanent headache, boredom.


           The situation has been psychologically aggravated  with  nervous
           irritability, psychomotor agitation  and  depressive  condition.
           The patient does not talk to family members and  her  relatives,
           is unable to work and to help the family."


      This does not establish that the appellant's mother, who continues  to
      live with him, has ceased to exercise responsibility. There  was,  and
      is, no evidence of any manifestation of the illness of the appellant's
      mother in the sense  of  how  that,  in  practice,  impacts  upon  her
      engagement with her 17 year old son.

  14. For these reasons, the decision of the judge cannot stand and will  be
      set aside. That is not simply because I would not have arrived at  the
      same conclusion but because this was a conclusion  not  rationally  or
      reasonably open to him on the  evidence.  That  establishes  that  the
      judge has made an error of law material to the outcome of the appeal.


  15. The directions sent to the parties with notice of today's hearing made
      clear that if the Upper Tribunal decided to set aside the decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal it would  proceed  forthwith  to  re-make  the
      decision. Nothing further is offered  in  terms  of  evidence  save  a
      letter from the appellant dated 12  February  2016  addressed  to  his
      father in which he describes how his mother has been  unwell  for  3-4
      years so that she does not cook for him and "yells all the  time".  He
      makes clear that he would prefer to live with his father in the United
      Kingdom because he fears that his mother "is getting worse".

  16. I have read carefully all the documentary material advanced on  behalf
      of  the  appellant.  Taken  at  its  highest,  this  is   capable   of
      establishing that the appellant's father has paid school fees for  his
      son, at least for the 2013/2014 school  year,  and  has  made  regular
      visits during the last three years or so. These visits  are  evidenced
      by photographs. The medical evidence indicates  that  the  appellant's
      mother has a need for continuing medical treatment  but  there  is  no
      suggestion that she cannot continue to live at home.  The sponsor says
      in this witness statement that his son's mother "cannot look after him
      over the last 3 years because she suffers from depression" but,  as  a
      matter of fact, that is precisely what  has  happened  over  the  last
      three years.  The "Notarial Declaration" is no  more  than  a  written
      statement by the appellant's mother of future intent, witnessed  by  a
      Public Notary, evidencing her agreement to her son coming to live with
      the sponsor in the United Kingdom. None of this,  even  taken  at  its
      cumulative highest, comes even close to establishing either  that  the
      appellant's father has had sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant's
      upbringing; that the appellant has been abandoned  by  his  mother  or
      that there are serious and compelling family or  other  considerations
      that  makes  the  appellant's  exclusion  from  the   United   Kingdom
      undesirable.

  17. Therefore, I substitute a fresh decision to dismiss the appeal against
      refusal to grant entry clearance.
  18. Signed                 [pic]
                               Date:    14 March 2016

                                Upper Tribunal Judge Southern



