
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/00985/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 1 November 2013                              |On 23 January 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - islamabad
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               rashid mahmood
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwncyz, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Shazia Bibi (Sponsor)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Rashid Mahmood, was born on 3 January  1980  and  is  a
    male citizen of Pakistan.  He had applied for entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as the spouse of Shazia Bibi (hereafter referred  to  as
    the sponsor).  His application  was  refused  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (ECO) in Islamabad by a decision dated 18 December  2012.   The
    respondent appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Kelly) which,  in
    the determination promulgated on 11 September 2013, allowed the  appeal
    in respect of the Immigration Rules.  The Entry Clearance  Officer  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I shall refer to the respondent in these proceedings as the "appellant"
    (as he was before the First-tier Tribunal) and to the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer as the "respondent".

 3. The appeal turns on a single issue.  The respondent was  not  satisfied
    that the appellant met the requirements of paragraph 281(ii) of HC  395
    (as amended):
    (ii) the applicant provides an original English language test
    certificate in speaking and listening from an English language test
    provider approved by the Secretary of State for these purposes, which
    clearly shows the applicant's name and the qualification obtained
    (which must meet or exceed level A1 of the Common European Framework of
    Reference) unless:

    (a) the applicant is aged 65 or over at the time he makes his
application; or

    (b) the applicant has a physical or mental condition that would prevent
    him from meeting the requirement; or;

    (c) there are exceptional compassionate circumstances that would
    prevent the applicant from meeting the requirement;





 4. Judge Kelly recorded at [4] that the factual background to  the  appeal
    was not in dispute:

    4.   The parties  were  married  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  7th
    September 2005 and the appellant subsequently sought leave to remain on
    the basis of his marriage to the sponsor.  When  this  was  refused  he
    returned to the United Kingdom on the 27th April  2011.  Prior  to  his
    leaving, he had studied with the 'Solange Robinson Consultancy'. On the
    18th  June  2011,  a  company  called  'Edexcel'  issued  him  with   a
    certificate to confirm that he was now qualified at level E1 of ESOL  -
    Skills for Life (Speaking and Listening). At that time EDEXCEL had been
    assessed as meeting the UK Border  Agency's  requirements  for  testing
    spouses in the English language. However, on the 18th July 2011 (i.e. a
    month after the appellant had been issued  with  his  certificate)  the
    Agency issued a new list of approved English language  test  providers.
    EDEXCEL was not on it. Therefore, by the time the  appellant  submitted
    his certificate in support of the application he made on the  6th  July
    2012, the issuing body was no  longer  approved  for  the  purposes  of
    paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules.

 5. The judge was not satisfied that either Section 85 of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 nor  a  common  law  duty  of  fairness
    assisted the appellant.  EDEXCEL had ceased to  be  an  approved  test-
    provider  some  twelve  months  before  the  appellant  had  made   his
    application for entry clearance.  The judge considered that "the answer
    [in this appeal] can only be found in the Rule itself." [6].

 6. The judge's analysis of the issues is brief and I set it out  below  in
    full:

    7.   Ms Faryl submitted that Rule required only that the  test-provider
    should be approved for the purpose at the time when  it  undertook  the
    assessment of the appellant's  ability  to  speak  and  listen  to  the
    English language. Mr Barrow, on the other hand, submitted that the Rule
    required that the test-provider should be approved for this purpose  at
    the date of the visa application and/or at the date of the decision.

    8.   The starting point in the construction of  paragraph  281  of  the
    Immigration Rules is the natural and ordinary meaning of the words that
    are used to express the requirement in question. However, the  Rule  is
    silent as to the stage at which the issuing body of a test  certificate
    is required to be approved by the Secretary of State for the purpose of
    the Immigration Rules. It is thus  permissible  to  adopt  a  purposive
    construction.

    9.   I am satisfied that it was not the Secretary of State's purpose in
    introducing  the  English  language  requirement  to  ensure  that  the
    applicant had  been  recently  assessed  as  possessing  the  necessary
    skills. This is because that purpose could easily have been achieved by
    the simple expedient of  including  a  requirement  that  the  relevant
    certificate  should  have  been  issued  within  a  prescribed   period
    preceding the date  of  the  application.  There  is  however  no  such
    requirement within this paragraph of the Immigration Rules.

    10.  It follows that the only sensible  reason  why  the  Secretary  of
    State required the assessing body to be approved by her was in order to
    ensure that it was 'fit for purpose' at the time when it undertook  its
    assessment of the applicant. Mr Barrow was  right  to  point  out  that
    whilst the standards of the Common European Framework may be immutable,
    it does not follow that those standards will  be  applied  consistently
    over time by the various assessing bodies. However, I am satisfied that
    the Secretary of State intended to guard against a possible decline  in
    the quality of  assessment  by  reserving  the  right  to  de-list  any
    organisation that was no longer  considered  to  meet  the  appropriate
    standard. There is no logical reason, however, why  the  de-listing  of
    the assessing body should act  retrospectively  so  as  to  deprive  an
    applicant of recognition of their achievement in meeting  the  relevant
    standard at a time when that body was  still  considered  competent  to
    assess it.

    11.  I am therefore satisfied that the requirement in paragraph 281  is
    for the applicant to submit a certificate that shows that  he  met  the
    specified standard for speaking and listening as  assessed  by  a  body
    that was approved for that purpose at the time of  the  assessment.  As
    the appellant met this requirement,  it  follows  that  a  decision  to
    refuse entry clearance on the ground that he had failed to  do  so  was
    not in accordance with Immigration Rules.

 7. The grounds of appeal assert that it,

         must be the date of application at the earliest, if not the date of
         decision, which is the relevant date in these  circumstances.   The
         appellant  must  ensure  that  an  application  applies  with   the
         Immigration Rules at the date they apply.  It does  not  matter  if
         they met some previous drafting of the Rules.

 8. The problem for the respondent is that Judge Kelly has found  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of the Rules in force at the date of his
    application, not a "previous drafting".  The question is whether  Judge
    Kelly was right to construe the immigration rule  as  detailed  in  his
    analysis.

 9. It is not disputed the appellant has provided with his  application  an
    original English language test certificate in speaking  and  listening.
    The question is whether he has provided such  a  certificate  "from  an
    English language test-provider approved by the Secretary of  State  for
    these purposes."  On the date the appellant passed  his  test,  EDEXCEL
    was a test-provider approved by the Secretary of State for the  purpose
    of conducting such tests.  The Entry Clearance Officer's case  is  that
    the  appellant's  certificate  was,   in   effect,   rendered   invalid
    retrospectively when EDEXCEL ceased to appear on the list  of  approved
    test-providers.  I agree with Judge Kelly that such a proposition  does
    not make logical sense.  Such an argument would indicate  that,  during
    periods when the test-provider appeared on  the  Secretary  of  State's
    list, the appellant's certificate was valid but that, at any time  when
    the provider did not appear on the list, it became  invalid.  It  would
    also mean that a valid certificate would be rendered  useless  if,  for
    whatever reason, the approved provider subsequently ceased trading.   I
    find that Judge Kelly was right to hold that the immigration  rule  was
    intended to provide that a test certificate issued to an applicant by a
    test-provider approved by the Secretary of State as  at  the  date  the
    test was passed by  that  applicant  would  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 281; that  was  the  quality  standard  which  the  provision
    existed to meet.  It makes no sense  that  a  valid  certificate  might
    drift in and out of validity depending on the vagaries of the Secretary
    of State's registration system.

10. It follows that I should find that the judge  has  construed  paragraph
    281 correctly, that the appellant met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    281(ii) and  that  he  should,  as  a  consequence,  be  granted  entry
    clearance as the spouse of the United Kingdom sponsor.

DECISION

11. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 12 December 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

