

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00749/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                                |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 14th August 2013                           |On 2nd October 2013          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                    M A A
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - (UKVISA Section)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Bradshaw instructed by French & Company Solicitors.

For the Respondent: Mr Lister - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


     1. This appeal was remitted to the Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Court  of
        Appeal in an order dated 15th April 2013. The statement of  reasons
        is in the following terms:


     The Respondent accepts that the decision of the Deputy UT Judge Garrett
   of 26 March    2012 was flawed in that it failed to take into account  of
   the decision of UT Judge     Goldstein of 25 October 2011  that  none  of
   the Article 8 findings of the Immigration     Judge in  the  decision  of
   the First Tier Tribunal of 22 August  2011  would  be  preserved     and,
   having found an error of law, re-made the decision  on  submissions  only
   without    informing the parties or seeking their agreement and when  the
   Appellant  had   previously  indicated  his  intention  to  call  further
   evidence .


     Accordingly, the Respondent accepts that this matter should be remitted
   to the Upper   Tribunal for a further hearing.


     2. It is accepted before me that  the  matter  is  to  be  reheard  in
        relation to the Article 8 ECHR issue de novo.



Background


     3. The Appellant was born on the 1 January 1965 and is a  national  of
        Pakistan. He applied for leave to enter the United Kingdom for  the
        purposes of settling with his wife and sponsor, CS, who is  present
        and settled in this country. The refusal is dated 1  December  2010
        and is endorsed as having been received by  the  Appellant  on  9th
        December 2010.


     4. The Entry Clearance  Officer  (ECO)  was  not  satisfied  that  the
        relationship between the Appellant and Sponsor  was  subsisting  or
        that they intended to live together as required  by  paragraph  281
        (iii). The offer  of  third-party  support  was  not  found  to  be
        sufficient and it  was  only  offered  for  a  limited  period.  No
        evidence of job offers available on arrival had been  provided  and
        in light of the fact the Sponsor was in part reliant upon what  was
        described as public funds, it was not accept that the Appellant had
        shown he was able to satisfy the maintenance  requirements  without
        recourse to public funds as required by paragraph 281 (v).


     5. The appeal under the Immigration Rules was dismissed by  First-tier
        Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa in her determination promulgated on the
        22nd August 2011 as the Judge was not satisfied, having  considered
        the evidence, that the parties were able to maintain themselves and
        any dependents adequately without recourse to  public  funds.   The
        issue regarding the existence of a subsisting marriage was conceded
        by the Entry Clearance Manager on review. The Judge also  dismissed
        the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.


     6. Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  on  19th
        September 2011 which led to the hearing on 25th October 2011 before
        Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein who determined  that  there  was  an
        error of law in relation to the Article 8 ECHR decision.  There  is
        no evidence permission was granted to challenge the findings  under
        the Immigration Rules which, in accordance with  the  statement  of
        reasons from the Court of Appeal, is not an issue before me in  any
        event. This is, therefore, a preserved finding.



The evidence



     7. The bundle of evidence relied upon for the purpose of this  hearing
        is that sent undercover  of  a  letter  dated  15th  February  2012
        together with  additional  evidence  such  as  a  letter  from  the
        Sponsor's GP dated 20th February 2012, documents  relating  to  the
        Sponsor's medical situation dated 16th May 2013, and other  related
        documents. In addition to this  I  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
        Sponsor and her eldest son. All the written and oral  evidence  has
        been considered in detail.



Discussion



     8. As this is an appeal against the refusal of an ECO  the  Article  8
        appeal has to be considered in light of the situation  appertaining
        at the date of decision.


     9. The impact of the Appellant's inability to be able to  satisfy  the
        provisions of paragraph 281 so far as they relate to maintenance is
        a relevant factor. Whilst an inability to meet the  Rules  is  not,
        per se, determinative; if the Appellant was permitted to enter  the
        United Kingdom without being able to  show  the  family  would  not
        become dependent on public funds there would be a potential cost to
        the public purse. Mr Lister referred to the decision in AAO v Entry
        Clearance Officer [2011] EWCA Civ 840  which  involved  an  elderly
        Somali mother living in Kenya supported by a  daughter  in  the  UK
        from benefits who she had not seen  for  12  years.  The  Court  of
        Appeal held that, given the weakness of family life and the lack of
        a positive duty which imposed on the UK  an  obligation  that  went
        beyond making systematic allowance for a right of entry  which  was
        governed by carefully composed Immigration Rules and an  overriding
        consideration of Article 8 on a  case-by-case  basis,  it  was  not
        possible to say that there had been a  breach  of  Article  8.   As
        Strasbourg and domestic jurisprudence had consistently  emphasised,
        states were entitled to have regard to their system of  immigration
        control and a requirement that  an  entrant  should  be  maintained
        without  recourse  to  public  funds  was  a  fair  and   necessary
        limitation on what would otherwise be an overwhelming burden on all
        its citizens.


    10. When considering Article 8 issues it is necessary to considered the
        questions set out by Lord Bingham in paragraph 17 of the  judgement
        in the case of Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 are which are:


         (1)      Will the proposed removal be an interference by a  public
        authority with         the exercise of  the  applicant's  right  to
        respect for his private or (as the case      may be) family life?
         (2)      If so, will such interference have consequences  of  such
        gravity as              potentially  to  engage  the  operation  of
        article 8?
                  (3)  If so, is such interference in  accordance  with  the
   law?
         (4)      If so, is such interference  necessary  in  a  democratic
        society in the interests        of national security, public safety
        or the economic well-  being  of  the            country,  for  the
        prevention  of  disorder  or   crime,   for   the   protection   of
        health or morals, or for the protection of the rights and  freedoms
        of            others?
          (5)       If  so,  is  such  interference  proportionate  to  the
        legitimate public end           sought to be achieved?


    11. The Respondent accepted that family life recognised  by  Article  8
        exists between the Appellant and Sponsor as it  has  been  conceded
        that they  have  a  subsisting  marriage.   It  was  not,  however,
        accepted before me that the relationship between the Appellant  and
        the children is as claimed.


    12. The history of this family unit shows that the Sponsor married  the
        Appellant on 12th October 1990.  It was an arranged marriage  after
        which the  parties  lived  together  at  the  Appellant's  father's
        property in Pakistan. There are three children of the  marriage  WH
        born 19th February 1994, AH born 20th October 1996 and  B-U-H  born
        10th  May  1991.  At  the  date  of  decision  the  children   were
        approximately 16, 14 and 9 respectively.


    13. In a witness statement  dated  19th  July  2011  and  re-dated  8th
        February 2012 the Sponsor states  that  as  a  result  of  conflict
        between her husband and his brother her husband sustained  injuries
        after which he ran off abandoning the Sponsor and the children. The
        brother-in-law  then  began  to  be  unpleasant  to  the   children
        resulting in injury to AH. The police took no action,  despite  the
        attacks being reported to them, as a result of  which  the  Sponsor
        brought the children to the United Kingdom on 23rd September  2006.
        The Sponsor and children are British citizens.


    14. The Sponsor returned to Pakistan in April 2009 to see an  aunt  who
        was ill and who eventually passed away.  She was told by a relative
        that between February and March 2009 her husband had returned home.
        She states she was asked by relatives to meet her  husband  and  to
        give him another chance although she returned to the United Kingdom
        after only a few days in Pakistan.   Shortly  after  returning  the
        Appellant rang her to apologise to her and the children. He  wanted
        to speak to the children and said he missed them. The relatives and
        family got together to reconcile the relationship.  In August  2010
        the Sponsor took the children on holiday to Pakistan to  see  their
        father. After returning to the United Kingdom the youngest child in
        particular missed his father.  The Sponsor returned on  13th  April
        2011 and she and the Appellant travelled together to  Saudi  Arabia
        on a pilgrimage.


    15. The evidence is therefore that family life  between  the  Appellant
        and his children existed as they formed part of the same  household
        from the date they were born until  2006  when  their  father  left
        home.  There is then a period where  there  was  no  contact  until
        2010. At that time their father telephoned the family in the United
        Kingdom and spoke to the  children,  leading  to  indirect  contact
        being re-established and direct contact when they  visited  him  in
        August 2010. In relation to the existence of family life after  re-
        establishing contact and evidence of ongoing contact  I  accept  Mr
        Lister's submission that this  is  somewhat  vague.  I  do  accept,
        however, that it has been established that family  life  recognised
        by Article 8  exists  between  the  Appellant  and  his  biological
        children although the quality of that family  life  is  limited  to
        indirect contact on the basis of the available evidence.


    16. In Shamin Box [2002] UKIAT 02212 the Tribunal said  that  in  entry
        cases, Adjudicators should not treat the Article 8 question as "one
        of whether there had been  an  unjustified  interference  with  the
        right to private and family life",  but   should  consider  whether
        there had been an unjustified  lack  of  respect  for  private  and
        family life; and that the focus should be on whether, in the  light
        of the positive obligations on the UK to facilitate family reunion,
        there has been a failure to act in the particular circumstances  of
        the case. Nonetheless, the Tribunal said that, in interference  and
        lack of respect cases, similar principles  applied.  In  conducting
        the necessary balancing exercise, it remains relevant that a  State
        does not have a general obligation to respect an immigrant's choice
        of country of residence.  It  also  remains  relevant  to  consider
        whether there are insurmountable obstacles to the  family  enjoying
        family life elsewhere.


    17. Mr Bradshaw submitted that if the appeal is rejected it  will  have
        the effect of splitting this family. He argued that the children as
        British citizens cannot be expected to return to live  in  Pakistan
        especially when their lives  are  now  established  in  the  United
        Kingdom.  I accept this proposition as they are  also  EU  citizens
        and accept that their situation has to be considered, especially in
        light of the decision of the House of Lords in  Beoku-Betts  [2008]
        UKHL 39.


    18. The argument that dismissing the appeal  means  Article  8  is  not
        engaged as the status quo will be preserved ignores  the  important
        element referred to above, namely the positive  obligation  of  the
        State to facilitate family reunion within its borders. It was  also
        accepted by the advocates that the issue in this case  is  that  of
        proportionality.


    19. Mr Bradshaw submitted that the needs of the children are a  primary
        consideration.  He sought rely  upon  the  decision  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal in Mundeba [2013] UKUT 00088 which examined the duty on an
        ECO, when assessing an application under the Immigration Rules,  to
        consider whether there were family or other considerations making a
        child's  exclusion  undesirable.  The   Tribunal   reiterated   the
        established starting point in such a case that the  best  interests
        of the child are usually best served by being with both or at least
        one of their parents. The appeal was an appeal by a minor living in
        Kinshasa in the DRC who made application to settle  in  the  United
        Kingdom with his sponsor who had ILR.  The 'exclusion  undesirable'
        issue was therefore an important element whereas in this appeal the
        children are already in the United Kingdom  and  the  Appellant  is
        attempting to join them here.  The right of an individual to  enter
        in such circumstances is regulated by  the  Immigration  Rules,  in
        relation to which the Appellant was unable to succeed,  and  it  is
        settled jurisprudence that Article 8 is not a mechanism to be  used
        to circumvent the requirements of the Rules.


    20. I accept that the best interests of the children are normally to be
        brought up by both parents. Mr Bradshaw submitted that the  refusal
        to grant entry clearance would lead to a permanent breakdown in the
        physical relationship between the Appellant and his  children  save
        for the possibility of contact during visits. That is  a  factor  I
        have noted and take into account, although there is the possibility
        of a further application if the Appellant  was  able  to  meet  the
        requirements of the Rules at  a  future  date.   Mr  Bradshaw  also
        submitted that the absence of regular physical contact between  the
        Appellant and the children was over  four  years  at  the  date  of
        decision and is now just short of seven  and  that  the  separation
        came at an important time in  the  development  of  the  children's
        lives as they were all at an age where emotionally they would  have
        benefited from such support.  It was further  submitted  that  such
        support is still needed for the family as the  children  move  onto
        important milestones in their personal lives.  I note this  comment
        but it was not as a result of any action by the State that  contact
        was lost for the period  2006  -  2010  but  as  a  result  of  the
        Appellant abandoning his family.  I have  considered  the  evidence
        reflecting the children's views in relation to this element of  the
        appeal.


    21. Even though it may have been in the children's best  interests  for
        their father to have remained with them and to now join them and to
        re-establish the family life they had prior to his  abandoning  the
        family in 2006, that  is  only  one  factor  within  the  balancing
        exercise.


    22. Another element relied upon by the Sponsor is her claim that she is
        disabled and unable to  care  for  her  children  properly  as  she
        suffers with depression and severe  arthritis  and  has  restricted
        mobility.  She claims in her witness statement, [A's bundle Page 3,
        paragraph 14] that her son WH has to help with  all  the  housework
        although she gets some help from Social Services and someone  comes
        every morning to help her take a bath and with the  preparation  of
        the breakfast.  She claims her youngest son has been neglected  due
        to her medical problems and she cannot give  him  meals  at  times,
        cannot pick him up from school, and has  not  attended  parents  or
        teachers evenings which his father could do if he  arrived  in  the
        United Kingdom.


    23. The medical evidence provided shows that the Sponsor registered  at
        the Radford Medical Practice in June  2011  and  was  diagnosed  as
        suffering from:


              i.  Multiple joint pains


              ii. Fibromyalgia


              iii.     A high BMI which in July was 35.9.


    24. The letter from the Practice, dated 20th February 2012,  notes  the
        Sponsor has  attended  on  several  occasions  since  registration,
        mostly due to joint or back pains and that she has been accompanied
        by her son as she says  she  cannot  attend  without  support.  The
        Sponsor also told the surgery she needs help with  basic  self-care
        and is unable to come to the surgery without physical support  from
        her son.    The  GP  states  in  her  professional  opinion  it  is
        appropriate to get a further opinion as it was  difficult  to  know
        how much help and physical support the Sponsor required with regard
        to her day-to-day living.


    25. At pages 116 to 122 of the bundle is  a  copy  of  an  Occupational
        Therapy Assessment dated 30th  June  2011.   This  notes  that  the
        Sponsor has been re-housed to her current address, which  is  local
        authority accommodation, where she lives with her three sons. It is
        noted her sons are very supportive and that she has extended family
        living in Nottingham.  It is noted that her eldest son  WH  attends
        college and assists  with  domestic  tasks  and  that  a  carer  is
        provided every morning for 30 minutes to assist  the  Sponsor  with
        getting up, breakfast, and personal care. It is noted that extended
        family and friends visit occasionally indicating the Sponsor is not
        isolated. She is able to attend appointment by taxi.


    26. In relation to her personal mobility, it is noted the  Sponsor  has
        stated she often remains upstairs during the day so she can  access
        toilet facilities which contradicts  a  statement  appearing  in  a
        letter dated 30th June 2011 written by NARCO [A's bundle, page 126]
        that she said she has to wait  for  her  sons  to  come  home  from
        school/college in the afternoon so they can help her go upstairs if
        she needs to use the toilet.


    27. The Occupational Therapy summary indicates the only action required
        is a half step to be fitted up front door, an external handrail  in
        the garden, a freestanding toilet frame, a static shower chair  and
        a commode, to meet the sponsor's physical needs.


    28. A further letter from Nottinghamshire  Healthcare  dated  16th  May
        2013 refers to a memory assessment undertaken on that  date  and  a
        referral for an MRI scan. A Community Occupational Therapist was to
        contact the Sponsor  directly  for  investigation.  The  Care  Plan
        attached to that letter indicates a comprehensive assessment by the
        Working Age Dementia Diagnostic Service is to be conducted as  well
        as other enquiries undertaken including  an  appointment  with  the
        Cognitive Disorders Clinic, but this is post decision evidence.


    29. The Sponsor's oral evidence was that as  a  result  of  her  health
        issues and difficulties that she encountered it was  necessary  for
        her to have to give up work which  is  a  further  reason  why  she
        needed the Appellant's support.  The Sponsor was asked in  evidence
        in chief when she actually stopped working.  It was noted that  she
        had told the First-tier Tribunal Judge that this  was  in  February
        2011 [determination of Judge Gurung-Thapa para  11].   The  Sponsor
        confirmed this is the evidence she  gave  and  clarified  that  the
        refusal is dated approximately two months before she finished work.
         Arthritis was diagnosed on 22nd October 2010 and  Fibromyalgia  on
        17th January 2011.


    30. The Sponsor was asked about her health at the date of  decision  in
        reply to which she claimed that the time she had to  move  to  only
        working 25 hours a week as she could not work  longer  as  she  was
        very tired from the job and could not look after herself  at  home.
        She claimed she saw a doctor at that  time  as  her  condition  was
        severe. The doctor advised her to rest  from  her  job  but  things
        became worse after which she went to hospital.  The Sponsor claimed
        that she was not well and wished to return to work but was not able
        to do so as a result of which she lost her job. She claims to  have
        been suffering  from  severe  health  problems  and  to  have  been
        mentally distressed. She also claims that her sons  were  disturbed
        due to her condition and that she has remained unwell and  mentally
        disturbed since.


    31. The Sponsor was asked about  what  she  could  undertake  regarding
        shopping and she claimed that her eldest son used to make food  for
        them and do the shopping and that it was his responsibility to book
        all appointments. I note this  contradicts  the  entry  in  the  OT
        Assessment [A's bundle page 117] that the Sponsor stated she enjoys
        cooking for the family who also assist.  The  Sponsor  also  claims
        her youngest son had problems and was  the  responsibility  of  her
        eldest son as he was very good helping, but there is no independent
        expert evidence of the nature of such problems or consequences,  if
        any, for the child.


    32. The picture the Sponsor was  attempting  to  paint  for  the  Upper
        Tribunal is of somebody whose health problems  existed  before  the
        decision and which deteriorated rapidly once  the  entry  clearance
        application had been refused. The Sponsor claimed as a  result  she
        needed help which was provided by the children and that it was  not
        in their best interests to have to perform such a role,  especially
        as they had their own educational needs to attend to. The Appellant
        should therefore have been permitted to join the family as he could
        fulfil this role.


    33. As noted above there are elements of the  Sponsors  case  that  are
        contradicted by other evidence.  Having considered the evidence  as
        a whole, and whilst accepting the sponsor  has  medical  conditions
        and needs, I find that she has embellished elements of her claim to
        try and  present  the  picture  referred  to  above  which  is  not
        supported by the evidence.  I do not  find  the  Sponsor  to  be  a
        credible witness.  The  existence  of  the  medical  conditions  is
        supported by the letter from the GP. I accept there is evidence  of
        the Sponsor received medication  and  some  limited  form  of  help
        within her  home  from  support  services.  I  do  not  accept  the
        sponsor's evidence that as  a  result  of  her  condition  she  was
        required to reduce her working hours to twenty five  hours  a  week
        due to ill health around the time of the refusal, as the copy  wage
        slips provided at pages 189 - 193 of  the  bundle  clearly  show  a
        different picture. Those wage  slips  start  with  tax  period  11,
        26/02/2010 and end with tax period 9 dated 07/12 2010.  They appear
        to cover four weekly pay periods and for  all  bar  13/08/2010  and
        08/10/2010  show  the  number  of  units  worked  as  one   hundred
        indicating one hundred hours in a four-week period, or twenty  five
        hours per week.  The payslips indicate that  rather  than  reducing
        her working hours to twenty five as a result of illness, these were
        in fact her normal  weekly  hours.   For  a  reason  that  was  not
        properly explained the Sponsor failed to provide her P 60  for  the
        tax year ending 5th April 2011 and only provided that for 5th April
        2010. Is therefore  not  possible  to  ascertain  whether  she  was
        telling the truth regarding the date she ceased her employment.


    34. The Sponsor was also asked why the letter  from  the  GP  makes  no
        mention of her eldest son having to  provide  family  support.  The
        Sponsor claimed this was because at the time he was busy  with  his
        studies and accused her of disturbing his studies.


    35. The Sponsor's claim her health deteriorated to the extent it did as
        a result of the refusal also has to be considered  in  light  of  a
        letter dated 19th July 2010 [A's bundle pages 124 -125] written  by
        a person described as the sponsor's tenancy support  worker,  which
        indicates she is suffering from depression, has been depressed  for
        three year, and is taking  antidepressants.   It  also  states  the
        Sponsor has mobility problems, the living room has  been  converted
        to a bedroom as she finds it difficult to climb  stairs,  that  she
        cannot climb stairs in the house without assistance and has to wait
        for her children to come home from school so they can help  her  to
        go upstairs, as otherwise she would have to use the outside toilet.
        The letter also states that her attendance at a  computer  training
        scheme ended as she does not feel well enough to go out and  cannot
        stand and sit for long periods which means cooking and washing  can
        be difficult.  I note at this time the Sponsor  was,  according  to
        the  wage  slips  provided,  working  and  able  to  maintain  that
        employment of which there is no  mention  in  the  support  workers
        letter [A's bundle, page 191, wage slip for four week period ending
        16/7/10 showing one hundred hours worked up to that date  and  wage
        slip dated 18/8/10 showing ninety eight hours worked in  that  four
        week period].


    36. The Tribunal also heard oral evidence from the Sponsor's son WH who
        submitted a letter to the First-tier Tribunal [A's bundle page  24]
        and who has written an additional  statement  dated  15th  February
        2012 [A's bundle page 273]. He was asked whether  he  recalled  the
        time his mother stopped work and although  he  remembered  she  did
        stop work he was not able to recall the exact date.  He  was  aware
        his mother was working at  the  time  of  the  refusal  and  became
        stressed when she discovered that the application had been refused.
          He confirmed his mother was working at the date of  the  refusal.
        He recalled his mother was not working the time of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal hearing in July  2011  and  that  his  mother's  condition
        deteriorated after the refusal.


    37. WH was asked why his mother's health deteriorated.  He  stated  she
        was working every day in the morning  and  caring  for  them  which
        meant she was tired and became worse when she found out that  their
        father was not going to be allowed to join them.


    38. WH was asked about the assistance he gave to which he  stated  that
        he would occasionally do shopping. He was a student and  needed  to
        study although he would help at home. He stated he tried to do  his
        best but did not want to miss life by caring for family  and  later
        he  worked  too.   WH  confirmed  his  academic  history  including
        completing his diploma course with no issues  regarding  attendance
        and that his brothers had a normal time in attending school with no
        problems in attendance either.   WH started work in 2011.


    39. I did not find the evidence of WH supported the claim made  by  the
        Sponsor that she was so dependent  upon  the  children  that  their
        upbringing was adversely affected or that the needs of  the  family
        were not met.


    40. I accept the evidence is that the Sponsor  has  medical  conditions
        and  that  the  family  were  required  to  adapt  to  meet   those
        requirements to enable them to function as they wished to  do.   It
        appears however the children's education was not affected adversely
        and there is no evidence they were neglected or  that  their  basic
        needs were not met.  There is clear evidence that the needs of  the
        children were met between 2006 and 2010 by their mother and, if the
        disappointment of not having her husband join  her  resulted  in  a
        deterioration in her condition, there is insufficient  evidence  to
        show that the impact upon the children were such that  there  needs
        were not met or that they suffer disproportionately as a result  of
        their father's exclusion.


    41. I do not find it proved that the children who have remained in  the
        United Kingdom have lost any rights to  which  they  were  lawfully
        entitled as a result of their citizenship of the United Kingdom  or
        the European Union.

    42. Whilst accepting that a lot of evidence  that  has  been  developed
        before the Tribunal was not available to the ECO, relating  to  the
        period around the date of decision, I do not find it proved on  the
        evidence  that  the  best  interests  of  the  children   are   the
        determinative  factor  in  this  appeal.   They  are  a   paramount
        consideration as reflected in the case law and  I  have  considered
        this  together  with  the  positive  obligation  on  the  State  to
        facilitate family reunion and the future development of family life
        it at all possible.


    43. I find there is insufficient evidence to support the claims that WH
        or his brothers suffered to their detriment to any material  degree
        as a result of having to help their mother and indeed  many  single
        parent families where  the  mother  is  unable  to  fully  function
        require the assistance of able children.  I note that the State  is
        providing additional support indicating that  the  Sponsor's  needs
        are being met with input and help from the  NHS  to  which  she  is
        lawfully entitled.  I do not  find  it  has  been  shown  that  the
        Sponsor's condition is such that she is likely  to  become  totally
        debilitated although I accept that her condition indicates that she
        is in pain.  Mr Bradshaw argued that the provision  of  support  by
        the NHS lessens the economic argument relied upon by the  Secretary
        of State, but the State has a substantial margin of appreciation in
        terms of controlling entry of non-nationals and if the Secretary of
        State's decision that there is a  requirement  to  meet  a  minimum
        income standard to avoid reliance on  public  funds  results  in  a
        consequence that some funds have to  be  incurred  providing  State
        assistance such as home help, that is a matter for the Secretary of
        State.


    44. Having weighed up the competing interests I find that the  economic
        welfare of the United Kingdom, the legitimate aim  relied  upon  by
        the Secretary of State to be found in Article 8 (2)  which  can  be
        obtained by having valid and workable immigration controls  is  the
        determinative factor.  Whilst I accept on the facts  this  case  is
        more finely balanced than some, the  elements  in  support  of  the
        Appellant have not been proved to be  determinative.   I  find  the
        Respondent has discharged the burden of proof upon him/her  to  the
        required standard to show that the  decision  under  Article  8  is
        proportionate to the legitimate aim relied upon in this appeal.  As
        stated in FK & OK (Botswana) v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
        Department [2013] EWCA Civ 238 by Sir Stanley Burnton:


              11. The second reason is that the maintenance  of  immigration
   control is not an                aim that is implied for the purposes  of
   article 8.2. Its maintenance is                    necessary in order  to
   preserve   or   to   foster    the    economic    well-being    of    the
   country, in order to protect health and morals, and for the protection of
   the                 rights and freedoms  of  others.  If  there  were  no
   immigration control,                       enormous  numbers  of  persons
   would be able to enter this country, and               would be  entitled
   to   claim   social   security   benefits,   the    benefits    of    the
   National Health Service, to be housed (or to  compete  for  housing  with
          those in this country) and to compete for  employment  with  those
   already                 here. Their children  would  be  entitled  to  be
   educated at the taxpayers'                 expense  (as  was  the  second
   appellant). All such matters (and I do  not                       suggest
   that they are the only matters) go to  the  economic  well-being  of  the
          country. That the individuals concerned in the  present  case  are
   law-abiding                   (other  than  in  respect  of   immigration
   controls)  does  not  detract  from  the                 fact  that   the
   maintenance  of   a   generally   applicable   immigration   policy   is,
   albeit indirectly, a legitimate aim for the purposes of article 8.2.
              12. The third reason for rejecting this submission is that  it
   is inconsistent  with                   binding  authority.  For  present
   purposes, it is  sufficient  to  refer  to  R  (Razgar)                 v
   Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] UKHL 27 [2004] 2 AC 368
                  and to Huang v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
   [2007] UKHL 11                   [2007] 2 AC 167. in Razgar, Lord Bingham
   of Cornhill cited the judgment of                  the European Court  of
   Human Rights in D v UK (1997) 24 EHRR 423, in                   which the
   Court said, at paragraph 48,  in  relation  to  the  deportation  of  the
     appellant to Algeria, that:
                       "such interference may be regarded as complying  with
      the                       requirements  of  article  8,  namely  as  a
      measure 'in accordance with                  the  law',  pursuing  the
      aims of the protection of the economic  well-being                  of
      the country and the prevention of  disorder  and  crime,  as  well  as
          being 'necessary in a democratic society' for those aims."
                   The italics are mine. In Huang,  Lord  Bingham  said,  at
      paragraph 18, in              relation to the article 8 claim in  that
      case:
                       "... The Strasbourg court has  repeatedly  recognised
      the general right                  of states to control the entry  and
      residence    of    non-nationals,    and                    repeatedly
      acknowledged   that   the   Convention    confers    no    right    on
      individuals or families to choose where they prefer to live.  In  most
              cases where the applicants complain of a  violation  of  their
      article  8                  rights,  in  a  case  where  the  impugned
      decision is  authorised  by  law                    for  a  legitimate
      object  and  the   interference   (or   lack   of   respect)   is   of
      sufficient seriousness to engage  the  operation  of  article  8,  the
      crucial                    question  is  likely  to  be  whether   the
      interference (or  lack  of  respect)                complained  of  is
      proportionate    to    the    legitimate    end    sought    to     be
      achieved."


    45. Mr Bradshaw also relied upon the Upper Tribunal decision in MA  and
        SM [2013] UKUT 000380. This is an appeal in  which  notwithstanding
        the inability of the appellant to meet the maintenance requirements
        it was held in the children's best interests  that  the  appeal  be
        allowed. The first appellant is an Iranian national  who  lived  in
        Turkey with a British national child and therefore issues  relating
        to child's nationality as a British and European citizen had to  be
        considered. The second appeal involves a family where two  siblings
        were split one living with the appellant in Thailand and the  other
        in the United  Kingdom.  The  children  are  British  citizens  and
        therefore European nationals and on the facts of the  case,  having
        conducted the balancing exercise it was felt that as  a  result  of
        legal issues, including the European case law, the appeals  succeed
        when focusing on the issue of the proportionality of the  decision.
        Whilst that determination and finding can be distinguished, as  the
        children in this appeal are in the United Kingdom as stated  above,
        in paragraph 72 of the determination the Tribunal acknowledged that
        "The Secretary of State is undoubtedly entitled to rely on economic
        considerations as  justification  for  accepted  interference".  In
        paragraph 75 the Tribunal recognised the economic considerations of
        the United Kingdom where  there  are  real  economic  pressures  on
        overstretched welfare system and in paragraph 76 that "The  absence
        of any misconduct by the parties did not diminish the weight to  be
        given to the economic well-being of the United Kingdom although its
        place in the measure  of  proportionality  needs  to  be  carefully
        evaluated in the face of the impact of continued separation of this
        family".  In these appeals it was found there was a compelling need
        for the family to be reunited on  the  facts  which  has  not  been
        proved to exist to the same degree in this appeal.


    46. The  family  can  visit  and,  if  circumstances  permit,  a  fresh
        application can be made.  There is no  evidence  that  any  ongoing
        contact of an indirect nature cannot continue and the children  are
        of course a lot of older and of more independent mind and resources
        and may be able to make their own decision regarding  whether  they
        visit their father and if so when in the future.


Decision

    47. The First-tier Tribunal Judge has been  found  to  have  materially
        erred in law and her determination set aside. I remake the decision
        as follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    48. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


          I make that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
          (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008)  to  protect  the  identity  of  the
   children.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 30th September 2013












