
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00665/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13 August 2014                             |On 21 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB

                                   Between

                                     m k
                           (anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIRUT, LEBANON

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Heidar, Solicitor, of AA Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Lebanon.  She is now 15  years  old,  but
    was 13 at the date of decision.  She applied  for  entry  clearance  to
    settle in the UK with her father (the sponsor), who is  now  a  British
    citizen.  The sponsor obtained permanent residence in the UK  in  2010,
    and was naturalised as a British  citizen  in  2012.   The  appellant's
    application was refused on 26  November  2012,  with  a  review  on  27
    February 2013, and her appeal was subsequently dismissed by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Flynn, in a determination  promulgated  on  23  December
    2013.

2.   Permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Foudy, on 1 April 2014, but was then granted, on renewed  grounds
    prepared by new representatives, by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein,  on
    12 June 2014.  In granting permission the Upper Tribunal Judge observed
    that there were arguable issues as to whether the judge was entitled in
    law to reach the conclusions that she did for the reasons given.

3.   A Rule 24 response for  the  respondent  was  provided,  defending  the
    judge's determination, on the basis that valid reasons had  been  given
    as to why the judge found the sponsor not to have  sole  responsibility
    for the appellant.

4.   In a discussion of the issues at the start of the hearing before me  it
    was agreed that the ability of the sponsor to maintain and  accommodate
    the appellant was not at issue.  Maintenance had  been  raised  in  the
    refusal, but this had  subsequently  been  conceded.   The  only  issue
    before the judge had therefore been that of sole responsibility.  There
    was some discussion  of  the  alternative  consideration  of  paragraph
    297(i)(f), concerned with  "serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations".  In cases of this sort, if sole responsibility is  not
    accepted, it is normal  for  this  to  be  given  consideration  as  an
    alternative.  In this  refusal  this  had  not  occurred,  and  it  was
    confirmed at the hearing before me that this point had not been  raised
    in the original grounds of appeal, and neither was  it  raised  at  the
    hearing before the judge.

5.   The sponsor attended the hearing, accompanied by his partner.

6.   The challenges to the determination were  under  three  headings.   The
    first concerned failure  to  consider  relevant  evidence;  the  second
    failure to consider the issue of sole responsibility correctly in  law;
    and  the  third  factual  errors  in  the  Article  8   proportionality
    assessment.  On the first ground Ms  Heidar  submitted  that  the  best
    interests of the child should have been front and centre in  the  case.
    The voice of the child should have been heard.  There were  handwritten
    and typed statements giving the appellant's views, and  these  had  not
    been referred to, and did not appear to have been taken into account by
    the judge.  The letters from the appellant's grandmother and  uncle  in
    Lebanon also did not appear to have been considered.  In considering  a
    power of attorney the judge had misunderstood the meaning and relevance
    of the document.  It was an authority from the sponsor  permitting  his
    Lebanese relatives to obtain a passport for his daughter.

7.   On the second ground Ms Heidar referred to the recent  developments  of
    the law in relation to consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    child.  The judge's findings at paragraph 35, in which she  found  that
    the sponsor was generally credible and that he had delegated  authority
    for the care of his daughter to his relatives  should  have  led  to  a
    finding of sole responsibility.  Reference was  made  to  the  case  of
    Mundeba (section 55 and paragraph 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88.   Although
    this case was concerned not  with  sole  responsibility  but  with  the
    alternative in paragraph 297(i)(f) (serious and  compelling  family  or
    other considerations) the observations about the best interests of  the
    child, and that the starting point in considering those best  interests
    would be that a child should usually be with both or at  least  one  of
    their natural parents, was relevant.

8.   On the third ground Ms  Heidar  accepted  that  she  was  placing  less
    emphasis on her challenge to the Article 8 aspect, because she accepted
    that the  outcome  turned  on  paragraph  297  there  was,  however,  a
    significant factual error in that paragraph 54 referred to the  sponsor
    living alone, whereas paragraph 10 of the determination referred to his
    relationship with his partner.

9.   Mr Walker, for the respondent, pointed to paragraphs 10,  36,  and  43,
    in which the judge had referred to the documentary and  oral  evidence,
    and indicated that she had considered all of the evidence in the round.
     There was no requirement for the judge to have listed  every  item  of
    evidence and the findings on joint responsibility had been open to  the
    judge on the evidence that she had heard and the  documentary  evidence
    that she had considered.  The apparent error in the discrepancy between
    paragraphs 10 and 54 was not as clear as made out, because it had  been
    the sponsor's evidence that he lived alone, despite having a partner.

Error of Law

10.  Having risen to give further consideration to the submissions  by  both
    sides I indicated, at the hearing, that I found the second ground to be
    made out, and that the determination did disclose a material  error  of
    law in not addressing the  correct  legal  framework  in  reaching  the
    decision on sole responsibility.  I also indicated that I did not  find
    either of the other two grounds to have been made out.

11.  My reasons in relation to the  second  ground,  which  I  indicated  in
    summary at the hearing, are as follows.   The  judge  referred  to  the
    leading authority on sole responsibility, the case of TD  (Yemen),  and
    quoted part of the  legal  summary  paragraph  of  that  determination,
    within paragraph 33 of her determination.  In addition the judge quoted
    passages  from  Macdonald's  Immigration  Law  and   Practice,   within
    paragraph 34.  Difficulty may have arisen because key elements  of  the
    guidance in  TD  (Yemen)  were  omitted  from  the  section  quoted  in
    paragraph 33.  In particular the concluding parts of the guidance  were
    omitted, since the  quotation  finished  at  sub-paragraph  (vi).   The
    remaining sub-paragraphs are those in bold below:

         52.  Questions of "sole responsibility" under the immigration rules
         should be approached as follows:

           i. Who has "responsibility" for a child's upbringing and  whether
              that responsibility is  "sole"  is  a  factual  matter  to  be
              decided upon all the evidence.
          ii. The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules should  not
              to be understood as a  theoretical  or  legal  obligation  but
              rather as a practical one which, in each case, looks to who in
              fact  is  exercising  responsibility  for  the  child.    That
              responsibility may have been for a short duration in that  the
              present arrangements may have begun quite recently.
         iii. "Responsibility" for a child's upbringing may be undertaken by
              individuals other than a child's parents  and  may  be  shared
              between different individuals: which  may  particularly  arise
              where the child remains in its own  country  whilst  the  only
              parent involved in its life travels to and lives in the UK.
          iv. Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in  the
              upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional  that  one  of
              them will have sole responsibility.
           v. If it is said that  both  are  not  involved  in  the  child's
              upbringing, one of the indicators for that will  be  that  the
              other has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility.  In  such
              cases, it may well be justified to find that  that  parent  no
              longer has responsibility for the child.
          vi. However, the issue of sole responsibility is not just a matter
              between the parents.  So even if  there  is  only  one  parent
              involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may  not  have
              sole responsibility.
         vii.   In   the   circumstances   likely   to   arise,   day-to-day
              responsibility (or decision-making) for  the  child's  welfare
              may necessarily be shared with others (such  as  relatives  or
              friends) because of the geographical  separation  between  the
              parent and child.
        viii. That,  however,  does  not  prevent  the  parent  having  sole
              responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.
          ix.  The  test  is,  not  whether  anyone  else   has   day-to-day
              responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control
              and direction of the child's upbringing including  making  all
              the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.   If   not,
              responsibility is shared and so not "sole".

12.  There are other crucial matters in  the  sub-paragraphs  which  precede
    the start of those quoted in paragraph 33 of the  determination,  which
    are as those at i. and ii. above.

13.  The judge's finding that the sponsor did not have  sole  responsibility
    for his daughter, but rather that responsibility was  shared  with  the
    appellant's grandmother and uncle, was based on a  number  of  matters.
    These were that a power of attorney  gave  a  wide  discretion  to  the
    appellant's uncle; that the  sponsor  had  said  that  decisions  about
    schooling had been taken jointly with his  relatives;  that  there  was
    nothing preventing the appellant continuing to live with her relatives;
    and that the sponsor had not applied for the appellant to either  visit
    or settle with him earlier.   In  an  analysis  of  these  reasons,  at
    paragraphs 36 to 42 two key points emerge that appear to me to take the
    challenge outside one that is restricted to the factual realm, and into
    the area where it can be said that the correct legal framework has  not
    been applied.

14.  The first point is that the reference to  joint  decision-making  about
    education in paragraph 39 does not appear to be inconsistent with  sole
    responsibility.  The summary in TD (Yemen) at (vii)  and  (viii)  makes
    this clear.  There may be day-to-day responsibility or  decision-making
    about the child's welfare which will be shared with relatives, but that
    does not prevent the parent in the UK having sole responsibility within
    the meaning of the Rules.  The second sentence of paragraph 39  of  the
    determination ("he said that decisions about her schooling  were  taken
    jointly with his family") is treated by the judge as an  indication  of
    shared responsibility, but if the  guidance  in  TD  (Yemen)  had  been
    applied in full this would have been regarded as a matter falling under
    sub-paragraph (vii), rather than one that  was  determinative.   It  is
    possible  that  the  partial  quotation  at   paragraph   33   of   the
    determination, which omitted the  final  three  sub-paragraphs  of  the
    guidance in TD (Yemen) may have contributed  to  not  focusing  on  the
    final test.

15.  On an analysis of paragraphs 36 to 42 it  is  difficult  to  avoid  the
    conclusion that the central point to be considered, the  test  referred
    to in sub-paragraph (ix) of TD (Yemen), namely the test of  "continuing
    controlling direction of the child's upbringing  including  making  all
    the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life"  was  not   directly
    considered by the judge.

16.  Another point of concern about the legal  framework  within  which  the
    sole responsibility finding was made concerns the legal point that sole
    responsibility may have been exercised for a  relatively  short  period
    before the entry clearance application.  As is noted  at  sub-paragraph
    (ii) in TD (Yemen) sole  responsibility  may  have  been  for  a  short
    duration only.  The judge's reasoning  between  paragraphs  36  and  42
    clearly places weight on the overall period of time  that  the  sponsor
    has been away from the appellant, and there is no consideration by  the
    judge of whether the sponsor may have been  able  to  demonstrate  sole
    responsibility in the period leading up to the application, even if  he
    had not been in a position to do so in earlier years.

17.  Although I have decided that the first ground was not made  out,  since
    I accept the submissions on this point by Mr Walker,  in  essence  that
    the judge was not obliged to list and refer to every item of  evidence,
    nevertheless there is one aspect of the argument under this ground that
    is also relevant to the second ground.  This is that the best interests
    of the child, as discussed in the Mundeba case, are of relevance to the
    sole responsibility decision.  It is the case that the judge considered
    the best interests of the child in her consideration of Article 8,  but
    the difficulty is that those best  interests  do  not  appear  to  have
    featured in the sole responsibility issue, which was, in  reality,  the
    heart of the appeal.  The  impact  of  the  initial  decision  and  the
    determination was to prevent a  child  from  living  with  her  natural
    parent, against the wishes of both the child and the parent, and  in  a
    context where it was accepted  that  the  other  parent  had  abandoned
    responsibility.  The starting  point,  taking  into  account  what  are
    referred to in the IDIs quoted at paragraph 27 of the Mundeba decision,
    would be the internationally accepted principle  that  a  child  should
    first and foremost be cared for by a natural  parent  or  parents.   In
    assessing paragraph 297(i)(e), therefore, as well  as  297(i)(f)  which
    was considered in the Mundeba case, it would therefore  be  correct  to
    say that the starting point of any consideration would be that the best
    interests of this appellant would be to be with her father.  Given  the
    structure of the Immigration Rules, and the sole  responsibility  rule,
    this may of course be outweighed  in  positions  where  the  sponsoring
    parent in the UK had shared responsibility, but it is striking  in  the
    determination that the best interests of the child, and her wishes, and
    the principle that a child should be with a  natural  parent,  are  not
    referred to at all in the reasoning process on the sole  responsibility
    issue.

18.  For all of these reasons I therefore find  that  the  finding  on  sole
    responsibility, through not having been approached through the  correct
    legal framework set out in TD (Yemen), involved an error on a point  of
    law that was material to the outcome.   That  aspect  of  the  decision
    therefore falls to be set aside.

Re-making the Decision

19.  I invited submissions from both parties as to the appropriate  disposal
    of the appeal given my error of law decision.  Having considered  those
    submissions I indicated that I intended to re-make the decision on  the
    basis of the documentary evidence in the two appellant's  bundles,  and
    the respondent's bundle.  Having checked with Mr Walker that he had all
    of the relevant documentary evidence  I  invited  submissions,  on  the
    basis that the findings in the judge's determination  at  paragraph  35
    could be preserved, and it was only the reasoning and findings  between
    paragraphs 36 and 43 that were to be set aside.

20.  Mr Walker indicated that he had no further  submissions  to  make.   Ms
    Heidar, for the appellant, made very brief submissions referring to the
    positive findings in paragraph 35 of the determination, and  submitting
    that the starting point had to be that it was in the best interests  of
    the child to be with her natural parent.

21.  As I indicated at the hearing I have decided to  re-make  the  decision
    by allowing the appeal under paragraph  297,  on  the  basis  that  the
    sponsor did have sole responsibility within the meaning of the Rules at
    the date of decision.  As noted above it was agreed that this  was  the
    only point at issue.  It was also agreed by  Ms  Heidar  that,  in  the
    event of the appellant  succeeding  under  paragraph  297  it  was  not
    necessary for me to consider Article 8.

22.  The judge's findings at paragraph 35 were as follows.

         "I listened carefully to the evidence of the sponsor and I find him
         to be generally credible.  I accept that he has remained in contact
         with the appellant throughout his absence.  I accept that he  asked
         his mother and brother to bring  up  his  daughter  and  that  they
         agreed to do so with his delegated authority.  I also  accept  that
         the appellant's mother abandoned  her  daughter  and  there  is  no
         contact between them.  I further accept that the sponsor  has  been
         in contact with the appellant and has sent money for her support."

23.  I have considered the handwritten  statement  by  the  appellant  of  9
    February 2013, and the typed statement of 22 November 2013.  I note, in
    those statements, the appellant's clear view that  her  father  is  the
    most important person in her life, and that she has  been  dreaming  of
    the day when she would be able to live with him in the  UK.   She  also
    refers to her decision to move and to live with her father  in  the  UK
    because "he is the only person I have".  She refers to the  process  of
    losing contact with her mother after her mother moved away and  decided
    to continue her life "with another person".  I  have  also  taken  into
    account the sponsor's statement, and the summary of the evidence in the
    judge's determination, which led to the findings at paragraph 35 above.
     I note that the sponsor visited the appellant in 2005, 2012, and 2013.

24.  I have  also  taken  account  of  the  documentary  evidence  from  the
    appellant's  grandmother  and  uncle.   This  is  supportive   of   the
    appellant's wish to move to the UK to live with her father, and is also
    supportive  of  the  appellant's  father's  claim  to  have  maintained
    continuing controlling direction of her upbringing, as well  as  taking
    full financial responsibility for her education  and  upkeep.   I  have
    also taken note of the letter from the appellant's  mother  giving  her
    consent to the appellant moving to the UK to live with her father.

25.  I have considered the power of attorney.  I note that  this  explicitly
    refers to the process  of  obtaining  a  passport  for  the  appellant.
    Although the sponsor has indicated that he intends to travel  with  the
    appellant, should she obtain entry clearance, nevertheless  it  appears
    that it was necessary to obtain a passport  for  the  purposes  of  the
    application.  My view of this document is that it is a  legal  document
    essentially limited to the purpose of  obtaining  a  passport  for  the
    appellant, and cannot be interpreted more widely.   It  appears  to  me
    that the reference to travel in the power of attorney is related to the
    passport issue, rather than suggesting that the sponsor does  not  have
    continuing control and direction of the appellant's upbringing.

26.  I accept the submission that the starting point for  any  consideration
    of the best interests of the appellant are that she should be with  her
    natural parent or parents.  In her particular case, given  the  finding
    that her mother has abandoned  responsibility,  this  only  leaves  the
    sponsor, her father.  In considering the sole responsibility  issue  it
    is therefore relevant that it is in her best interests to be  with  the
    only parent who continues to exercise responsibility,  and  her  wishes
    are also of relevance.

27.  The documentary evidence does not appear to me to show that  there  are
    any difficulties with the appellant's grandmother and uncle  continuing
    to care for her in Lebanon, but the structure of paragraph 297 is  such
    that a  parent  who  has  had  sole  responsibility  does  not,  as  an
    additional point, have to establish anything of this  sort.   It  would
    only be if sole responsibility had not been  shown,  and  consideration
    moved to paragraph 297(i)(f), that this would become a relevant issue.

28.  For these reasons, on considering the documentary evidence,  and  using
    the findings at paragraph 35 of the determination as a starting  point,
    I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  sponsor  has  had   sole
    responsibility for the appellant's upbringing.   This  is  a  situation
    that appears to me to fall within the test of  the  appellant's  father
    maintaining  responsibility  for  the  control  and  direction  of  the
    appellant's upbringing, despite there being  day-to-day  responsibility
    and decision-making shared with the appellant's uncle and  grandmother,
    as envisaged in sub-paragraph (vii) of TD (Yemen).

29.  Having reached this decision in relation to  paragraph  297  I  am  not
    considering Article 8.

30.  In the interests of preserving the anonymity of the appellant,  who  is
    a minor, I am making an anonymity order.

31.  Despite having allowed the appeal, on re-making it, I am not  making  a
    fee award.  No application was made at the hearing for such  an  award.
    It was not clear whether all of the evidence relied on  in  the  appeal
    bundle was presented with the application.  For an award to be made  it
    would be necessary to show that sufficient evidence was presented  with
    the application for it to have been  successful.   This  has  not  been
    established in this case.

Decision

32.  The determination discloses a material error of law in relation to  the
    sole responsibility test under  paragraph  297.   That  aspect  of  the
    determination is set aside.

33.  In re-making the decision the appeal is allowed under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005, as follows.
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

