
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00438/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10th September 2014                        |On 6th October 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 LEOS JONES
                          (No Anonymity Direction)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hopkin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department but nonetheless  I  shall  refer  to  the
    parties as they were termed before the First-tier Tribunal that is  the
    appellant Mr Leos Jones and the respondent the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department.

 2. The appellant appeals under the Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations) and the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 against the decision to  refuse  entry  to  the  UK
    under Regulation 19 of the EEA Regulations.  The decision was  made  on
    4th December 2013 in the following terms:

         "You have sought admission to the United Kingdom under  EC  law  in
         accordance with Regulation 11 of the Immigration (European Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 on the ground that you are a Czech national.
          However I am satisfied that your exclusion is justified on grounds
         of public policy because sixteen clandestine entrants were found in
         the trailer of the vehicle of which you were the driver and  it  is
         believed that, to a high degree of probability, it is unlikely that
         you were unaware of their presence.

         I therefore  ...[sic]  you  admission  to  the  United  Kingdom  in
         accordance with Regulation 19(2)."

 3. An appeal  was  heard  on  the  papers  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cresswell and  a  determination  was  promulgated  on  30th  June  2014
    allowing the appeal.

 4. An application for permission to appeal was made by  the  Secretary  of
    State in the following terms;  the  judge  found  that  the  respondent
    supplied no evidence but the Immigration  Officer's  account  had  been
    accepted by the appellant in that he did not deny  sixteen  clandestine
    entrants were  found  in  his  trailer  and  no  further  evidence  was
    necessary.

 5. Although there were defects in the refusal notice this  was  not  fatal
    "to the appeal" as all parties were aware of the basis of the refusal.

 6. It was submitted that the appellant 'created  a  risk'  by  failing  to
    carry  out  adequate  checks  to  his  trailer  which  allowed  sixteen
    individuals to board unnoticed.  Even if the appellant was unaware they
    had boarded he knew of the associated risks of  not  carrying  out  the
    security checks and thus facilitated entry whether known or not.

 7. At paragraph 15 the judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  made  proper
    checks of his trailer which contradicts the appellant's own account  at
    14 "he checked again after refuelling  but  did  not  check  the  truck
    tarp".

 8. The judge had not considered the public interest in allowing the appeal
    and the judge had failed to deal with all points  adequately  and  such
    failure amounted to a material  misdirection  of  law.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley who stated that
    the judge's findings were brief and that  his  finding  at  15(iv)  was
    inconsistent with the appellant's admission that  after  refuelling  in
    Calais he "did not check the truck tarp".  The judge  in  allowing  the
    appeal did not have regard  to  public  security  considerations  under
    Regulation 19 of the EEA Regulations.

 9. At the hearing it was submitted by Mr Hopkin that the judge had  failed
    to give reasoned findings and in particular at paragraph  15(iv)  there
    was an inadequacy of reasoning as the appellant himself stated  he  did
    not check the truck tarp.  The assessment of the evidence was an error.

10. Mr Hopkin accepted that there  was  a  weakness  in  the  Secretary  of
    State's case in that no further evidence  was  provided  to  support  a
    contention that the appellant was explicitly complicit in the action or
    reckless and there was no evidence on  this.   The  assessment  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer in Calais should be given some  weight  and  it
    was his opinion that  "to  a  high  degree  of  probability"  that  the
    appellant was unlikely to be unaware of the  presence  of  the  sixteen
    clandestine entrants.

Conclusions

11. As the judge set out at paragraph  12,  Regulation  11(1)  of  the  EEA
    Regulations states that "an EEA national must be admitted to the United
    Kingdom if he produces on arrival a valid  national  identity  card  or
    passport issued by an EEA State" and further to  Regulation  11(8)  but
    this Regulation is subject to Regulation 19(1)(1AB) and (2).

12. Regulation 19(1) states that a person is not entitled to be admitted to
    the United Kingdom by virtue of  Regulation  11  if  his  exclusion  is
    justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health
    in accordance with Regulation 21.

13. Regulation 21 refers  to  decisions  taken  on  public  policy,  public
    security and public health grounds and further to Regulation 21(5)

         "where a relevant decision is taken on grounds of public policy  or
         public security it  shall,  in  a  condition  to  comply  with  the
         preceding paragraphs of this Regulation,  be  taken  in  accordance
         with the following principles -

          a)   the   decision   must   comply   with   the   principle   of
             proportionality;

          b) the decision must be based exclusively on the personal conduct
             of the person concerned;

          c) the personal conduct of the person concerned must represent  a
             genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting one
             of the fundamental interests of society."

14. The judge set these out in full and directed himself appropriately.

15. The decision in question and as recorded by the judge at  paragraph  13
    refers to the respondent's contention that it was 'believed to  a  high
    degree  of  probability'  that  the  appellant  was  'unlikely'  to  be
    'unaware' of the presence of the clandestine entrants.

16. As Mr Hopkin conceded this would require some evidence of intention  or
    at least of the reckless nature of the appellant's actions and  I  find
    that in this instance the burden of proof would be on the EEA appellant
    to establish a right of admission or residence but on the Secretary  of
    State to prove the fact that he is alleging.  It is also the contention
    that the appellant was engaged in complicit  dishonesty  in  effect  in
    people smuggling.  This onus is on the respondent to show this  on  the
    balance of probabilities.

17. The evidence was set out by the judge, in part, at [14].  He noted that
    the evidence produced by the  appellant  was  that  he  had  undertaken
    security checks on his truck after refuelling at Calais but he did  not
    check the truck tarp.  The  judge  noted  that  the  appellant  claimed
    people must have entered when he went to the toilet.   The  judge  also
    noted the statement of his witness Mr Bretislav Trnecka and  he  stated
    (although not set out by the judge) "I was with him a whole time  so  I
    believe they had to entry the trailer during the refuelling.  That  was
    the only time he had to leave the truck for a while and the  truck  was
    checked a few minutes before."  Thus it was not the case that the judge
    did not take into account material evidence.

18. As, however,  the judge states at paragraph 15(1)  the  respondent  had
    supplied 'no evidence whatsoever'. The judge had already recorded  that
    a poorly drafted refusal notice was the total of the evidence  produced
    by the respondent.  The judge correctly  stated  that  barring  an  EEA
    citizen is a serious issue requiring that it be strictly justified  and
    proportionate to the objective pursued.

19. In the circumstances I find that the judge did not  necessarily  accept
    that the appellant made proper checks of his trailer but merely that he
    noted the appellant's  account  that  he  did  not  know  and  was  not
    complicit or reckless in the entry of the clandestine entrants into his
    truck.   It  was  the  ECO's  case  that  the  appellant  was  actively
    complicit, not as implied, in the application for permission to  appeal
    that he was merely negligent. The judge as he stated had to 'guess'  at
    the grounds of public policy.

20. The ECJ has repeatedly emphasised that  exclusion  on  the  grounds  of
    public policy should not occur unless the person's presence or  conduct
    constitutes a genuine and sufficiently serious threat to public policy.
     The threat must be sufficiently serious. The decision,  also,  as  the
    judge pointed out to  exclude  must  be  both  strictly  justified  and
    proportionate to the objective pursued.  As he  stated  at  [15  (iii)]
    'without any evidence to contradict the appellant's account  of  proper
    checking (supported by his colleague's account), or at all,  I  can  do
    nothing other than allow the appeal'.

21. Without clear and explicit evidence that the appellant was reckless  or
    was complicit in transporting illegal entrants, and  I  do  not  accept
    that that is the case from his statement, or  that  of  his  friend  Mr
    Trnecka, I do not find that the judge's first finding at 15(1) that the
    respondent supplied no evidence  or  that  there  was  no  evidence  to
    contradict the appellant's account [15(iv)]  can  be  challenged.   The
    judge refers to the appellant's account of proper checking rather  than
    the fact that he did check properly but there was  no  evidence  as  to
    complicity save for surmise.  This would be axiomatic  and  fundamental
    and  effectively  a  condition  precedent  to  a  decision  considering
    proportionality or the degree of threat. There was no further  evidence
    supplied by the respondent for the judge to consider.

22. As such I find that there is no error  of  law  and  the  determination
    shall stand.


Signed                                  Date 3rd October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
