
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00206/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2nd December 2014                      |On 17th December 2014            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      Deputy Upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY


                                   Between

                       MISS HAMDA ABDI RAHMAN MOHAMED
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    the entry clearance officer - nairobi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Abdi Malik Mohamed, the appellant's paternal
                    cousin and voluntary representative
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on the 2nd May  1999.
   She  appeals  (with  permission)  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Hindson, promulgated on the 15th July  2014,  to  dismiss
   her appeal against the respondent's decision to refuse  her  application
   for  entry  clearance  as  the  daughter  of  Mr  Abdi  Rahman   Mohamed
   (hereafter, "the sponsor") who has been granted Humanitarian  Protection
   in the United Kingdom.

Background to the appeal

2. The respondent  had  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  the  sponsor's
   daughter. The respondent was not however satisfied  that  the  appellant
   had been a part of his family unit immediately prior to his flight  from
   Somalia. As  pre-flight  membership  of  sponsor's  family  unit  was  a
   requirement for entry clearance under paragraph 352FG of the Immigration
   Rules, it  followed  that  the  application  fell  to  be  refused.  The
   respondent also considered  that  there  nothing  "exceptional"  in  the
   appellant's circumstances to warrant consideration  of  the  appellant's
   case, outside the Immigration Rules, on the basis of Article  8  of  the
   1950  European  Convention  for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
   Fundamental Freedoms.

3. There was no attendance by or on behalf of the appellant at the  hearing
   of the appeal on the 11th July 2014. In commenting upon  this  state  of
   affairs, Judge Hindson made the following observations at  paragraphs  3
   and 4 of his determination:

       No one attended the hearing and no explanation for non-attendance was
       provided. There was a problem with the court file. In the  notice  of
       appeal the appellant's name was erroneously given as her  father,  Mr
       Abdirahman Ahmed. As this is the document that is used to create  the
       file, it was created using his details as the appellant. In the form,
       the appellant's details are given as the  sponsor.  Another  man,  Mr
       Abdiquaqni Mohammed is named as the appellant's  representative.  His
       connection to the appellant is not clear, though he seems not to be a
       professional representative.

       Because of the way the file was created, no  notice  of  hearing  was
       sent to the appellant. None could have been sent in any event because
       the address that has been provided  for  her  is  "Somalia".  However
       notices of hearing were sent to her father, who is the  sponsor,  and
       to her representative. As both were properly served with  the  notice
       of hearing, and neither attended or provided any explanation for  not
       attending, I decided to proceed in their absence.

4. Judge Hindson thereafter  considered  that  the  sponsor's  absence  had
   'substantially  undermined'  the  credibility  of  her  application.  He
   thereafter reasoned, at paragraphs 14 and 15 of  his  determination,  as
   follows -

       However, even taking the appellant's case at its highest, she  cannot
       succeed since she was clearly living with her  mother  prior  to  her
       father leaving Somalia; it seems that she  has  not  lived  with  her
       father since her parents separated. Whilst I do not  know  when  that
       was, it is clear that it was before her father left  Somalia  because
       subsequent to him leaving the appellant's mother, and before he  left
       Somalia, he established a relationship with  another  woman  and  her
       children. This family was then admitted to the UK  under  the  family
       reunion provisions.

       I am not satisfied that  the  appellant  was  part  of  her  father's
       household at the time that  he  fled  Somalia  and  the  appeal  must
       therefore be dismissed.

5. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Brunnen  in  the  following
   terms:

       The grounds on which permission  to  appeal  is  sought  submit  that
       neither the Appellant's father nor her  representative  received  any
       notice of the hearing. If, unbeknown to  the  Judge,  this  occurred,
       then it is arguable that his decision to proceed with the  appeal  in
       the absence of both sponsor and representative has led to  procedural
       unfairness amounting to an error of law.

6. On the 10th October 2014, the respondent served a 'Rule  24  Notice'  in
   response to the granting of permission to appeal. The material  part  of
   this reads as follows -

       The Judge of the First Tier  at  paragraph  4  of  the  determination
       clearly records that notice of hearing was sent  to  the  appellant's
       father who is the sponsor and to her representative and that as  both
       were properly served with the notice of hearing that he was satisfied
       he could proceed in their absence. The respondent  does  not  accept,
       without evidence, that a procedural error occurred in this respect.

Analysis

7. I begin by expressing my sincere thanks to Mr  Abdi  Malik  Mohamed  for
   putting the appellant's case so clearly and effectively at  the  hearing
   before me. Mr Abdi Malik Mohammed is the nephew of the sponsor (who  was
   also present  at  the  hearing)  and  is  the  paternal  cousin  of  the
   appellant. Also in attendance at the hearing was Mr Abdi  Qani  Mohamed.
   Mr Abdi Malik Mohamed  explained  that  Mr  Abdi  Qani  Mohamed  is  the
   sponsor's carer. He is also of course the person who  was  nominated  as
   the appellant's representative in the Notice of Appeal to the First-tier
   Tribunal. However, of the three of them, only Mr Abdi Malik Mohamed  had
   a fluent command of the English language. I therefore permitted  him  to
   represent the appellant for the purposes of these proceedings.

8. Mr Abdi Malik Mohamed said that neither the sponsor nor  his  carer  (Mr
   Abdi Qani Mohamed) had received notice of the hearing of the appeal,  on
   the 11th July 2014, before the First-tier Tribunal. He  also  said  that
   whilst it was correct to say (as is stated in the Notice  of  Appeal  to
   the First-tier Tribunal) that the appellant had lived  with  her  mother
   following the separation of her parents, the sponsor, his new wife,  and
   her children, had  nevertheless  continued  to  live  at  the  next-door
   property in Somalia.

9. With regard to notice of the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I  find
   that it is unlikely that neither the sponsor nor Mr Abdi  Malik  Mohamed
   received it. The Tribunal file shows that they were each sent  a  Notice
   of Hearing, at their separate addresses, by  second-class  post  on  the
   16th April 2014. The possibility that both notices  were  coincidentally
   'lost in the post' is one that I find to be highly improbable. Moreover,
   the fact of their presence at the hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  is  an
   implicit acknowledgment that they had received notices that were  posted
   to them at precisely the same addresses as those that were issued by the
   First-tier Tribunal. This renders it even more unlikely that the sponsor
   did not receive notice of the earlier hearing. I thus find  that  it  is
   far more likely that the sponsor simply overlooked the hearing  date  in
   the First-tier Tribunal of which, I am satisfied, he had been  notified.
   I am accordingly satisfied  that  it  was  not  procedurally  unfair  to
   proceed to determine the appeal in his absence.

10. Even if there had been  a  procedural  irregularity  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, I would nevertheless have been satisfied  that  such  was  not
   material to the outcome  of  the  appeal.  This  is  for  the  following
   reasons.

11. If the First-tier Tribunal had dismissed  the  appeal  solely  upon  the
   basis of the sponsor's absence at the hearing, then I would  have  found
   that to be a material error of law. This is because the judge failed  to
   have regard to (a) the fact that a sponsor's presence at the hearing  is
   not an evidential requirement of proof of an appellant's case,  and  his
   absence  could  not  therefore  warrant  the  drawing  of  any   adverse
   conclusion; and (b) the possibility that an  event  had  occurred  which
   both prevented his attendance at the hearing and his ability  to  notify
   the Tribunal of the reasons for his absence.

12. However, the Tribunal also considered the appellant's  case  as  it  was
   stated in the  Notice  of  Appeal.  It  thereafter  concluded  that  the
   appellant had failed to prove that she was part of  the  sponsor's  pre-
   flight family unit. That was a conclusion that was  reasonably  open  to
   the Tribunal upon the evidence that was before it. Whether it  would  be
   possible to reach a different conclusion, in light of the claim that the
   appellant and her mother were living next-door to the  sponsor  and  his
   'new' family prior to the sponsor's flight from  Somalia,  is  a  matter
   that can now only be determined in  any  future  application  for  entry
   clearance to the United Kingdom that the appellant may choose to make.

Notice of Decision

13. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity is not directed.



Signed        Date 17th December 2014

Judge Kelly
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

