
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00740/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 February 2016                  |On 26 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                          MINAL RUSHIKESHBHAI VYAS
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh, Counsel instructed by The Sethi
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India born  on  9  September  1997  whose
    application for entry clearance to the  UK  to  join  her  husband  was
    refused by the respondent on the basis  that  the  genuineness  of  the
    documents her husband had  used  to  obtain  his  UK  citizenship  were
    doubted. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")  and
    in a decision promulgated on 23 January 2015 her appeal was dismissed.

 2. The factual background to this appeal is that in 2006  the  appellant's
    husband (hereinafter "the  sponsor")  entered  the  UK  on  a  Nepalese
    passport with leave as the spouse of a person settled in the UK. He was
    naturalised as British on 14 June 2010. In March 2012 he  divorced  and
    in April 2012 married the appellant, who at that time was  residing  in
    the UK. The appellant returned to India to apply for leave to enter the
    UK as the spouse of the sponsor.

 3. In a decision  dated  28  November  2013  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's application. The respondent's Notice states:

         "Checks conducted by  our  office  have  shown  that  your  sponsor
         travelled to the UK as the spouse of  GP  in  2006  on  a  Nepalese
         passport. However in 2004 he made an application  in  Mumbai  as  a
         visitor using an Indian passport bearing a different date of  birth
         and place of birth to  that  of  the  later  application.  On  both
         applications,  the  sponsor  remained  the  same.  I  am  therefore
         satisfied to a higher degree of probability that the application in
         2006 was made under a different identity. This therefore  leads  me
         to doubt the  genuineness  of  the  document  used  to  obtain  his
         citizenship  in  the  UK.  Consequently  I  therefore  refuse  your
         application under  paragraph  EC-P1.1(d)  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
         Immigration Rules (E-ECP 2.1)"

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by FtT Judge Khan.  The
    FtT directed itself at paragraph [9] of the decision that the burden of
    proof was on the appellant to show that she met the requirements of EC-
    P1.1.

 5. The FtT described the sponsor as being vague and evasive throughout his
    oral testimony and it found that he had obtained his Indian passport by
    unlawful means and that he was not entitled to it.

 6. With regard to the sponsor's Nepalese passport, the FtT found that  the
    sponsor had obtained it in 2006 and that the documents he relied on  to
    show he was Nepalese were "unreliable and not credible in any way".  At
    paragraph [29] The FtT commented on  the  sponsor's  birth  certificate
    which was registered in 2008. The FtT stated  it  did  not  accept  the
    certificate as evidence of the sponsor's Nepalese  citizenship  as  the
    document did not refer to any earlier registration, the sponsor  having
    claimed to have lost his birth certificate. The FtT  also  referred  to
    the sponsor's Nepalese citizenship card and stated that  little  or  no
    weight could be attached to it as it was not translated and the  reason
    the sponsor had given for not having it translated was  that  he  would
    have to provide finger prints. The FtT stated that if  the  sponsor  is
    "genuinely a Nepalese citizen then what is the problem  with  providing
    his fingerprints".

 7. The FtT concluded that the sponsor had failed  to  establish  his  true
    identity and had obtained  his  British  citizenship  using  unreliable
    documents.



Relevant paragraphs of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules

 8. This appeal turns on the following paragraphs of Appendix FM:

         'EC-P.1.1 The requirements to be  met  for  entry  clearance  as  a
         partner are that-

             (a)  the applicant must be outside the UK;

             (b)  the applicant must have  made  a  valid  application  for
             entry clearance as a partner;

             (c)  the applicant must not fall for refusal under any of  the
             grounds in Section S-EC: Suitability-entry clearance; and

             (d)  the applicant  must  meet  all  of  the  requirements  of
             Section E-ECP: Eligibility for entry clearance as a partner.

         S-EC.2.1. The applicant will normally  be  refused  on  grounds  of
         suitability if any of paragraphs S-EC.2.2. to 2.5. apply.

         S-EC.2.2. Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge-

             (a)  false information, representations or documents have been
             submitted in relation  to  the  application  (including  false
             information submitted to any person to obtain a document  used
             in support of the application); or

             (b)  there has been a failure to disclose  material  facts  in
             relation to the application.'

 9. Under the above described paragraphs of Appendix FM, an  applicant  for
    entry clearance will normally be refused on grounds of suitability  if,
    even if not to her knowledge, false information has been  submitted  in
    relation to the application. This includes false information  submitted
    to obtain a document used in support of the application.

Error of law

10. For the reasons set out below, I find that the FtT  made  two  material
    errors of law.

11. The first error relates to the burden of proof. It is  clear  from  the
    decision that the FtT has proceeded on the basis  that  the  burden  of
    proof fell on the appellant. This is set out at paragraph 9  where  the
    FtT stated that it was for the appellant to establish, on  the  balance
    of probabilities, that EC-P1.1, S-EC2.1 and S-EC2.2 were met.

12. The grounds of appeal argue that this is misconceived and I agree. This
    is a case where the respondent  alleged  the  sponsor  had  used  false
    information. It is well established that where an  allegation  of  this
    nature  is  made  the  burden  of  proof,  ultimately,  falls  on   the
    respondent.  As explained in Shen (Paper appeals;  proving  dishonesty)
    [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC) at [25] (emphasis added):

         "On analysis we believe that the way in which the burden  of  proof
         operates is as follows. We accept that if an  application  form  is
         false in a material way, that this may be relied upon as some prima
         facie  evidence  which  assists  in  establishing  dishonesty.  The
         inference of deliberate deception can be strengthened by  reference
         to other facts, for example if the conviction is shortly  prior  in
         time to the completion of the application form  this  will  furnish
         circumstantial supporting evidence that the  conviction  must  have
         been high in the applicant's mind and any  explanation  based  upon
         oversight  would  carry  little  weight.  However,  this   is   not
         dispositive of dishonesty and it is open to an Appellant to proffer
         an innocent explanation. If an innocent explanation is advanced (by
         which  we  mean  one  that  meets  a  basic,   minimum   level   of
         plausibility) then the burden switches back to the SSHD  to  answer
         that evidence. At the end of the day the SSHD bears the  burden  of
         proof.  This is a proposition which is uncontroversial and has been
         confirmed on many occasions: e.g. JC (Part  9  HC395  -  burden  of
         proof) China [2007] UKAIT 00027 para 10; MZ (Pakistan) v  Secretary
         of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 919 para 25;  Mumu
         (paragraph 320; Article 8; scope) [2012] UKUT 143 (IAC)"

13. The FtT fell into error by failing to recognise that a nuanced approach
    to the burden of proof, as set out in Chen, was required  and that  "at
    the end of the day" the burden of  was borne by the respondent.

14. The FtT's second material error was its failure to have regard  to,  or
    give reasons for making no reference to,  relevant  evidence.  The  key
    issue before the FtT was whether the sponsor was Nepalese. However, the
    decision contains no analysis of at least three documents purporting to
    show the sponsor was Nepalese. These are:

           . a letter from a  Municipality  Office  dated  13  August  2014
             stating that the sponsor was born  in  Nepal  and  giving  his
             personal details including his citizenship number and passport
             number.

           . A letter from a District Administration Office  dated  4  June
             2014 stating the sponsor's  citizenship  number  and  passport
             number.

           . A Residence Certificate dated 3 June 2014 from a  Municipality
             Office stating the sponsor's citizenship number  and  passport
             number.

15. Whilst the FtT was not required to  make  specific  findings  on  every
    aspect of the evidence before it, these documents are key evidence that
    go to heart of the central issue in the case and the judge erred by not
    considering them (or explaining his reason  to  discount  them)  before
    concluding, as he  did  at  paragraph  [30],  that  the  documents  the
    appellant sought  to  rely  on  to  establish  the  sponsor's  Nepalese
    citizenship were unreliable and not credible.

Remade decision

16. Having found that the decision contains a material error of law, I  now
    proceed to remake the decision.

17. This appeal  turns  on  the  application  of  paragraph  S-EC2.2(a)  of
    Appendix FM, which provides that an applicant will normally be  refused
    entry clearance if false information, representations or documents were
    submitted in relation to the application for entry clearance  and  that
    this includes false information submitted to obtain a document used  in
    support of the application.

18. The respondent alleges  that  paragraph  S-EC2.2  applies  because  the
    sponsor used false documents and information to show he was a  Nepalese
    citizen  in  order  to  obtain  documents  (his  British  passport  and
    certificate of naturalisation) that were then used in  support  of  the
    appellant's application for entry clearance.

19. In a case, such  as  this,  where  the  respondent  is  alleging  false
    documents and information were used, the  approach  to  the  burden  of
    proof is not straightforward. It was helpfully summarised by the  Upper
    Tribunal in Muhandiramge (section S-LTR.1.7) [2015] UKUT 675 (IAC),  as
    follows:

         "(a) First, where the Secretary of State alleges that an  applicant
         has practised dishonesty or deception in an application  for  leave
         to remain, there is an evidential burden on the Secretary of State.
         This requires that sufficient evidence be adduced to raise an issue
         as to the existence or  non-existence  of  a  fact  in  issue:  for
         example, by producing the  completed  application  which  is  prima
         facie deceitful in some material fashion.

         (b)  The  spotlight  thereby  switches  to  the  applicant.  If  he
         discharges the burden - again, an evidential one -  of  raising  an
         innocent explanation, namely an account which satisfies the minimum
         level of plausibility, a further transfer of the  burden  of  proof
         occurs.

         (c)  Where (b) is satisfied, the burden rests on the  Secretary  of
         State to establish, on  the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the
         Appellant's prima facie innocent explanation is to be rejected."

20. Applying this approach to the present case, and relying on the evidence
    that was before the FtT, my findings are as follows:

21. In 2004 the sponsor applied to enter the  UK  as  a  visitor  using  an
    Indian passport bearing a different date and place  of  birth  to  that
    shown on his Nepalese passport, which he used to enter the UK  in  2006
    and subsequently obtain British citizenship.  The  discrepancy  between
    the two passports raises a serious concern about the genuineness of the
    documents the sponsor used to obtain his citizenship (ie  the  Nepalese
    passport).  Accordingly,  the  respondent  has  satisfied  the  initial
    evidential burden.

22. The initial evidential burden having been satisfied by the  respondent,
    the evidential burden is then  on  the  sponsor  to  give  a  plausible
    explanation  as  to  the  genuineness  of  his  Nepalese  passport  and
    citizenship.

23. The sponsor has submitted a wide range of documents from Nepal that, on
    their face, show he was born in Nepal  and  has  Nepalese  citizenship.
    These include (a) a Nepalese passport issued  in  August  2006;  (b)  a
    birth certificate from Nepal (dated 22 January 2008); (c) a letter from
    a municipality office in Nepal stating that the  sponsor  was  born  in
    Nepal and giving his personal details including his citizenship  number
    and passport number (dated 13  August  2014);  (d)  a  letter  from   a
    District Administration Office  in  Nepal  setting  out  the  sponsor's
    citizenship number and passport number (dated 4 June 2014); and  (e)  a
    residence certificate from a Nepalese municipality office  stating  the
    sponsor's citizenship number and passport number (dated 3 June 2014). I
    am satisfied that by submitting these documents, which  on  their  face
    appear genuine, the sponsor has met the evidential burden of  giving  a
    plausible explanation for his Nepalese citizenship.

24. Accordingly, the evidential burden having been satisfied, the burden of
    proof rests on the Secretary of State to establish, on the  balance  of
    probabilities, that the sponsor's prima facie innocent  explanation  is
    to be rejected. The respondent has not submitted any evidence  to  show
    why or how any of the aforementioned documents are or  might  be  false
    and accordingly has not discharged the burden.

25. Indeed, the evidence before me, irrespective of  where  the  burden  of
    proof lies, overwhelming supports the view  that,  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities, the sponsor is a Nepalese national. He has  submitted  a
    wide range of documents confirming  his  citizenship  including,  inter
    alia, a passport and birth certificate, and there is no evidence before
    me (just as there was none before the FtT) to show these documents  are
    not genuine.  Accordingly, I am satisfied  that  paragraph  S-EC.2.2(a)
    does not apply and therefore that the appeal should be allowed.

Notice of Decision

 a. The appeal is allowed.

 b. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and is set aside.

 c. I remake the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  allowing  the
    appeal.

 d. No anonymity direction is made.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 23 February 2016              |

