
IAC-CH-AP-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00089/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2015                          |On 13th February 2015         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                               muhammad shafi
                          (no ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                        (on behalf of Eco islamabad)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 20th November 1943.   He
    appeals with permission against a decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Pacey, promulgated on  11th  September  2014,  dismissing  his
    appeal against refusal of his application for  leave  to  come  to  the
    United Kingdom as a returning  resident.   The  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant did not meet the  requirements  of  either  paragraph  18  or
    paragraph 19 of the Immigration Rules.   He  had  been  away  from  the
    United Kingdom for almost twenty years and did  not  establish  on  the
    balance of probabilities that he intended to return for the purpose  of
    settlement.  He had not sought to return on the death of his mother  in
    Pakistan, which had occurred in 2009.

 2. In the grounds it is submitted that the Appellant had in fact left  his
    wife in Pakistan as he wished to settle in the United Kingdom and  then
    apply for his wife to join him.  He had not realised  earlier  that  he
    was able to apply as a returning resident and  had  he  known  that  he
    would have applied on the death of his mother.  It would make no  sense
    for him to go to the  lengths  of  seeking  to  enter  as  a  returning
    resident if he did not intend  to  settle.   The  decision  was  harsh.
    Those grounds, although handwritten, appear to have been  submitted  by
    solicitors  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant.   Following  the  grant  of
    permission the Respondent filed a notice under Upper Tribunal Procedure
    Rule 24 opposing the appeal and submitting that the judge had  reasoned
    correctly.  The Appellant had established a new family in Pakistan with
    whom he remained.

 3. The appeal had been listed for hearing at 2pm.  It  was  called  on  at
    2.35pm but there was no attendance by or on behalf  of  the  Appellant,
    either by representatives or by  the  Sponsor,  who  had  attended  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  I was satisfied that notice of
    hearing had been duly given to the Appellant and  his  representatives,
    and to the Sponsor by a letters dated 12th January 2015.   The  notices
    of hearing had not been returned by the Post Office and there had  been
    no explanation received for the failure to attend.   Having  regard  to
    rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  I  was
    satisfied that notice of the hearing had been duly given and I  was  of
    the view that it was in the interests of justice to  proceed  with  the
    hearing.

 4. Mr Mills for the Respondent relied upon the rule 24 response.  The fact
    that the Appellant stated that he had not realised that he could  apply
    sooner really added nothing to the substance of the case.  The decision
    of Judge Pacey gave  clear  reasons  as  to  why  she  found  that  the
    Appellant was not in fact seeking to enter for settlement.  Even if  he
    were entering for settlement Mr Mills pointed out there would have been
    no reasonable prospect that discretion under paragraph 19 of the  Rules
    would have been exercised in the Appellant's favour and he referred  to
    the guidance in that regard.  The further beyond a two year absence  in
    any particular case the less likely it was that leave would be granted.
     This Appellant, the judge had found, had been absent for almost twenty
    years and had remained for five years after the death  of  his  mother.
    He submitted that the judge could not have found that discretion should
    have been exercised differently and there was no material error in  the
    decision.

 5. Having considered the original decision and  reasons,  the  application
    and grant, the Respondent's response and the submissions made to me,  I
    have come to the view that there was no material error of  law  in  the
    decision of Judge Pacey.  She heard oral evidence from the  Appellant's
    son.  It was not in dispute that he had been absent for  almost  twenty
    years and he could not therefore satisfy the mandatory requirements  of
    paragraph 18(ii).  However another mandatory  requirement  is  that  an
    applicant should be seeking admission for the  purpose  of  settlement.
    The judge noted (at paragraph 11 of her decision)  that  the  Appellant
    was leaving behind his wife in Pakistan.  She acknowledged that this in
    itself was no bar to a person seeking to resettle but the oral evidence
    of the son was that he did not know why the Appellant's  wife  was  not
    accompanying him.  The son did not know the intentions  of  the  father
    and who he would stay with in the UK.  The judge expressed the  opinion
    (at paragraph 12) that it was highly unlikely that if the Appellant  in
    reality planned to settle again in the UK  he  would  not  have  had  a
    discussion with his son as to  the  accommodation  arrangements  to  be
    made.  It was also the case that the son  had  clearly  said  that  his
    father would return to Pakistan because he had relatives there.  He had
    not said that his father would visit Pakistan but that he would  return
    there.  The judge then went on (at paragraph 14) to state, "In my  view
    the  oral  and  documentary  evidence  is  that,  on  the  balance   of
    probabilities, the Appellant intends simply to visit the UK and not  in
    fact to settle as a returning resident."

 6. The reasons the judge gave for the core finding that the Appellant  was
    not seeking to come  to  this  country  to  settle  were  adequate  and
    sufficient.  They were not irrational or  perverse  and  the  Appellant
    will have been well aware of the why he lost his appeal.  No error on a
    point of law which  could  possibly  be  material  to  the  outcome  is
    apparent.

Decision

There was no material error of law in the  original  decision  made  by  the
Judge of the First-tier Tribunal and  her  decision,  that  the  Appellant's
appeal be dismissed, therefore stands.

No anonymity order was requested and none is made.



Signed        Date 12 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

