
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/00914/2015
     OA/00915/2015
     OA/01967/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 5 July 2017                            |On 14 July 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                            Mohammad Kaium Ahmed
                                farzana begum
                             shofiqlislam islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - INDIA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Moksud, Westminster Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants, Mohammed Kaium Ahmed, Farzana  Begum  and  Shofiqlislam
    Islam, are citizens of Bangladesh.  They  were  born  on  25  September
    2000, 21 February 1997 and 25 September 1993 respectively and claim  to
    be the children  of  the  same  father,  the  late  Rehan  Uddin.   The
    appellants claim that the late  Rehan  Uddin  was  a  British  citizen.
    Applications for certificates of entitlement to the right of  abode  in
    the United Kingdom were refused by decisions  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (ECO) India dated 14 November 2014.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Clapham SSC) in a  decision  promulgated  on  16  December  2015
    dismissed the appeals.  The appellants now appeal, with permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Upper Tribunal  Judge  Southern,  noted  that  the
    judge had incorrectly recorded the date of birth of the third appellant
    as 25 September 1983.  He also noted that the  appellants  had  adduced
    DNA evidence which indicated a high probability that they were  related
    to each other (no DNA example had been taken from the late Rehan  Uddin
    for obvious reasons).   Judge  Southern  granted  permission  primarily
    because Judge Clapham had arguably failed to deal  in  adequately  with
    the DNA evidence.

 3.  These  appellants  have  previously  applied   for   certificates   of
    entitlement and have been refused and their appeals  dismissed.   Judge
    Britton dismissed an  appeal  by  a  determination  promulgated  on  20
    September 2013.  As long ago as June 2006, Judge Ince had dismissed  an
    appeal by the same appellants which he  had  heard  in  Bradford.   The
    appeals before Judge  Clapham  and  Judge  Britton  had  been  "on  the
    papers".  DNA evidence had not been available  at  the  time  of  Judge
    Ince's decision but the same DNA evidence had been  made  available  to
    Judge Britton.  Judge Britton did not find that the appellants and  the
    late Mr Uddin were related as claimed noting that the "DNA results  may
    show there may be a relationship as claimed between the appellants  and
    Serazul Islam, but it  does  not  show  they  have  the  same  father."
    Serazul Islam is another son of the late Rehan Uddin.  The DNA  results
    indicated that Serazul  Islam  and  the  appellants  were  most  likely
    related as half siblings.   Notwithstanding  the  DNA  evidence,  Judge
    Britton dismissed the  appeals.   As  well  as  finding  that  the  DNA
    evidence proved little regarding the claimed relationship  between  the
    appellants and the late Rehan Uddin, he found that the  appellants  had
    not proved that Rehan Uddin had been  in  Bangladesh  at  the  time  of
    conception of the children [22].

 4. I have considered the previous judicial decisions despite the fact that
    they do not appear to have been made available to Judge Clapham.  I was
    conscious of the fact that the submissions made to me by Mr  Moksud  in
    relation to the DNA evidence do not appear to add anything  at  all  to
    the submissions made in the previous appeal to  Judge  Britton.   Judge
    Clapham did not have the advantage of hearing oral submissions since he
    dealt with the matter "on the papers."  I have to say that,  had  Judge
    Clapham examined the DNA evidence in  any  greater  detail,  I  do  not
    believe that he would have changed his decision.  As  the  ECO  in  the
    previous appeal had pointed out, the DNA  evidence  did  not  establish
    that the appellants were the natural children of the late Rehan  Uddin.
    That failure, together with the incomplete nationality certificates had
    been produced to the  ECO  and  the  lack  of  evidence  regarding  the
    presence of the  late  Rehan  Uddin  in  Bangladesh  at  the  dates  of
    conception of the appellants, would have led Judge Clapham  to  dismiss
    the appeal in any event.   Often  DNA  may  be  conclusive  in  proving
    kinship but in this appeal it cannot  prove  the  crucial  relationship
    which the appellants claim  exists  between  the  late  United  Kingdom
    citizen, Rehan Uddin, and the appellants.

 5. Mr Moksud submitted to me that  the  passport  of  the  late  Mr  Uddin
    indicated that he had left Bangladesh on 22  March  1996  and  had  not
    returned to the country again before the birth of the second  appellant
    on 21 February 1997. He cannot, therefore, have  had  sexual  relations
    with the mother of the second appellant after 22 March 1996.  Mr Moksud
    appeared to submit that theses dates provided conclusive evidence  that
    it was possible for the late Mr Uddin to have been the  father  of  the
    second appellant. Assuming that the dates are accurate, this would mean
    that the child had been born 11 months  following  conception;  I  take
    judicial knowledge of the fact that the gestation of a human baby is  9
    months.  I pointed this out to Mr Moksud who was unable  to  provide  a
    rational explanation.  Indeed, rather than settle the question  of  the
    parentage of the second appellant as he believed would be the case,  Mr
    Moksud's submission concerning the passport of the late Mr Uddin  casts
    further doubt upon the claim that  he  is  the  father  of  the  second
    appellant.

 6. In short, nothing that was  submitted  to  me  at  the  Upper  Tribunal
    hearing leads me to conclude  that  Judge  Clapham's  decision,  albeit
    somewhat  brief,  is  wrong  in  law.   The  evidence  concerning   the
    conception of  the  children  remains  unsatisfactory  whilst  the  DNA
    evidence (the judge's analysis of which had been of  concern  to  Judge
    Southern when he granted permission) had been dealt  with  conclusively
    and correctly at the previous appeal before Judge Britton.

Notice of Decision

 7. These appeals are dismissed.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 5 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 5 July 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

