
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00784/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 September 2014                          |On 30 September 2014         |

                                   Before

                DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL ROBERTSON

                                   Between

                        FAJILABANU FARUK GULAM PATEL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                            PAKISTAN (ISLAMABAD)

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Wray, Counsel, from Kings Court Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction


 1. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal against the decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Stott  (the  Judge),  who  dismissed   the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent to refuse her
    leave to enter as the spouse of Mr  Yasin  Patel,  the  Sponsor,  under
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules. The only issues before the  Judge
    were (i) whether the marriage was subsisting and the  parties  intended
    to live together permanently (paragraphs EC-P.1.1 (d) and E-ECP.2.6 and
    2.10 of Appendix FM) and (ii) whether the maintenance  provisions  were
    met (paragraphs E-ECP.1.1 (d) and E-ECP.3.1 of Appendix FM).  The  date
    of application was 1 October 2010  and  the  date  of  decision  is  14
    November 2012.
 2. As to maintenance, the Sponsor claimed that he was previously  employed
    by Best Connection Company and that since 1 June 2012 had been employed
    by Rapid Manufacturing Company (the current employer).  He  provided  a
    P60 from Best Connection and payslips from Rapid Manufacturing  Company
    for July to September 2012. In relation to his current employment, bank
    statements were provided but the Sponsor claimed that, because  he  was
    paid in cash, he paid in only the balance of his salary  after  payment
    of his expenses.

 3. The Judge found that the Appellant had not established that (i) she and
    the Sponsor were in a genuine and subsisting  relationship  [16],  (ii)
    the Sponsor was in salaried employment with Rapid Manufacturing Company
    as claimed and (iii) the funds paid into  the  Sponsor's  bank  account
    were his salary from Rapid Manufacturing Company [11].


 4. In  the  grounds  of  application,  it  is  submitted  that  the  Judge
    materially misdirected himself in law because:

        a. The Judge found it "peculiar" that a limited  company  paid  its
           employees in cash; it  was  a  lawful  method  of  payment,  the
           Sponsor provided all the evidence that was available to him  and
           could not have provided any more. The Judge therefore  erred  in
           failing  to  consider  this  evidence  and  his  findings   were
           therefore perverse; and


        b. The Judge found that the remittances sent by the Sponsor to  the
           Appellant were 'strong evidence' of a relationship but  he  then
           did not accept that he relationship was genuine  and  subsisting
           and failed to provide sufficient reasons  for  so  finding.  The
           Judge appeared to require evidence of  mutual  devotion  in  the
           intervening period but this failed  to  take  into  account  the
           guidance  in  Goudey  (subsisting  marriage:  evidence)  (Sudan)
           [2012] UKUT 41 (IAC) and GA ("Subsisting marriage") Ghana [2006]
           UKAIT 46.

 5. Permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein, who confirmed
    that  the  renewed  grounds  continued  to  rely  on  the  grounds   of
    application before the First-tier Tribunal but that these "demonstrated
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge may have made an  error  of  law  in
    failing to give adequate reasons for his findings on  material  matters
    and raises arguable issues as to whether he  was  entitled  in  law  to
    reach the conclusions he did for the reasons given."

 6.  A  Rule  24  response  opposing  the  application  was  filed  by  the
    Respondent.

The Hearing


 7. Relying on  the  grounds  of  application,  at  the  hearing,  Mr  Wray
    submitted that the Judge found that the money  transfers  were  'strong
    evidence' of a relationship and made  'ambivalent'  findings  regarding
    evidence of the Appellant's commitment to the Sponsor because  evidence
    of the Appellant's commitment to the Sponsor was missing.  However,  in
    the context that the marriage was an agreed marriage (that  is,  agreed
    between the families of the Appellant  and  Sponsor),  the  Appellant's
    role would be of a more passive nature than a  western  style  romantic
    relationship. He submitted that the Judge's findings were unreasonable.

 8. As to maintenance, Mr Wray submitted that the Appellant was  unable  to
    provide evidence of his salary being paid into his account  because  he
    was paid in cash but he provided his payslips and  a  letter  from  his
    employer. This was  contrary  to  the  Respondent's  own  policy  which
    provided that cash in hand was acceptable provided it  was  established
    that NI contributions etc were paid and the Sponsor  had  provided  his
    payslips. If this was correct, his current  employment  should  not  be
    discounted and the financial requirements were met. He  submitted  that
    the Judge had therefore materially misdirected himself and his decision
    was not sustainable.

 9. When asked if he had a copy of the Respondent's policy, he stated  that
    he did not but that it was on the Respondent's website and was referred
    to in the context of self employment. He  submitted  that  payments  in
    cash were not unlawful and in the 1950s it was  the  normal  method  of
    payment of wages. He submitted that  it  was  unreasonable  to  require
    everyone to be paid by BACS.

10. Mr Mills submitted that it could not be said that there  were  positive
    findings regarding the relationship due to  remittances  but  that  the
    findings on contact were 'ambivalent'  or  'contradictory'.  There  was
    usually evidence that pointed in both directions and the Judge  had  to
    decide which evidence was more persuasive. He found that there was lack
    of contact and lack of visits. The guidance in Goudey must be  seen  in
    the context of the facts of that case; what  was  significant  in  that
    case was that the couple had become engaged,  married  and  put  in  an
    application for entry clearance within a short space of time and  there
    was little intervening time during within which to establish  devotion.
    However, in the Appellant's case, they had met in 2007, and married  in
    2011 and there were no visits in between or since marriage  and  little
    evidence of contact.  The Judge gave adequate reasons for his  decision
    at [13 - 16].

11. As to maintenance, Mr Mills submitted that the specific requirements of
    the Rules have to be met. The guidance referred  to  related  to  self-
    employment and discretion to make payments in cash does not  extend  to
    employees; the rationally justifiable policy purpose behind it  was  to
    enable income to be demonstrated in a specific way. It was to  be  sure
    that the claimed income was  actually  earned.  There  was  nothing  to
    prevent the Sponsor from asking to be paid  by  BACS;  it  was  not  an
    insurmountable obstacle. There was no basis to bend or set  aside  this
    Rule.

12. With regard to Article 8, Mr Mills submitted that  in  the  grounds  of
    application it  is  submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to  conduct  a
    proportionality assessment under Article 8. However,  the  Judge  dealt
    with Article 8 at [17], finding that the parties knew that  they  would
    need to satisfy  the  Immigration  Rules  and  given  his  findings  in
    relation  to  relationship  and  maintenance,  his  decision  was   not
    disproportionate. Even if the only outstanding issue  was  maintenance,
    if the Appellant was now able to satisfy that requirement, the decision
    would still not be disproportionate because all she would  need  to  do
    was submit a fresh application.

13. In reply, Mr Wray submitted that the findings made by the Judge pointed
    to a genuine subsisting relationship because the Sponsor had  explained
    why an application for entry clearance was not made sooner and  why  he
    did not visit. He submitted that the length of time, the betrothal  and
    family arrangements would make it unthinkable that the Appellant  would
    not intend to reside with the Sponsor permanently. As to Article 8,  he
    submitted that  although  Mr  Mills  'had  a  point',  to  require  the
    Appellant to submit a new application  was  to  place  an  unreasonable
    burden on the Appellant because at the time  of  the  application,  the
    parties were not aware of the Rules and the Rules must be flexible.


Decision and reasons

14. Having considered the submissions, I find that:

        a. The Judge provided adequate reasons for  his  finding  that  the
           Appellant had not established  that  she  was  in  a  subsisting
           relationship and intended to live permanently with the  Sponsor.
           Given the lengthy separation between them, it was necessary  for
           them to provide evidence to establish that this requirement  was
           met.  The  Judge  considered  all  the   evidence   before   him
           (remittances and contact) at [12 - 16] and reached his  decision
           on the basis of the evidence  in  the  round.  The  evidence  of
           remittances was weighed against the evidence as  to  contact  in
           view of the period of time  under  consideration.  Although  the
           Sponsor provided reasons for lack of evidence as to contact  and
           visits, the Judge did not accept his explanations and  this  was
           open to him. Goudey can be (and was, by Mr Mills)  distinguished
           on the facts.

        b. The Judge did not err in law in  relation  to  his  findings  on
           maintenance. The Judge stated that the payment of salary in cash
           in a  company  with  24  employees,  whilst  not  unlawful,  was
           'peculiar'  and  this  observation  was  not  unreasonable.  The
           payment  of  large  sums  of  money  creates   security   issues
           associated  with  cash  handling  which  are  avoided  by   BACS
           payments. The Judge was not able to  trace  the  salary  in  the
           Appellant's bank account; the fact that he was paid in cash  did
           not prevent the Appellant from paying in the whole of his salary
           or, if he did not wish to do  so,  he  could  have  provided  an
           explanation as to what the shortfall had been used for.  On  the
           evidence before him, the Judge made a sustainable  finding  that
           he was not satisfied that the Appellant was employed as claimed.



15. As to Article 8, the Judge considered it on the basis there was a brief
    relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor and  concluded  that
    it would  not  be  disproportionate  to  refuse  the  application  when
    balanced against the need to maintain firm  and  effective  immigration
    control. As submitted by Mr Mills, if the  Appellant  is  now  able  to
    satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  it   is   not
    unjustifiably harsh to require the submission of a fresh application to
    enable the ECO to make an assessment under the  Immigration  Rules.  An
    appeal under Article 8 can only  be  allowed  if  the  outcome  of  the
    decision is unjustifiably harsh (see Nagre).

16. I find that the grounds are a disagreement with  the  findings  of  the
    Judge and no errors of law are disclosed.

Decision


17. There are no material errors of law in the determination of Judge Stott
    and his determination must therefore stand


18. The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Anonymity


19. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)
   of the Asylum and immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and  I  see
   no reason why an order should be made pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal
   Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed                                  Date



Manjinder Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT


     In light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (procedure) Rules
2005 and section 12(4) (a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act
2007).

As I have confirmed the decision of Judge Stott, no fee award is made.






Signed                          Dated

M Robertson
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
