
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00099/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2015                           |On 14 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE THIRLWALL DBE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PINKERTON

                                   Between

                              miss geeta gurung
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Duncan
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal who was born on 17 May 1991.  On 23
    September 2013 she applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as
    an adult dependent relative of the widow of a Gurkha, her  father,  who
    had formerly served in the Brigade  of  Gurkhas.   He  passed  away  in
    September 1992 and, according to documentation  in  the  file,  he  had
    served in the army for a little short of seven years, from 1963 - 1970.

 2. The appellant's application was refused by a decision dated 3  December
    2013.  The appellant appealed that decision and the appeal was heard by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyd.  In a determination promulgated  on  14
    October 2014 he dismissed the appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and
    under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal  that  decision.   Permission
    was granted as follows:-

         "3.  I am satisfied that it is arguable that there was  a  material
             error of law that could have made a material difference to the
             outcome for the reasons given in the application which I  will
             not simply repeat."

    This is not an approved or helpful form of grant in this  jurisdiction.
    The President of the Upper Tribunal (IAC) reiterated in MR  (permission
    to appeal: Tribunal's approach) Brazil [2015]  UKUT  00029  (IAC)  that
    when granting permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  it  is
    unsatisfactory  merely  to  state  that  the  applicant's  grounds  are
    arguable. The requirement, emphasised in Nixon (permission  to  appeal:
    grounds) [2014] UKUT 368 (IAC), to engage with each and every ground of
    application,  need  not  involve  anything  of  an  unduly   elaborate,
    burdensome or analytical nature. The reasons for granting  or  refusing
    permission to appeal, in whole or part, in any given case  will  almost
    invariably be capable of being  expressed  in  a  concise  and  focused
    manner.

The Grounds of appeal

 4. The grounds are to the effect that the judge erred in finding that  the
    relationship between the appellant and her mother ("the  sponsor")  did
    not go beyond the normal emotional ties.  Having made that finding  the
    judge failed to properly take into consideration the principles set out
    in the line of authorities concerning Gurkhas and  their  families  and
    the approach to be taken with regard  to  proportionality.  Furthermore
    the judge was wrong to say that as this was an Article 8  case  outwith
    the  Rules  he  had  to  be  satisfied  that  there   are   compelling,
    compassionate or exceptional circumstances such that the  decision  not
    to allow the appellant entry clearance would be disproportionate.

 5. In addition the grounds submit that the judge failed  to  consider  the
    historic wrong against the appellant's Gurkha father,  there  being  no
    reason why the principle should not apply equally to widows of Gurkhas.
     The sponsor qualified for settlement under the  policy  and  had  that
    been in operation "at the time of her husband's death/service she would
    have settled (that being her evidence) in the UK long ago and certainly
    whilst her daughter was a minor."  In that  case  the  appellant  would
    inevitably succeed on proportionality and the real argument is  whether
    family life  exists.   It  is  said  thereafter  that  given  that  the
    appellant has lived almost continuously with the sponsor  since  birth,
    had been visited by the sponsor in 2014, kept in daily contact with the
    sponsor, and was financially supported by her and  the  judge  accepted
    that the appellant and the sponsor had very close ties  had  the  judge
    given proper consideration he would have come to a different conclusion
    and found that there was family life.

The IDIs

 6. It is not in dispute that the sponsor was  granted  a  settlement  visa
    issued under the Secretary of State's concession afforded to widows  of
    former Gurkhas set out in Immigration Directorate  Instructions  (IDIs)
    Chapter 15 Section 2A, Annex B.

 7. Annex B makes clear that the discretionary arrangement only applies  to
    widows. The sponsor will have qualified for settlement because  she  is
    the widow of a  former  member  of  the  Brigade  of  Gurkhas  who  was
    discharged before 1 July 1997, having served for at least four years in
    the Brigade, and who therefore qualified under Annex  A  of  the  IDIs.
    Annex B states further that children or other  dependent  relatives  of
    former Gurkhas will have to meet  the  relevant  Immigration  Rules  or
    other appropriate discretionary criteria.

The Immigration Rules

 8. It was accepted before the First-tier tribunal that the appellant could
    not meet the requirements of the Rules.  Appendix  FM  at  Section  EC-
    DR.1.1.(d)  sets  out  that  the  applicant  must  meet  all   of   the
    requirements of "Section E-ECDR: Eligibility for entry clearance as  an
    adult dependent relative".

 9. E-ECDR 1.1. in turn requires that an adult dependent relative must meet
    all the requirements set out  in  paragraphs  E-ECDR.  2.1.to  3.2.  In
    essence this appellant had to show that as a result of age, illness  or
    disability she required long term personal  care  to  perform  everyday
    tasks; was unable, even with the practical and financial  help  of  the
    sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the country where  she
    is living, because it is not available and there is no person  in  that
    country who can reasonably provide it; or it is not affordable.

10. In addition there are financial requirements.   The  appellant  had  to
    provide evidence that she could be adequately maintained,  accommodated
    and cared for in the UK by the sponsor without recourse to public funds
    and in circumstances where the  sponsor  is  settled  in  the  UK.  The
    appellant had to provide also an  undertaking  signed  by  the  sponsor
    confirming that the appellant would have no recourse to  public  funds,
    and  that  the  sponsor  would  be  responsible  for  the   appellant's
    maintenance, accommodation and care, for a period of  five  years  from
    the date the applicant enters the UK if  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    enter. The appellant could not provide such evidence  and  thus  failed
    under the Immigration Rules.

11. The judge notes elsewhere that the sponsor  is  not  in  receipt  of  a
    Gurkha widow's pension because her late husband served in the army  for
    less than the required period to be awarded one.  She receives  pension
    credit in the UK, is not working, and is in receipt of housing  benefit
    and other state benefits as her main means of support. She would not be
    able to  fully  financially  support  the  appellant.  Furthermore  the
    sponsor  is  residing  in  rented  accommodation  with  no  independent
    property inspection report to show the size of the  accommodation,  its
    occupants, and its suitability.  There has been  no  undertaking  given
    confirming that the appellant will have no recourse  to  public  funds.
    These  factors  would  be  placed  in  the  scales  on  any  Article  8
    proportionality assessment.

Article 8 Considerations

12. To succeed the appellant needed to show before the First-tier  tribunal
    that Article 8 was engaged and that there  was  family  life  with  the
    sponsor. If such family life existed then the "historic  wrong"  was  a
    factor to be taken into account in  carrying  out  the  proportionality
    exercise.

13. The judge did not find that there was family life. He  did  not  accept
    that there are greater than normal ties between the appellant  and  the
    sponsor. He found at paragraph 22 that although the  appellant  claimed
    that she has been living on her own in Nepal for 23 months the  sponsor
    made it perfectly clear in her oral  evidence  that  the  appellant  is
    living with friends who will look after her, if  necessary.  The  judge
    found for all the reasons given that he could not rely on the GP report
    as  accurately  reflecting  the  appellant's  assertion  that  she   is
    suffering from fainting attacks and depression.

14. The judge did not dispute that the appellant and the sponsor  may  have
    close ties and a very close loving relationship  but  "no  attempt  was
    made at the time the  sponsor  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  for  the
    appellant to come with her and the only explanation for her not  coming
    was that she was continuing her studies".  He found that if they are as
    close as is claimed it would have been expected that either the sponsor
    would have remained in Nepal until  the  appellant  had  completed  her
    studies or the appellant would have attempted to come at the same  time
    as the sponsor:  " ... neither of these applies".

15. In paragraph 28 the judge  further  reasoned  why  Article  8  was  not
    engaged finding that the appellant and sponsor had no  real  dependency
    upon each other. He found that they simply missed each other  and  this
    did not constitute dependency.

16. Since the appellant could not meet the requirements of the  Immigration
    Rules and the judge found that Article 8 was not engaged, a  conclusion
    that he was entitled to reach for the reasons that he gave,  he  needed
    to say little more before dismissing the appeal.  Nevertheless,  as  he
    expresses in paragraph 29 "had I been carrying out  the  balancing  act
    under Article 8, I would have reached the same decision that it was not
    disproportionate".

17. In the same paragraph the judge states: "I am not satisfied that  there
    are any compelling, compassionate or exceptional circumstances in  this
    case such as to render the decision disproportionate". This  may  refer
    to the guidance issued by the respondent to her officials  in  deciding
    whether to grant leave to remain outside the Rules, in the exercise  of
    the residual discretion she has to grant such leave. Reference is  made
    in that guidance to "exceptional circumstances". Exceptional appears to
    mean circumstances in which refusal would result in unjustifiably harsh
    consequences for the individual such that refusal  of  the  application
    would not be proportionate. i.e. where a breach of Article 8  would  be
    involved.

18. The approach of the judge in considering the appellant's  circumstances
    and the consequences for her after finding that  the  appellant  cannot
    bring herself within the Rules and  where  Article  8  is  not  engaged
    cannot be said in our view to  be  an  incorrect  one.  The  judge  has
    considered everything required of him even  if  paragraphs  19  and  29
    could have been worded more accurately. He seems to have conflated  the
    applicable Rules, policy guidance in relation to Gurkhas, and Article 8
    into a simple paragraph but if that is an error it is  not  a  material
    one because he has considered each issue separately  elsewhere  in  the
    determination.

19. The judge having found that Article 8 was not engaged nevertheless  (at
    paragraphs 29 and following) considered what the position would  be  if
    he had been carrying out a balancing exercise under Article 8. He found
    that  he  would  have  reached  the  same  decision  that  it  was  not
    disproportionate to refuse the  appellant  entry  clearance.  In  those
    paragraphs he gave reasons why he came to  that  conclusion.   He  made
    reference to the statutory guidance that is provided by Part 5A of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 at 117B in the context  of
    Article 8 which sets out the public interest considerations  applicable
    in all cases.  He took into account that the appellant had not provided
    any evidence that she is an English speaker such as would cause her  to
    be less of a burden on taxpayers and  better  able  to  integrate  into
    society; neither is the appellant financially independent.   It  is  in
    the public interest and in particular in the interest of  the  economic
    well-being of the United Kingdom that persons  who  seek  to  enter  or
    remain here are financially independent.

20. We find that the judge was entitled  to  conclude  that  s.117B  has  a
    substantial bearing in assessing the public interest in this particular
    appeal because that section contains statutory guidance.

21. In paragraph 33 the judge referred to assessing  Article  8  under  the
    Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 jurisprudence and the  balancing  exercise.   For
    reasons given there and earlier in the determination - matters that  he
    was entitled to conclude in the way that he did - he found that he  was
    not  satisfied  that  it  had  been  established  on   a   balance   of
    probabilities that it would be disproportionate to refuse the appeal.

22. The judge grapples with the "historic wrong" point in paragraph  26  of
    the determination although he does not refer to it in those terms.  The
    authorities such as Gurung & Others {2013] EWCA Civ  8  and  Ghising  &
    Others (Gurkhas/BOCs:  Historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567  (IAC)
    and the cases referred to therein found  that  if  an  individual  came
    within  the  protection  of  Article  8(1)  the  balance   of   factors
    determining proportionality for the purposes of Article  8(2)  will  be
    influenced, and perhaps decisively influenced, by the fact (if it is  a
    fact) that, but for the historic wrong the family would or  might  have
    settled in the United Kingdom long ago.  As per the headnote in Ghising
    & Others at 4:

         "... where it is found that Article 8 is engaged and, but  for  the
         historic wrong, the appellant would have been  settled  in  the  UK
         long ago, this will ordinarily determine the outcome of the Article
         8 proportionality assessment in an Appellant's  favour,  where  the
         matters relied on by the Secretary of State/Entry Clearance Officer
         consist solely  of  the  public  interest  in  maintaining  a  firm
         immigration policy."

23. How does that apply to the current appellant's situation?  At paragraph
    26 the judge found that to the best  of  anyone's  knowledge  it  would
    appear that the appellant's father, having served his time in the army,
    simply returned home.  There was no evidence that he  ever  applied  to
    reside in the United Kingdom and the sponsor did not do so until it was
    brought to her attention by someone that she could apply to live  here.
    The sponsor in her written statement set out that  she  strongly  feels
    that if her husband had been permitted he would have settled in the  UK
    when he left the army as the family would have had a better life  here.



24. It seems to us that  this  falls  far  short  of  good  evidence  being
    provided that, but for the historic injustice,  the  sponsor's  husband
    would have settled in the UK.  The sponsor does not suggest that  there
    were conversations about settlement outside Nepal.  The  way  that  the
    judge put it was that there was no evidence that the appellant's father
    ever applied to reside in the United Kingdom. That does not  provide  a
    reasoned response to the  point  made  about  the  historic  injustice.
    However, in context it is clear enough that, read with the other points
    made and set out in paragraph 26, the appellant did not show  that  she
    could take the benefit of the historic injustice point when it came  to
    the carrying out of the Article 8 proportionality exercise.  The  judge
    was entitled to find that the evidence was simply not present to enable
    him to do so, and this for the reasons given.

Our Decision

25. It is for these reasons  that  we  do  not  find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge erred materially in law or that there is any other  good
    reason why this decision should be set aside.  Therefore  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge stands and that is that the appeal  is
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

26. No application has been made for an anonymity direction and  we  cannot
    see that one is warranted in the circumstances.  Therefore  we  do  not
    make one.


Signed:

                                Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Pinkerton

