

                                [pic]

 Upper Tribunal

 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

Appeal Number: OA/00243/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



 Heard at Field House
          Decision & Reasons Promulgated
 On 29 January 2016                                     On 4 February 2016


                                   Before





                        DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE   KAMARA


                                   Between


                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (MANILA)

         Appellant


                                     and



                       MR JUNE VINCENT BAGUIO PAIGALAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


 Representation:


 For the Appellant:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
 For the Respondent:   Mr S Jeshani, counsel instructed by Aston Brooke
 Solicitors


                        DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals the decision of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge J Robertson, promulgated on 5 August 2015, allowing an
       appeal against a decision to refuse the respondent leave to enter the
       United Kingdom as a  dependent  child  of  a  Tier  2  migrant  under
       paragraph 319H of the Immigration Rules.




 Background

    2. The respondent's application was refused on 24  November  2014  under
       paragraphs 319H (b), (f)(ii) and (iii).  The reasons given were  that
       a copy of the sponsor's UK biometric residence permit  had  not  been
       provided with the application; the ECO was  not  satisfied  that  the
       sponsor had  and  continued  to  have  sole  responsibility  for  the
       respondent's upbringing or that there  were  serious  and  compelling
       family or other consideration  which  made  her  exclusion  from  the
       United Kingdom undesirable.

    3. In appealing the ECO's decision, the  respondent  asserted  that  the
       decision was not in accordance with  the  Rules,  that  the  decision
       breached Article 8 ECHR and the  ECO  was  urged  to  reconsider.  No
       specific arguments were made on the respondent's behalf.

    4. An Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) reviewed the decision  under  appeal
       on 25 February 2015 and maintained the decision, noting  the  absence
       of any additional documents or information. The ECM was not satisfied
       that the decision breached Article 8 given that the sponsor  had  not
       lived with the respondent since 2008, as the sponsor  had  chosen  to
       travel to the United Kingdom in order to study.

    5. At the hearing before the FTTJ,  a  further  ground  of  refusal  was
       raised, that is that  the  respondent  could  not  be  satisfactorily
       accommodated without recourse to public funds because  the  sponsor's
       tenancy agreement referred to the sponsor and the respondent  sharing
       one room which would not be in accordance with the Housing Act  1985.
       The issue of the sponsor's leave to remain was resolved prior to  the
       hearing because it had been verified that her  leave  to  remain  was
       valid until 16 August 2016. The FTTJ found that the accommodation was
       adequate and  that  the  sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
       respondent.

    Error of law

    6. The grounds of application argue, that the FTTJ erred in taking  into
       account post-decision evidence of the accommodation available for the
       respondent, in the form of a letter from the sponsor's landlord which
       stated that "a second room would be provided" if entry clearance  was
       granted.

    7. Accordingly, it was said that the FTTJ materially  erred  in  law  in
       finding all of the requirements of the  Rules  were  met.  FTTJ  Mark
       Davies granted permission to appeal; stating  that  it  was  arguable
       that the FTTJ made an error of  law  in  taking  into  account  "post
       application evidence."

    8. At the hearing before me, Mr Tufan indicated that he was not pursuing
       the grounds of appeal with any vigor. I asked him to take me  to  the
       post-application evidence relied by the FTTJ and he was unable to  do
       so.  On the contrary he acknowledged that the landlord's  letter  and
       tenancy agreement  were  provided  to  the  ECO  in  support  of  the
       application for entry.



    9.  Given Mr Tufan's concessions, which I accept were  rightly  made,  I
       had no need to hear from Mr Jeshani.

   10. At the end of the hearing, I announced that the  First-tier  Tribunal
       made no error of law and upheld  the  decision.  My  reasons  are  as
       follows.

   11. On 30 October 2014 the respondent sought entry to the United Kingdom.
       The aforementioned application was accompanied by a letter  from  the
       sponsor's landlord dated 21 September 2014,  as  well  as  a  tenancy
       agreement for  the  proposed  accommodation.  The  landlord's  letter
       confirmed the level of rent, the extent of the  accommodation  rented
       and  the  specific  arrangements  in  place  for   the   respondent's
       accommodation on the understanding  that  he  would  be  joining  the
       sponsor in the United Kingdom from 24 December 2014. I  am  satisfied
       that those documents were before the ECO because they  are  contained
       in the ECO's evidential bundle which was before the FTTJ and they are
       listed on the first page of the ECM's review  under  the  heading  of
       "Documents submitted with the application." The  FTTJ  therefore  did
       not  refer  to  post-application  evidence  in   finding   that   the
       accommodation requirements had been met.

   12. I accordingly dismiss the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal.


 Decision


  1) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
     the making of an error on a point of law


  2) The decision of the FTTJ is upheld, with all findings preserved.

 No application for anonymity was made and I could see no reason to make
 such a direction.


 Signed     Date: 30 January 2016


 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



 -----------------------
Appeal Number: OA/00243/2015


3



