
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00767/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 July 2015                      |On 30 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                   ENTRY CLERANCE OFFICER (ECO), ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 sidra fiaz
                            (No anonymity order)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr I Hussain, Syeds Solicitors, Birmingham


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mrs Sidra Fiaz lives with her son, Mohammed  Ahsan  in  Pakistan.   She
    wants to live with her husband,  Mr  Fiaz  Mohammed  in  the  UK.   Her
    husband and son are British citizens but she is  a  Pakistani  citizen.
    As a result she cannot live in the UK  without  first  obtaining  entry
    clearance.  Her application  for  entry  clearance  was  refused  on  2
    September 2014 and it is against that  immigration  decision  that  she
    appealed.

 2. She succeeded in her appeal because First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lagunju
    found that it was not proportionate to expect Mr Mohammed to leave  the
    UK as to do so would be to require him to  give  up  enjoyment  of  his
    rights as a British citizen and to abandon his 16 year old son from his
    first marriage.  Mr Fiaz's victory was short  lived,  however,  because
    the Entry Clearance Officer sought and was granted permission to appeal
    against the decision of on the basis that  it  might  contain  a  legal
    error.  After hearing submissions from both parties on 28 April 2015, I
    agreed and set the decision aside.

 3. For ease of reference I attach a copy of that decision (see  Annex  1).
    I found  that  many  of  Judge  Lagunju's  findings  were  correct  and
    concluded that the only ground of appeal that has to be reconsidered is
    whether the refusal of entry clearance  is  compatible  with  the  UK's
    obligations under article 8 of the human rights convention.

Evidence

 4. At the start of the resumed  hearing  both  Mr  Mills  and  Mr  Hussain
    confirmed they had received my earlier  decision  and  the  directions.
    Both relied on the documents submitted previously, which  included  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's bundle of documents, Ms Fiaz's main bundle of
    26 pages (submitted  on  3  November  2014)  and  a  skeleton  argument
    prepared by Mr Nazir Ahmed on 9 December 2014.

 5. Ms Fiaz submitted some medical documents relating to treatment her  son
    had received in Pakistan and statements from her and her  husband.   Mr
    Mills did not object to these documents being admitted and because they
    are potentially material to the issues I have to determine  I  admitted
    them.  In addition to the documentary evidence, I  have  been  provided
    with a number of authorities and legal resources.

 6. At the hearing, Mr  Mohammed  gave  further  evidence  and  was  cross-
    examined, after which I heard submissions from Mr Mills and Mr Hussain.
     There is no need to record in detail the evidence or  the  submissions
    because their content will become apparent from my findings below.

Agreed facts

 7. Turning to the evidence, the following facts, which are relevant to  my
    assessment under article 8, are undisputed because they stem  from  the
    preserved findings made by Judge Lagunju and because they are supported
    by cogent evidence.

 8. Mrs Fiaz is a Pakistani citizen who was born on 13 March 1988  and  has
    lived all her life in Pakistan.  Mr  Mohammed  is  a  British  citizen,
    having been born in the Bradford on 1 September 1969, and has lived all
    his life here.

 9. Mrs Fiaz married Mr Mohammed in Pakistan on 24 February 2010  and  that
    marriage is recognised according to the  laws  of  Pakistan.   This  is
    confirmed in the Nikah Khawani marriage certificate issued on 13  March
    2010.  However, their marriage is not recognised in English law because
    Mr Mohammed, who is domiciled in England and Wales,  was  not  divorced
    from his previous  wife  according  to  English  law  until  1  October
    2012.[1]  This is despite the annulment certificate  of  22  June  2009
    from the Family Support Services of Birmingham  Central  Mosque,  which
    although probably having force in Shariah law carries no  authority  in
    English law.

10. Mrs Fiaz and Mr Mohammed have a son, Mohammad Ahsan, who  was  born  in
    Pakistan on 13 December 2010 and who has dual nationality, being both a
    British citizen and a Pakistani citizen.  His birth was  registered  at
    the British High Commission in Islamabad.  Their son has lived all  his
    life in Pakistan in the care of his mother.  At the date of decision he
    was two years and nine months old.

11. Mr Mohammed did not have sufficient income or assets  at  the  date  of
    decision to meet the financial  requirements  of  appendix  FM  to  the
    immigration rules.  This is a relevant factor in relation to article  8
    because of the public interest in protecting the economic wellbeing  of
    the UK.[2]  Despite his financial limitations, there is  evidence  that
    Mr Mohammed regularly transferred money to Mrs Fiaz up to the  date  of
    decision.

12. At the date of decision, Mr Mohammed lived with (and continues to  live
    with) his son, Ismail Abbass, from his first wife who was  born  on  11
    April 1998 in Birmingham, who is a British citizen and who has lived in
    the UK all his life.  His birth  certificate  and  passport  have  been
    provided.  The fact Mr Mohammed cares for this son is shown in  the  HM
    Revenue & Customs documents confirming payment of tax credits.

Disputed facts

13. All other facts are disputed.  These primarily  relate  to  the  health
    condition of Mohammad Ahsan, the  couple's  son  in  Pakistan  and  the
    conditions in which he  and  Mrs  Fiaz  are  living  in  Pakistan.   In
    addition  to  the  documentary  evidence,  I  heard  from  Mr  Mohammed
    regarding both factors.

14. Mrs Fiaz and Mr Mohammed have concerns about the health  of  their  son
    and have provided evidence about their concerns.

15. The Entry Clearance Officer's bundle contains  a  "Medical  Examination
    Report" from  Dr  Capt  (R)  Arshad  Jawaid,  a  medical  and  children
    specialist.  The report relates to Mohammed Ahsan and is dated  24  May
    2013.  The report is handwritten and as best I can  make  out  contains
    the following.

         "Certified that I have examined Mr Mohammed Ahsan aged 2  �  years,
         son of Mr Fiaz Mohammed, who is obviously very weak and  looks  ill
         and undernourished.  He suffers repeatedly  of  enteric  fever  and
         gastroenteritis.  The cause appears to  be  his  not  living  under
         proper parental care (forced single parent  child)  and  living  in
         substandard socio-hygienic conditions.  The repeated illness  leads
         to  repeated  undue  hospitalisations  and   use   of   unnecessary
         antibiotics with their inherent  side  effects.   Living  a  forced
         single parent life can be detrimental for his  intellectual  growth
         and mental health.

         "If the child is migrated to the UK to live with his father then he
         will be definitely benefited.  He will remain health by  living  in
         healthy socioeconomic environments and develop normally  by  living
         in a proper family life.

         "Not valid for any court."

16. On 22 June 2015 Mrs Fiaz's  solicitors  wrote  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    requesting the resumed hearing to be expedited.   In  support  of  that
    application were  three  medical  prescriptions/letters  from  Basharat
    Clinic dated 27 December 2014, 7 February 2015 and  23  May  2015.   Mr
    Hussain acknowledged that the contents of these  three  documents  were
    illegible.

17. Also in support of the application to expedite were five  letters  from
    Dr Capt (R) Arshad Jawaid, dated 19 November 2014 and  15  January,  14
    February, 16 March and 20 April 2015.  The letters are all handwritten.



18. The earliest document identifies that Mohammed Ahsan was irritable  and
    appeared underweight and malnourished.  The advice was that the  family
    should be reunited as quickly as possible and that Mrs Fiaz should keep
    him in touch with his father by telephone on a daily basis.  The doctor
    also advised that the child should be kept in good hygienic conditions.
     Various medications  were  prescribed  but  it  is  unclear  for  what
    condition.

19. On 15  January  2015,  the  doctor  prescribed  other  medications  and
    recorded that his patient was a  forced  single  parent  child.   There
    appears to be a diagnosis of sinusitis.

20. On 14 February 2015 the doctor again records the fact that his  patient
    is a single parent child and advises that the family should be reunited
    "as early as possible in the interest of the child."   Two  medications
    were prescribed.

21. On 16  March  2015,  the  same  doctor  diagnosed  restlessness  and  a
    temperature of 100 degrees Fahrenheit.  He prescribed four medications.

22. On 20 April 2015, the doctor prescribed three  medicines  and  recorded
    the following.

         "Forced  single  parent  child  living  in  sub  optimal   hygienic
         conditions.  Falling ill  repeatedly  according  to  my  record  by
         contracting various types of infections e.g. respiratory  and  GIT.
         Father in UK.  It appears that as the child is slow, irritable  and
         non-focused.

         "Grandfather of the child called in my office and advised  to  send
         the child and his mother to live with his father / her  husband  in
         the interest of the child."

23. The Entry Clearance Officer's bundle contains two  sponsorship  letters
    from Mr Mohammed.  The first is undated and merely addressed  "to  whom
    it may concern".  It contains the following statement  in  unpunctuated
    English.

         "Mohammad Ahsan my son is in Pakistan he  is  not  in  good  health
         mentally do to missing his father physically week falling ill every
         day as stated in he's medical reports need to register him  with  a
         doctor in the UK that's only going to happen when he comes  to  the
         UK with his mother, and register him with a school ok his mother is
         a Pakistani she is being punished for being Pakistani  national  as
         well as my son who is a UK national what has  he  done  to  deserve
         this he should be with his father and mother as  a  family  further
         more if anything happens to my son I will hold you responsible."

24. The second statement is headed, "Declaration to Sponsor" and  is  dated
    24 August 2014, the second paragraph of which contains the following.

         "I have a child, Master Muhammad Ahsan,  born  on  13-12-2010  from
         this marriage / relationship.  My child is a  British  citizen  and
         holds British passport no. 707209183 which is  valid  until  25-07-
         2016.  My wife and son are currently residing at Village  and  Post
         Office [ - ].  My son, Master Muhammad Ahsan,  has  serous  medical
         condition and needs to be seen by  a  specialist  doctor/consultant
         for his treatment in the UK.  I am in the  process  of  booking  an
         appointment for him with the doctor, however, it is  only  possible
         when my child is physically present in the UK."

25. Mrs Fiaz's main bundle of documents contains an affidavit from her  and
    a statement from Mr Mohammed.  Neither refers to  any  health  concerns
    relating to their son.  Mrs Fiaz's affidavit states  that  she  is  the
    primary carer of her son and that she should have a right of  residence
    in the UK under EU law.  The statement of Mr Mohammed, dated 3 November
    2014, makes the same claim and adds the following:

         "7. It would not be possible for my son in Pakistan  to  come  over
         without his mother because of the emotional attachment he has  with
         the mother and also given that I would be forced to give up work if
         I was expected to act as primary carer for both children.   I  also
         feel that it is in the best interests of the  child  to  be  living
         with both of his parents.  And also the  child's  right  as  an  EU
         citizen to freely reside within the EU and his right to education."

26. Mrs Fiaz submitted a further affidavit  dated  15  July  2015  for  the
    resumed hearing.  It is in the same terms  as  the  earlier  affidavit,
    save for the following paragraphs.

         "My child has been suffering from various illnesses  since  he  was
         born.  He has been to hospital on numerous occasions.  He has  been
         on medication for a considerable long time now but not getting well
         permanently.  His doctors have suggested  that  my  child's  health
         conditions can certainly improve in the presence and  attention  of
         both  parents  and  that  he  would  benefit  from  better  medical
         treatment and care in the UK.

         "My husband has various other inevitable commitments  like  looking
         after his other child from his previous marriage, his work etc  and
         he is, therefore, unable and  cannot  leave  the  UK  and  move  to
         Pakistan to live with my child."

27. These two paragraphs also appear in Mr Mohammed's witness statement  of
    14 July 2014, adjusted merely  to  reflect  the  signatory.   Otherwise
    there is no relevant change to his earlier statement.

28. Mr Mohammed adopted his witness statement when he gave further evidence
    at the hearing on 21 July 2015.  He said that his son was weak, that he
    had lost weight and suffered from  vomiting  and  diarrhoea.   He  said
    these illnesses were caused by the fact his son lived in poor  hygienic
    conditions.

29. Mr Mohammed said his son lived in the house  of  his  mother's  parents
    with his mother, his grandparents, his mother's two brothers and one of
    their wives.  He slept  with  his  mother  in  the  same  room  as  his
    grandparents and his mother's 18 year old brother.  His mother's  other
    brother and his wife slept in the other room.  He described that toilet
    facilities were in the yard, where goats were kept.  Drinking water had
    to be brought in from outside as it was not piped to  the  house.   Mrs
    Fiaz's father would get the water on his motorbike.

30. Overall, Mr Mohammed said that the living  conditions  were  below  the
    Pakistani average.  He said his wife's family were  poor  but  admitted
    that they did not suffer significant ill health.  He  thought  his  son
    suffered ill health because of his young age and the lack  of  a  fully
    developed immune system.

31. Mr Mohammed confirmed that he called his wife using the  internet  each
    day.  He admitted that his son was too young to  use  a  mobile  phone.
    His conversations lasted only a couple of minutes each day.

32. Mr Mohammed said his son was  not  thriving  and  that  he  missed  his
    father.  Mr Mohammed admitted that his son had developed  a  good  bond
    with his grandfather but he was the only child in the household, the 18
    year old brother of Mrs Fiaz being  the  next  youngest.   Mr  Mohammed
    suggested that his son did  not  have  a  good  relationship  with  his
    grandmother who was difficult or that he had  good  relationships  with
    the other adults in the household who found him a nuisance.

My conclusions on this evidence

33. I have considered all this evidence and reach the  following  findings.
    I am not satisfied that the evidence supports the  claims  of  Mohammed
    Ahsan's parents that he has some serious  condition  requiring  medical
    treatment in the UK.  I reach  this  conclusion  because  there  is  no
    evidence of a serious illness being diagnosed.  The  evidence  that  he
    has been hospitalised in Pakistan is very weak,  consisting  merely  of
    the accounts given by his parents and in  one  letter  provided  by  Dr
    Jawaid.  The reliability of that letter  is  undermined  by  the  final
    words it contains, "Not valid for any court."

34. The medical evidence is equivocal.  The medicines prescribed appear  to
    be for common childhood illnesses.  The advice given by Dr Jawaid  that
    the child would benefit from living in the UK with both parents seem to
    be reflective of his personal views regarding single parent  households
    rather than based on any diagnosis.  There is no evidence that  he  has
    actually visited the child's home to  assess  for  himself  the  living
    conditions and to that extent his comments can only be  the  recitation
    of what he has been told by Mrs Fiaz and her father.

35. It is unclear how Dr Jawaid could have assessed the  mental  health  of
    Mohammed Ahsan since at the date of decision he was only 33 months old.
      Any  comment  on  the  child's  mental  health  must  be  treated  as
    speculative, particularly in the absence of any evidence  to  show  the
    level to which the child might have bonded with his father.  I bear  in
    mind the fact that Mrs Fiaz has always been the main carer and the fact
    that Mr Mohammed has spent limited time in Pakistan.

36. Dr Jawaid also makes remarks about the ability  of  Mrs  Fiaz  to  care
    properly for her son.  These comments are at odds with  her  affidavits
    and the statements of Mr Mohammed that she  is  their  child's  primary
    carer.  Mr Mohammed has not raised any concern about how she is  caring
    for their son and the concerns raised  by  him  merely  relate  to  the
    living conditions.

37. With regard to the living conditions, I am not satisfied  that  I  have
    been given a truthful account.  It is in the interest of Mrs  Fiaz  and
    Mr Mohammed to portray significant difficulties in Pakistan in order to
    strengthen her article 8 case.  Yet they have provided  no  independent
    assessment of the living conditions.  I accept that it is  more  likely
    than not that the living conditions in Pakistan will be different  from
    those in the UK but this does not automatically lead to the  conclusion
    that they are not acceptable.

38. In reaching my decision as to the unreliability of Mr Mohammed and  Mrs
    Fiaz's evidence, I have regard to the comments they have made in  their
    statements and affidavits.  Despite alleging that  their  son  has  had
    serious illnesses since birth, no reliable evidence of  such  illnesses
    has been provided.  The only evidence, most of  which  post  dates  the
    date of decision merely shows that the illnesses he has had are  common
    one's treatable at home by easily available medication.

39. Having considered the evidence, I am not satisfied that it  shows  that
    Mohammed Ahsan is living in conditions which undermine his  health  and
    wellbeing beyond  what  would  be  acceptable.   I  accept  he  suffers
    childhood illnesses, including sinusitis, diarrhoea and gastroenteritis
    but do not accept that he has any serious illness or condition.

Legal considerations

40. Having made my findings I remind myself that it is for Mrs Fiaz to show
    that it is more likely than not that article 8(1) is engaged.   If  she
    succeeds, then it falls to the Entry Clearance Officer to show that the
    immigration decision is proportionate in  all  the  circumstances.   To
    assess these issues I will follow the classic Razgar[3] approach.

41. Because this appeal is against a decision to  refuse  entry  clearance,
    the relevant date for both facts and law is the date of decision and  I
    can  only  take  into  consideration  later  evidence  insofar  as   it
    appertains to the situation at that date.

The first four Razgar questions

42. Mr Mills accepted that  family  life  existed  between  Mrs  Fiaz,  her
    husband and their son, Mohammed Ahsan, at the date of  decision  simply
    because of the nature of their relationships.   He  disputed,  however,
    whether the refusal of entry clearance was such  interference  to  have
    consequences of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation  of
    article 8 (that is, whether the circumstances  met  the  second  Razgar
    question).

43. Mr Mills's submission was to the  effect  that  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance would have left the family group in the same circumstances in
    which it had existed since  Mohammed  Ahsan's  birth  to  the  date  of
    decision and  there  was  no  evidence  that  those  circumstances  had
    undermined Mohammed Ahsan's wellbeing.  His main carer was  his  mother
    and she had cared for him since his birth.  That care  arrangement  has
    continued since the date of decision.

44. Alternatively, Mr Mills submitted that it had been open to Mr  Mohammed
    to move to Pakistan to live with his wife and son.

45. Mr Mills made no submissions as to whether he accepted there was family
    life between Mr Mohammed and his other son, Ismail Abbass.  In light of
    the agreed facts that I have set out above,  I  am  satisfied  that  Mr
    Mohammed enjoyed family life with his son in the  UK  at  the  date  of
    decision at the same time that he enjoyed family life with his wife and
    other son in Pakistan.

46. I remind myself that when considering the second Razgar question  I  am
    not assessing the  proportionality  of  the  immigration  decision  but
    whether the decision has the potential of causing serious  difficulties
    for family life existing or continuing.

47. I am satisfied that the refusal of entry clearance could result in  the
    family group being split across two countries thousands of miles  apart
    or in Mr Mohammed having to abandon Ismail Abbas in the UK.  As  either
    of these options is a potentially grave consequence, I  find  that  Mrs
    Fiaz has discharged the burden on her with regard to article 8(1).

48. With regard to the third and  fourth  Razgar  questions,  there  is  no
    dispute that it was open to the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  refusal
    entry clearance because the requirements of the immigration rules  were
    not met at the date of decision.  It is  also  recognised  that  it  is
    necessary in a democratic society  to  maintain  effective  immigration
    controls and therefore there is justification for the decision.

49. Therefore, the outcome of this appeal turns on whether the  refusal  of
    entry clearance was proportionate in all the circumstances.   In  order
    to assess the last Razgar question, I first have to have regard to  the
    best interests of the  two  children  who  would  be  affected  by  the
    immigration decision and it is to that issue that I turn.

Assessing the best interests of a child

50. There is a well developed corpus of case law relating to the assessment
    of best interests of children in immigration cases.   I  summarise  the
    key provisions which emerge through the cases listed in Annex 2 to this
    decision and reasons statement.

51. When assessing the proportionality of an immigration decision, although
    the best interests of a child will be the  primary  consideration,  all
    other relevant factors must be balanced including the  public  interest
    in maintaining effective immigration controls. In  other  words,  other
    factors can outweigh what is found to be in a child's best interests.

52. When determining the best interests of a child, any factor which  might
    affect a child's wellbeing must be considered.  There is no  prescribed
    or exhaustive list of  what  factors  are  to  be  considered  but  the
    following factors can be drawn from the various authorities  listed  in
    annex 2.

       . The child's identity (including nationality and ethnicity);

       . the ties the child has to a particular society and culture;

       . the ability of the child to adapt to life in another country;

       . the child's emotional needs;

       . the ability of the child to have direct contact with both parents;

       . the stability and continuity of the child's care arrangements;

       . the child's access to health, education and other services  helping
         their development;

       . provisions relating to the child's security and safeguarding; and

       . the impact any decision is likely to have on the child's future.

53. The various authorities also provide the following guidance.

54. All things being equal, it will be in the best interests of children to
    live with both their parents.  It is  generally  in  the  interests  of
    children  to  have  both  stability  and  continuity  of   social   and
    educational provision and the benefit of growing  up  in  the  cultural
    norms of the society to which they  belong.   In  addition,  a  British
    citizen child should not be deprived of the enjoyment  of  rights  that
    derive from that citizenship.

55. The child should be consulted about their wishes where  their  maturity
    permits.  If that is not possible, then the views of their parents  and
    others close to the child should be considered.

56. Although in some cases a judge may  have  to  explore  whether  further
    information about a child's best interests  needs  to  be  obtained  or
    inquiry to be made, the judge primarily acts on the evidence in a case.
     Where that evidence gives no hint of a suggestion that the welfare  of
    the child is threatened by the immigration  decision  in  question,  or
    that the child's best interests are undermined  thereby,  there  is  no
    basis for any further judicial exploration on the matter.

57. Assessing what is actually in  the  best  interests  of  a  child  will
    usually require some compromise because it will not be possible to give
    the same weight or prominence to  all  the  factors  that  have  to  be
    considered.  In addition, there may be  situations  where  an  external
    factor means it is not possible to create a  situation  where  a  child
    lives in  circumstances  that  are  assessed  as  securing  their  best
    interests and an alternative has to be accepted, which  should  be  the
    next best option.

58. In immigration cases, the external factors are usually  the  result  of
    the proposed expulsion of a parent or both parents from the UK  or  the
    refusal to admit a parent or both parents from outside the UK.  In such
    situations there must be cogent evidence and/or reasons to show why the
    best  interests  of  the  child  outweigh  the  measures   to   control
    immigration.

59. In general, the assessment of whether the best  interests  of  a  child
    outweighs the need to maintain effective immigration  controls  differs
    between those cases where the child is in the UK and  those  where  the
    child is outside the UK.  In cases involving expulsion, the focus  will
    be on the reasonableness of expecting the child to leave  the  UK.   In
    cases involving entry clearance, an appeal is only to be allowed  where
    compelling circumstances exist (which are not  sufficiently  recognised
    under the Immigration Rules) to require the grant of such permission.

60. Because of the tension between the various factors, the best  interests
    of the child are to be determined  by  reference  to  the  child  alone
    without reference to  the  immigration  history  or  status  of  either
    parent.

61. Having identified the relevant guidance, I move on to decide  the  best
    interests of the children affected by the decision to refuse  Mrs  Fiaz
    entry clearance.

The best interests of Mohammed Ahsan

62. In order to assess Mohammed Ahsan's best interests, it is necessary  to
    make findings about his circumstances as at the date of  decision.   To
    do so I must assess the evidence provided in this appeal.

63. I mention for clarity that in this appeal I have  found  no  reason  to
    direct the parties to obtain further evidence  about  Mohammed  Ahsan's
    best interests.  The evidence submitted gives no hint of  a  suggestion
    that the welfare of the child is threatened by the immigration decision
    in question, or that the child's best interests are undermined thereby,
    and therefore I find  there  is  no  basis  for  any  further  judicial
    exploration on the matter

64. As can be seen from the directions I issued to the parties at  the  end
    of my earlier decision (see Annex 1), it was for them  to  provide  any
    evidence on which they sought to rely.  At the resumed hearing  neither
    party sought additional time.

65. Keeping in mind the summary of the case law I have  set  out  above,  I
    take into consideration how the evidence relates to the factors I  must
    consider.

Mohammed Ahsan's identity

66. Mohammed Ahsan is a dual national, being citizens of both  the  UK  and
    Pakistan.  Both nationalities are part of his identity.  Up to the date
    of decision his Pakistani nationality is the only  one  that  has  been
    given effect but that it not by choice but because  his  mother  cannot
    move to the UK without entry clearance.

67. There is no direct evidence that Mohammed Ahsan's Pakistani nationality
    should be viewed as  being  of  secondary  importance  to  his  British
    citizenship but that is the opinion of his parents.  This opinion stems
    from the belief that Mohammed Ahsan will have a better future in the UK
    because of the educational, health and other resources  that  would  be
    available to him here to assist his development.

68. When assessing the best interests of a child it is not enough  to  rely
    on generalities because it is necessary to assess what might assess the
    specific child's wellbeing and I will examine  the  access  to  health,
    education and other resources in detail below.

Ties Mohammed Ahsan has to a particular society and culture

69. Mohammed Ahsan was too young at the date of decision to have  developed
    any clear ties of his own to the society and culture of Pakistan.   His
    young age at that date means that his ties were merely to the household
    in which he lived and primarily to his mother who was his  main  carer.
    There is no evidence that he had developed any particular ties to other
    family members at the date of decision although there is some  evidence
    that since the date of decision he has developed  a  good  relationship
    with his grandfather.  It  is  not  possible  to  assess  whether  that
    relationship existed at the date of decision.

70. It is evident that Mohammed Ahsan would not  have  developed  any  ties
    with the society and culture of the UK at the date of decision since he
    had not experienced either.

The ability of the Mohammed Ahsan to adapt to life in another country

71. It is reasonable to expect that at the date of decision Mohammed  Ahsan
    would be able to adapt to life in a different country  because  of  his
    age.  A child of his age has to  adapt  to  life  in  general  and  the
    country in which he is living is not as significant a factor as it will
    be when a child is older and is developing their own relationships  and
    interests.

72. Given his young age at the date of decision, Mohammed Ahsan  would  not
    be able to adapt to life in the UK without help  from  his  parents  or
    others.

Mohammed Ahsan's emotional needs

73. Although the parents and  one  medical  practitioner  have  alluded  to
    Mohammed Ahsan having  some  mental  health  /  emotional  difficulties
    caused by his separation from his father, I have rejected these because
    of the lack of evidence.

74. There is evidence that Mohammed Ahsan's emotional needs are met through
    his mother.  I discuss that evidence below when  considering  his  care
    arrangements.

The ability to have direct contact with both parents

75. There is no evidence to suggest that the usual maxim did not apply  and
    that at the date of decision it was in Mohammed Ahsan's best  interests
    to have direct contact with both his parents.  His  young  age  at  the
    date of decision means that I cannot accept that direct  contact  could
    reasonably include modern means of communication.

The stability and continuity of care arrangements

76. It is accepted that Mrs Fiaz has been the main carer for Mohammed Ahsan
    since birth.  They have lived in the home owned by Mrs  Fiaz's  parents
    and they live as part of a joint  household.   The  evidence  indicates
    that this is preferable to Mrs Fiaz living alone  with  Mohammed  Ahsan
    because it is not culturally acceptable for a woman  with  a  child  to
    live on her own in Pakistan. There is no evidence  that  suggests  that
    the current living arrangements  were  under  threat  at  the  date  of
    decision or that there was any basis for  thinking  that  those  living
    arrangements were not stable.

77. In reaching this finding, I have considered the evidence that  Mohammed
    Ahsan's parents have decided that whilst they are prevented from living
    together in the UK it is in his best interests to remain in the care of
    Mrs Fiaz, his mother.  The evidence clearly indicates that they reached
    this conclusion despite knowing that their son has a right to  live  in
    the UK and that he could do so  even  without  his  mother  being  here
    (although that would take some adjustment for Mr Mohammed).  This theme
    runs through the evidence but is perhaps clearest in paragraph 7 of  Mr
    Mohammed's witness statement of 3 November 2014 where he said.

         "It would not be possible for my  son  in  Pakistan  to  come  over
         without his mother because of the emotional attachment he has  with
         the mother..."

Mohammed Ahsan's access to health,  education  and  other  services  helping
their development

78. It is common knowledge that there is a well developed education  system
    in Pakistan and there is no evidence or reason to suggest that Mohammed
    Ahsan would not be able to access it.  There is nothing to confirm  the
    parents' view that their son would have  a  better  future  in  the  UK
    because of having access to a better education system.   That  is  mere
    speculation.

79. I have accepted that the evidence shows it is more likely than not that
    Mohammed Ahsan has encountered  a  range  of  childhood  illnesses  but
    nothing more.  The evidence also  shows  he  has  received  appropriate
    treatment in Pakistan for such illnesses. His medical  records  do  not
    show that there are any health issues that establish it would have been
    in his best interests to live  in  the  UK  to  secure  better  medical
    treatment for a condition that existed at the date of decision.

80. Mohammed Ahsan's parents have not identified any other services in  the
    UK from which her son might benefit should he live here instead  of  in
    Pakistan.  Although they have expressed their view that it was in their
    son's best interest to live in the UK they have not provided any cogent
    evidence to show that to be the case and simply rely on speculation and
    generalisations.

Provisions relating to security and safeguarding

81. Although there have been some allegations by the  Dr  Jawaid  that  Mrs
    Fiaz has not provided the best care for her son, I have rejected  those
    allegations as being unfounded.

Other factors

82. In addition to these points, I add that there is no  evidence  to  show
    that Mohammed Ahsan would have a better life in the UK.  I  have  found
    that there is no evidence to confirm  that  at  the  date  of  decision
    Mohammed Ahsan's living conditions were below average  in  Pakistan  or
    that they were unsuitable.

83. Although it is general knowledge that the average standard of living is
    better in the UK than in Pakistan and that a British citizen  child  in
    the UK will have free access to education and health care  irrespective
    of his parents' income and resources, for the reasons I have given  the
    evidence does not show that Mohammed Ahsan wellbeing would be  improved
    by moving from Pakistan to the UK.

84. Although the average position might be better,  no  evidence  has  been
    provided to indicate that Mohammed Ahsan himself would have been  in  a
    better position in the UK than in Pakistan  at  the  date  of  decision
    bearing in mind that his father's income and resources were well  below
    the average income of a family in the UK.

The future impact any decision is likely to have on the child

85. Where a couple cannot live together because of immigration control they
    have to decide what is in the best interest of their  child.   This  is
    never an easy decision.  Mohammed  Ahsan's  parents  believe  that  the
    decision refusing entry clearance to Mrs Fiaz means  that  they  cannot
    live together as a family unit.  The couple have  decided  that  it  is
    more important from Mohammed Ahsan's wellbeing to live with his  mother
    even though this means he will not get to know his  father  or  benefit
    from his rights and  entitlements  as  a  British  citizen.   It  is  a
    compromise forced upon them and which affects Mohammed Ahsan's future.

My conclusions as to the best interests of Mohammed Ahsan

86. Having examined the evidence and arguments presented,  I  am  satisfied
    that at the date of decision it would have been in the  best  interests
    of Mohammed Ahsan to live with both parents and to be able to enjoy his
    rights and entitlements as both a Pakistani and British citizen.  I say
    that it was in his best interests to live with both parents because his
    young age would prevent him  developing  any  meaningful  relationships
    other than through close proximity with his parents.

87. I also find that at the date  of  decision  that  it  was  in  Mohammed
    Ahsan's best interests for his day to day care to be  provided  by  his
    mother to maintain stability and continuity.  I do not find  that  such
    care needed to be provided in  Pakistan  because  of  Mohammed  Ahsan's
    young age and the fact it is reasonable to expect him  to  be  able  to
    adapt.

88. I do not find that the evidence shows that  at  the  date  of  decision
    Mohammed Ahsan  had  been  denied  the  enjoyment  of  any  rights  and
    entitlements that derived from his British citizenship.  I add that the
    evidence does not show that at the date of decision it was in his  best
    interests to be able to access medical and  educational  facilities  in
    the UK in the future.  This was mere speculation by his parents.

Possible living arrangements - focus on Mohammed Ahsan

89. In light of my findings, there are limited options for arranging living
    arrangements that respect Mohammed Ahsan's best interests.

90. My findings mean that the arrangements at the date of decision were not
    in Mohammed Ahsan's best interest because he was living apart from  his
    father.  The option that was suggested that he might have moved to  the
    UK without his mother was also not in his best interests  as  it  would
    have separated him from his mother.  Not only would that have  resulted
    in Mohammed Ahsan not living with both parents, it had  the  additional
    disadvantage to his best interests in that it would have  disrupted the
    care she had always provided.

91. There were, of course, two options of bringing the family together as a
    unit, which I have found to be  in  Mohammed  Ahsan's  best  interests.
    Mohammed's Ahsan's parents could have either lived in  Pakistan  or  in
    the UK.

92. Logic suggests that, on the facts I have found, Mohammed  Ahsan's  best
    interests would be best met by his father moving  to  Pakistan  because
    this would require the least disruption for Mohammed Ahsan.  I  mention
    that living with his father has the additional possibility of assisting
    him in understanding his British  citizenship.     On  the  facts,  the
    second best option in respect of Mohammed Ahsan's best interests is  to
    live in the UK with both parents.

93. But these options do not take into consideration the best interests  of
    the other child who is affected by the immigration decision and I  move
    on to consider the best interests of Mr Mohammed's other  son,   Ismail
    Abbass.

The best interests of Ismail Abbass

94. In order to assess Ismail Abbass's best interests, it is  necessary  to
    make findings about his circumstances as at the date of  decision.   To
    do so I must assess the evidence provided in this appeal.  This is very
    limited since neither party focused on it.

95. I mention for clarity that in this appeal I have  found  no  reason  to
    direct the parties to obtain further  evidence  about  Ismail  Abbass's
    best interests.  The evidence submitted gives no hint of  a  suggestion
    that the welfare of the child is threatened by the immigration decision
    in question, or that the child's best interests are undermined thereby,
    and therefore I find  there  is  no  basis  for  any  further  judicial
    exploration on the matter

96. As can be seen from the directions I issued to the parties at  the  end
    of my earlier decision (see Annex 1), it was for them  to  provide  any
    evidence on which they sought to rely.  At the resumed hearing  neither
    party sought additional time.

97. Keeping in mind the summary of the case law I have  set  out  above,  I
    take into consideration the following  factors  that  derive  from  the
    evidence.

Ismail Abbass's identity

98. The evidence shows that Ismail Abbass is a British citizen and that  he
    has lived all his life in the UK.  There is no evidence that he has any
    right to live in any other country.

Ties Ismail Abbass has to a particular society and culture

99. The fact that at the date of decisions Ismail Abbass was a 16 year  old
    child who had grown up in the UK can only  mean  that  he  is  strongly
    connected to British society and culture.

The ability of the Ismail Abbass to adapt to life in another country

100. Mr Mohammed said his son was not fluent in any  language  of  Pakistan.
    This will pose an additional difficulty for him  adapting  to  life  in
    Pakistan in addition to the fact that he is integrated into society  in
    the UK.

Ismail Abbass's emotional needs

101. There is no evidence as  to  his  emotional  needs.   At  the  date  of
    decision he was 16 and therefore would not be as emotionally reliant on
    his father as he would be if he were younger..

The ability to have direct contact with both parents

102. Mr Mohammed's evidence is that  after  separating  from  Ismail  Abbass
    mother, Ismail came to live with him as he did not get along  with  his
    sister.  Although it is not entirely clear to me when this occurred, it
    clearly happened prior to the date of decision since there is  evidence
    of tax credits being paid before that date.  There is  no  evidence  to
    indicate what contact there is between Ismail Abbass and his mother.

The stability and continuity of care arrangements;

103. This is a situation where as a result of the  breakdown  of  a  marital
    relationship the parents have had to decide where  the  children  would
    live.  It is also evident that because of his age Ismail  Abbass  would
    have been consulted and his wishes taken into consideration.  As  such,
    this is a situation where his primary parental relationship is with his
    father.

Ismail Abbass's access to  health,  education  and  other  services  helping
their development

104. There is no evidence as  to  what  access  Ismail  Abbass  has  had  to
    health, education and other services.  However, given his age  and  his
    nationality, it is more likely than  not  that  he  was  continuing  in
    education at the date of decision.

Provisions relating to security and safeguarding

105. There is no evidence relating to security and safeguarding at the  date
    of decision.    Mr Mohammed mentioned that there had been some fighting
    between Ismail Abbass  and  his  sister,  which  had  resulted  in  the
    decision that Ismail should continue to live  with  his  father  rather
    than his mother.  However, this appeared to be post-decision.

106. Mr Mohammed also gave evidence that Ismail Abbass had developed a  good
    relationship with Mohamed Ahsan  when  they  stayed  together  for  two
    months.  Ismail Abbass liked having a younger brother.

Other factors

107. No other factors have been identified.

The future impact any decision is likely to have on the child

108. If Mr Mohammed were to move to Pakistan to live with his wife  and  son
    there, then this would cause Ismail Abbass to either have to leave  the
    UK with him or to stay in the UK on his own.

My conclusions as to the best interests of Ismail Abbass

109. In light of the above, I am satisfied that at the date of  decision  it
    was in the best interests of Ismail Abbass to remain  living  with  his
    father in the UK.  This would ensure his best interests in relation  to
    his identity are respected as well  as  the  maintenance  of  his  care
    arrangements at the date of decision.

110. To have expected Ismail Abbass to leave the UK to live with his  father
    in Pakistan would have been to deny him enjoyment  of  his  rights  and
    entitlements as a British citizen.

Possible living arrangements - focus on Mohammed Ahsan and Ismail Abbass

111. In light of my findings it is necessary for me to review  the  possible
    living arrangements  with  a  view  to  identifying  what  options  are
    available to respect the best interests of both children.

112. It is clear that the  best  interests  of  Ismail  Abbass  require  his
    father to live with him in the UK because there is no  other  available
    option.  This means that the best interests of  both  children  can  be
    respected only if Mohammed Ahsan and his mother move to the UK to  live
    with Mr Mohammed and Ismail Abbass.  Such an arrangement would  require
    both children to adapt  but  there  is  evidence  that  this  would  be
    achievable without difficulty.

113. Having assessed the best interests  of  both  children  I  move  on  to
    consider  whether  the  decision   to   refuse   entry   clearance   is
    proportionate in all the circumstances.

Article 8 proportionality assessment

114. There is no argument that the immigration decision has  been  made  for
    the legitimate purpose of maintaining effective  immigration  controls.
    Judge  Lagunju  found  that  Mrs  Fiaz  could  not  succeed  under  the
    immigration rules because the financial requirements were not met.  The
    Court of Appeal has identified in a number of cases that  the  need  to
    protect the economic wellbeing of  the  UK  would  often  outweigh  the
    personal interests of married couples choosing  where  they  wanted  to
    live together.[4]

115. However, the Court  of  Appeal  has  indicted  that  the  usual  public
    interest in  maintaining  effective  immigration  controls  that  might
    justify keeping adult family  members  apart  must  be  tempered  where
    children  are  involved.[5]   Of  greatest  significance  in  assessing
    proportionality in an entry  clearance  case  will  be  whether  it  is
    possible for existing family life to continue overseas.  If  not,  then
    there is likely to be a compelling factor  that  outweighs  the  public
    interest.

116. I draw from the assessment of best interests that I have made that  the
    family life that there could  be  no  reasonable  expectation  for  the
    family life that exists between Mr Mohammed and Ismail Abbass  to  have
    continued if Mr Mohammed were to move to Pakistan.  This means  I  find
    it was not proportionate to expect Mr Mohammed to move to Pakistan even
    though this might have been in the best interest of his other son.

117. I also draw on my assessment of  the  best  interest  of  the  children
    involved in this case and conclude that it  was  not  proportionate  to
    expect Mohammed Ahsan to continue living with only one parent. This was
    contrary to his best interests.  The fact his father did not live  with
    him was not a matter of choice but because of his father's other family
    commitments which he could not abandon.

118. On the facts of this case, the public interest in respecting  the  best
    interests of a British citizen child was to allow that child to come to
    the UK with his mother even though she would not usually have qualified
    for entry clearance.  To do otherwise would have been to  prevent  this
    family living together as it was impossible on the facts presented  for
    all the members to live together in Pakistan.  Thus the public interest
    in maintaining effective immigration control was outweighed.





Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju contains an error  of  law
and is set aside.  To this extent the appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  of  the
Entry Clearance Officer, Islamabad is allowed.

I remake the decision and allow the appeal of Mrs  Fiaz  against  the  Entry
Clearance  Officer's  decision  of  2  September  2014  refusing  her  entry
clearance.



                               Signed   Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
ANNEX 1
DECISION ON ERROR ON POINT OF LAW OF 13 MAY 2015

 1. At the end of the hearing that took place on 28 April 2015 I  announced
    that I would allow the ECO's appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  because  I
    found that there was a material error on a point of law in the decision
    and reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lagunju  that  was
    promulgated on 26 January 2015.  I reserved  my  reasons  which  I  now
    give.

 2. By way of background, it is sufficient to record that Judge Lagunju was
    seized initially with determining whether Ms Fiaz met the  requirements
    of the immigration rules as a partner.  Judge Lagunju found, with  good
    reason, that Ms Fiaz could not be regarded as being lawfully married to
    the sponsor and that in any event she had not shown that the  financial
    requirements of appendix FM were  met.   Judge  Lagunju  reached  these
    conclusions based on the evidence presented, bearing in mind  that  she
    had to consider the situation at the date of  decision.   There  is  no
    challenge to these findings.  They are preseerved as  they  contain  no
    obvious legal error and there has been no cross appeal.

 3. These were not the only issues Judge Lagunju had to determine.  Ms Fiaz
    also relied on arguments that refusing her entry clearance violated her
    family life rights under article 8 of the human rights  convention  and
    that the refusal was also contrary to EU law.  These issues arose  from
    the fact that Ms Fiaz was the primary  carer  of  her  son,  a  British
    citizen, who lived with her in Pakistan.

 4. In relation to the EU law issues, Judge Lagunju found against Ms  Fiaz.
    She considered the case of MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside EU)
    Iran [2013] UKUT 380 (IAC) but  found  that  the  child  would  not  be
    deprived of his citizenship rights as he could live in the UK with  his
    father.  Again, there is no challenge to these findings and there is no
    cross appeal.  Therefore, these conclusions are also preserved.

 5. It is the article 8 decision that the ECO challenges.  In paragraph  24
    of her decision and reasons statement, Judge Lagunju said:

         "24. Accordingly I accept that [Ms Fiaz] shares  family  life  with
         her partner and child, thus the decision does interfere with family
         life as it would cause the applicant and her child to be separated.
          I find such interference  is  of  sufficient  severity  to  engage
         article 8."

    In subsequent paragraphs, Judge Lagunju considered  the  impact  on  Ms
    Fiaz, her partner and their child on the basis  that  the  child  would
    move to the UK to exercise his citizenship rights  thereby  leaving  Ms
    Fiaz on her own in Pakistan.  In other words, it is  clear  that  Judge
    Lagunju considered the article 8 issues on a hypothetical basis and not
    on the situation as it was at the date of decision.

 6. This approach has no basis in law.  The House of Lords confirmed in  AS
    (Somalia) & Anor v SSHD [2009] UKHL 32 that the  relevant  date  in  an
    appeal against refusal of entry clearance remained the date of decision
    even in relation to grounds of appeal relating to family  life  rights.
    As such, Judge Lagunju's approach is legally flawed and her conclusions
    regarding article 8 cannot stand.

 7. Following this decision, I discussed with  the  parties  how  the  case
    should be determined.  I decided that it  should  be  retained  in  the
    Upper Tribunal because  of  the  fixed  findings  in  relation  to  the
    immigration rules and EU law.  However, in relation  to  article  8,  I
    recognised the  fact  that  it  would  be  essential  to  consider  the
    wellbeing of the child and agreed to  give  Ms  Fiaz  time  to  present
    evidence on that issue.  There was some indication in the  papers  that
    there were some medical issues relating to the child and it would  seem
    necessary to have those issues ventilated and clarified before reaching
    a conclusion.  I reminded Mr Ahmed - although no reminder was  required
    -  that  the  Tribunal  would  only  be  able  to   consider   evidence
    appertaining to the date of decision.

 8. In choosing this path, I indicated to the parties that I would have  to
    have regard to the Court of Appeal's judgment in SS (Congo) and  others
    v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 387 because of what it says regarding the impact
    the  best  interests  of  a  child   overseas   might   have   on   the
    proportionality assessment.  I also reminded the parties that  I  would
    have to have regard to  the  fact  that  the  child  would  be  a  dual
    national, and currently would be regarded as exercising his entitlement
    to live in Pakistan.

Decision

The ECO's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed because the  decision  and
reasons statement of Judge Lagunju contains an error on a point of  law  and
must be set aside.

Directions

 1. The  resumed  hearing  will  be  before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McCarthy.

 2. The issues are limited to consideration of the article 8 rights  of  Ms
    Fiaz.

 3. Any further evidence must be filed and served at least 14 calendar days
    before the next hearing.
ANNEX 2

Cases considered when summarising the  law  dealing  with  the  relationship
between immigration control and the best interests of a child

Ruiz Zambrano (European citizenship) [2010] EUECJ C-34/09

ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4
Zoumbas v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74

Singh v ECO New Delhi [2004] EWCA Civ 1075
Lee v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 348
AJ (India) and Others v SSHD [2011] EWCA Civ 1191
Muse & Ors v Entry Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10
SS Nigeria v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 550
EV (Philippines) and Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 874
SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387

LD (Article 8 - best interests of child) Zimbabwe [2010] UKUT 278 (IAC)
Omotunde (best interests - Zambrano applied - Razgar) Nigeria [2011] UKUT
247 (IAC)
E-A (Article 8 - best interest of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 315 (IAC)
MK (best interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 475 (IAC)
T (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483(IAC)
Sanade and others (British children - Zambrano - Dereci) [2012] UKUT 48
(IAC)
SC (Article 8 - in accordance with the law) Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 56 (IAC)
Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC)
Campbell (exclusion; Zambrano) Jamaica [2013] UKUT 147 (IAC)
Azimi-Moayed and others (decisions affecting children; onward appeals)
[2013] UKUT 197(IAC)
MA and SM (Zambrano; EU children outside the EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 00380
(IAC)
JO and Others (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC)
MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC)

-----------------------
[1] See STARRED Baig v ECO, Islamabad (Pakistan) [2002] UKIAT 04229, [2003]
INLR 117
[2] See MM & Ors, R (On the Application of) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985,
[2014] Imm AR 1207
[3] See para 17 of Razgar, R (on the Application of) v. SSHD [2004] UKHL
27, [2004] Imm AR 381
[4] Id. MM and others
[5] See paragraph 39 of SSHD v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387

