
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00157/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DHAKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MONOwara begum
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Hassan, Kalam Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Respondent, who was born on 20 November  1973,  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh. She met Abdul Jabbar, who  is  a  British  citizen,  on  15
    August 1990.  He had been born on 26 January 1952  and  he  is  now  in
    receipt of DLA because of a number of medical conditions from which  he
    suffers.

2.   On 2 October 2007 the Respondent was refused  entry  clearance  because
    her husband's only income was welfare benefits. On 26 August  2013  she
    applied again for entry clearance. Her application was  refused  on  19
    November 2013 again because it was said her husband was not in  receipt
    of benefits that could attract consideration under paragraph E-ECP.3.3.
     of Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.

4.   She appealed and on 15 July  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McMahon
    allowed her appeal. In particular, he found that  the  evidence  before
    him established that   the  Respondent's  husband  was  in  receipt  of
    Disability Living Allowance or its equivalent and that,  therefore,  he
    could meet the requirements under the Immigration Rules.

5.   On 21 July 2015 the Appellant appealed against this decision.  She  did
    not dispute that the evidence had shown  that the Respondent's  husband
    was in receipt of the necessary disability benefit. But  she  submitted
    that the Judge had failed to consider the  second  part  of  the  Rule,
    which was  E-ECP3.3.(b),  which  required  the  Respondent  to  provide
    evidence that her partner was able to maintain and accommodate  himself
    and her and any dependants adequately in the  UK  without  recourse  to
    public funds.

6.   There was no issue between the parties as to her partner's  ability  to
    accommodate her but the Judge was required to  consider  her  partner's
    ability to maintain her without recourse to (additional) public  funds.
    But all he said in paragraph 13 of his decision was:  "I  am  satisfied
    that as at the date of application and the date of refusal the  sponsor
    was in fact in receipt of disability living allowance"  and  "thus  the
    financial requirements of Appendix FM  were met".

7.   As a consequence, I find that he  made  a  material  error  of  law  in
    failing  to  address  the  requirements  contained  in  E-ECP3.3(b)  of
    Appendix FM.

8.   I note that there was evidence in the  Respondent's  sponsor's  witness
    statement in the  and the documents attached  to  it  that  he  was  in
    receipt of sufficient money to maintain her, which appears to have been
    overlooked by First-tier Tribunal Judge McMahon.

Notice of Decision

9.   I allow the Appellant's appeal but maintain the findings of  fact  made
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge McMahon.

10.  I remit the case to First-tier Tribunal Judge McMahon in order for  him
    to consider whether the requirements of E-ECP3.3.(b) of Appendix FM are
    also met on the evidence referred to in paragraph 8 above.


Signed   Dated: 2 February 2016

Nadine Finch
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

