
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00618/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 December 2015                  |On 22 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                              Mrs Forida Islam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Noor, Black Stones Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 29 April  1992.   She
    appealed against a  decision  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  2
    December 2013 refusing to grant her a certificate of entitlement to the
    right of abode in the UK as the daughter of Monohor  Ali,  who  is  her
    father and  Sponsor.   The  reason  for  that  decision  was  that  the
    Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant had been born after her
    father was granted British citizenship.  The Respondent's decision  was
    upheld by the ECM on 16 January 2015.

 2. There have been two previous applications made by the  Appellant.   The
    first of those applications was rejected on the basis that it  was  not
    accepted that the Appellant was the daughter of Monohor Ali and  whilst
    the Appellant sought to appeal against that decision she then  withdrew
    that appeal and made a second application.   In  a  decision  dated  16
    October 2011, the Respondent accepted, on the basis  of  DNA  evidence,
    that the relationship was established but refused  the  application  on
    the basis of a lack of evidence. An appeal was heard and  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy, in  a  decision  promulgated  on  12
    April 2012.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of Judge Herlihy and in a decision of the Upper Tribunal dated
    20 September 2012 the Upper Tribunal upheld Judge  Herlihy's  decision.
    They noted at [16]:

         "The sole document pointing to the Appellant having used  her  date
         of birth before it was registered is the letter from Lalabazar Alim
         Madrasah.  The judge did not attach much  weight  to  that  as  the
         author of the letter did not attach a copy of the relevant register
         he appears to have consulted.   This  is  a  significant  omission.
         Without it the letter is simply a bare assertion and little  weight
         can be attached to it."

 4. The Appellant then made a third application, which is  the  subject  of
    the current appeal.  As part of the documentation that was submitted to
    the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  the  Appellant  submitted  firstly,  an
    affidavit from the midwife, Dilara Begum, who  had  delivered  her  and
    also further documentation from the madrasa  where  the  Appellant  was
    studying  which  include  a  certificate   that   the   Appellant   had
    participated in the annual exam of class 8 held in 2005; evidence  that
    she had undertaken a number of examinations and copies  of  the  school
    admission registers for a number of years which  were  submitted  along
    with translations.

 5. At the hearing before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clayton  the  judge
    declined to consider the new evidence.  She stated at [18]:

         "The Appellant did adduce  further  evidence  in  the  form  of  an
         extract from the school register and an affidavit from the midwife,
         but applying Devaseelan principles, there is no  reason  why  these
         should not have been before Judge Herlihy and  the  Upper  Tribunal
         for their consideration."

    And at [19]: "Even if I were to admit the new documents, which  I  have
    not done, I would find them to be entirely  self-serving  and  to  have
    been produced solely to bolster a weak claim."

 6. The judge further found that the Appellant had not persuaded her  on  a
    balance of probabilities that she was  entitled  to  a  certificate  of
    entitlement to the right of abode and she dismissed the appeal.

 7. Permission to appeal was sought on a number of bases but in  particular
    that the judge had erred in finding that there was no  reason  why  the
    Appellant had previously failed to adduce evidence before Judge Herlihy
    and the Upper Tribunal in  that it was only following the decisions  of
    Judge Herlihy and the Upper Tribunal, who drew attention  to  the  fact
    that they could not attach weight to the letter from the school  absent
    a copy of the register, that a copy  of  the  register  had  duly  been
    produced, and it was submitted that this was a good reason  bearing  in
    mind Devaseelan, to admit and consider that new evidence.

 8. A challenge was also made to the judge's decision at [19] that even  if
    she had admitted the documents she would find them to be entirely self-
    serving and to have been produced solely to bolster a weak claim.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Finch  on  7
    September 2015 on the basis  that  in  Devaseelan  the  Upper  Tribunal
    recognised that its guidance did not cover every possibility and it was
    open to the second judge to  exercise  discretion  but  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had failed to consider exercising her discretion on  the
    particular facts of this case and had further erred in categorising the
    new evidence as self-serving when such evidence was  from  an  official
    and objective source  and  not  evidence  generated  by  the  Appellant
    herself.

Hearing

10. I heard submissions at the hearing before me from Mr Noor on behalf  of
    the Appellant and from Ms Willocks-Briscoe on behalf of  the  Secretary
    of State.  I also had the opportunity to examine two  of  the  original
    documents, namely the affidavit from the  Appellant's  midwife,  Dilara
    Begum [56]-[57], who delivered her as a baby, and also the letters from
    the Appellant's school, copies of which appear at pages  28-30  of  the
    Appellant's bundle.

11. I find that First-tier Tribunal Judge Clayton did err materially in law
    for the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal.  This was  the  third
    application the Appellant had made.  Each  time  further  evidence  had
    been submitted, essentially in response to  the  reasons  provided  for
    refusing the previous application.

12. The evidence overall showed firstly, that the Appellant is the daughter
    of a British citizen and that secondly, her date of birth is  29  April
    1992.  In essence the reason why the documentation supporting her  date
    of birth is material is because her birth was not registered  for  some
    seventeen years after it had taken  place  due  to  the  fact  that  by
    operation of  Bangladeshi  law  it  was  not  previously  necessary  to
    register the birth.  This was an issue dealt with during  the  previous
    proceedings.

13. The judge, I find, erred in failing to admit the new  documentation  on
    the basis that Devaseelan applied when it is clear that Devaseelan does
    provide for discretion and in the particular circumstances of this case
    I find that discretion should have  been  exercised  at  least  to  the
    extent of consideration of the documentation concerned.

14. I further find that Judge Clayton erred in finding that even if she had
    admitted the documents she would have found them to be  entirely  self-
    serving and to have produced solely to bolster a weak claim when, as Ms
    Finch noted in her grant of permission, the documents in  question,  in
    particular those from the school, are from an  official  source.   They
    contain a translator's signature and they have also been stamped  by  a
    notary public, Belal Ahmed, as has the letter from  Dilara  Begum,  the
    midwife.  There is nothing, I find, to suggest that these documents are
    self-serving per se  given  the  source  or  sources  from  which  they
    emanate.

15. I indicated my decision in court and both parties  agreed  that  I  can
    remake the decision, so I now proceed to do  so.   The  only  issue  in
    respect of the appeal was the Appellant's date  of  birth  and  whether
    this postdated the time  when  her  father  had  been  granted  British
    nationality.  That was on 26 February 1992 [page 50 of the  Appellant's
    bundle refers].  It is clear from the  evidence  that  the  Appellant's
    date of birth was 29 April 1992 and thus her date  of  birth  postdates
    the date on which her father was naturalised.

16. As I indicated earlier, I had the opportunity of seeing  the  originals
    in respect of two of the key  new  documents  and  I  find  that  those
    documents confirm the Appellant's date of  birth  and  when  considered
    cumulatively along with the evidence already submitted,  in  particular
    her birth registration certificate and the  previous  letter  from  the
    school, I find that the Appellant's date of birth is  indeed  29  April
    1992 and therefore she is entitled to a certificate of  entitlement  to
    the right of abode in the UK as the daughter of a  naturalised  British
    citizen.

Notice of Decision

For those reasons I allow her appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 21 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

