
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00834/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 March 2014                              |On 17 September 2014         |
|Determination given immediately following     |                             |
|hearing                                       |                             |


                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE PARKER
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                MONAZA SADAF

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Qureshi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal brought by Mr Monaza Sadaf against the  determination
    of Judge Lucas of the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant, a citizen of
    Pakistan, born on 17 March 1990, appealed against the decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer, Islamabad made on 19 November 2012  to  refuse
    to grant her entry clearance for settlement under paragraph 281  of  HC
    395.  At the hearing before Judge Lucas the appellant  was  represented
    by Mr Qureshi of Counsel and he appeared on the hearing of this appeal.
     At that hearing the respondent was represented by Mr Carol of  Counsel
    but today Mr Deller has appeared on behalf of the  respondent  to  this
    appeal.

2.   The decision letter said that there was no  evidence  of  a  subsisting
    relationship between 2009 and 2012 and that was the  issue  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The First-tier Tribunal heard evidence  from  the
    sponsor and the sponsor  had  provided  a  witness  statement  dated  9
    December 2013.  In that witness statement he said that he  had  married
    the appellant on 19 November 2009, the appellant was his  cousin,  that
    he had gone to Pakistan in order to marry, that he had stayed there for
    about six weeks and he was in regular contact with his wife and he went
    every year to meet his wife and he had recently visited his  wife  from
    10 October 2013 to 29 November 2013. The sponsor,  as  we  have  noted,
    gave oral evidence. Mr Qureshi explained  that  he  believed  that  the
    sponsor was rather nervous and, to a certain extent, confused  when  he
    gave evidence and possibly when in particular he was cross-examined  by
    Mr Carol for the respondent.

3.   The question was raised as the   hearing  whether  an  interpreter  was
    appropriate  in  those   circumstances.    Mr   Qureshi   has   frankly
    acknowledged today that he did not press on Judge Lucas  the  necessity
    for an interpreter.  It appears that Mr Qureshi took the view that  the
    sponsor was able from a linguistic point  of  view  to  understand  the
    questions that were being put and that the use of an interpreter  would
    not have sufficiently improved  his  understanding  from  a  linguistic
    point of view of the questions, nor his ability to answer, also from  a
    linguistic point of view.  Of course, as we observed during the hearing
    of this appeal, Mr Qureshi was best placed  to  make  that  assessment,
    taking the view that the ability to understand  and  answer  would  not
    have been materially improved by the introduction  of  an  interpreter.
    In other  words,  the  difficulty  as  was  perceived  in  the  sponsor
    answering the questions  derived  from  the  intrinsic  nature  of  the
    questions he was being asked and from the trouble that he was having in
    giving convincing answers to those questions.

4.   The judge having heard  the  evidence  and  taken  other  matters  into
    account, reached the  conclusion  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  a
    subsisting relationship over the period from the marriage in 2009 until
    the date of the application and he also noted  in  the  same  paragraph
    that the burden of proof was on the appellant.

5.   Permission to appeal the First-tier Tribunal determination was  granted
    by Judge Hemingway, a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.   He  said,  so
    far as is material,

         "The grounds of application consisted of a series of  disagreements
         with the way in which the  judge  approached  the  evidence  and  a
         matter of  contention  the  decision  was  against  the  weight  of
         evidence.  The analysis of the evidence is brief and it is arguable
         that the judge erred in failing to have  regard  to  the  sponsor's
         oral  evidence,  failing  to  make  a  clear  finding  as  to   the
         credibility of the sponsor and failing to engage with the sponsor's
         explanation as to why there was a  delay  in  the  entry  clearance
         application being lodged."

6.   Mr Qureshi today urges upon us the submission that indeed there was  an
    error of law.  He has accepted quite rightly that to establish an error
    of law in the present context it would be necessary to  show  that  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal either disregarded evidential material
    that was put before him or failed to take  account  of  the  evidential
    material that was put before him or,  upon  that  material,  reached  a
    decision that no rational decision-maker could  have reached.

7.   We reject that submission for the following reasons. It is quite  plain
    in our judgment that the Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  have
    regard to relevant material.  He had before him the  witness  statement
    of the sponsor to which reference has been  made. He heard  the sponsor
    give oral evidence and be subject to cross-examination.  It does appear
    from the frank acknowledgment made by Mr Qureshi that the  sponsor  may
    not have come across at all as a particularly effective witness not, as
    we  have  pointed  out,  from  linguistic  problems,   but   from   the
    difficulties that he was having in explaining his position credibly  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

8.   The First-tier Tribunal did for example consider the contacts that  the
    sponsor had had. The judge referred at paragraph 17 to  the  fact  that
    there had been visits on an annual basis.  However he pointed out  that
    the evidence also showed that the sponsor had other family  members  to
    whom he was sending money but there was no indication that he had  seen
    the appellant as opposed to other members of his family.

9.   In our judgment the judge was entitled to look for supporting  material
    and he did look diligently for such material because he referred to the
    photograph of the wedding.  However that  was  the  only  material  put
    before him and he did not believe, and this  was   a  matter  for   his
    assessment, that that material credibly reinforced the  evidence  given
    by the appellant.

10.  Before us today Mr Qureshi has pointed to  other  photographs  that  he
    says shows that the  appellant  was  at  the  material  time  with  the
    sponsor.  However, we  probed  this  aspect  with  Mr  Qureshi  and  he
    accepted that those photographs were not drawn to the attention of  the
    judge and nor was the explanation given that is now advanced that those
    photographs had been available and had been sent to the respondent.

11.  In our judgment, particularly where a party  is  represented,  if  such
    additional material is to be put to the judge it must expressly be  put
    or an explanation given as to why that material is not  available.   On
    any view the appellant through the sponsor had a perfect opportunity to
    either put such material or, if it was not available, to explain why it
    was  not  so  available.  No  such  steps  were  taken  and  in   those
    circumstances it is simply not open to the appellant to  say  that  the
    judge made any error of law in dealing with that point.

12.  Mr Qureshi also says that there  was  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that payments made to relatives of  the  sponsor  were  indeed
    earmarked for the appellant and in that connection he drew attention to
    the application in  which  the  appellant  recorded  where  she  lived.
    However there is no indication on the face of that  document  that  the
    appellant was referring to her mother and father-in-law.  It is no more
    than a bare address.  It was certainly open to the appellant to explain
    that that document did refer to the relatives in question but that does
    not appear to have happened.  In any event, that  document  was  before
    the Tribunal, and again it was perfectly open for the appellant to draw
    it specifically to the attention of the judge.

13.  In paragraph 13 the judge in fact does  acknowledge  that  the  sponsor
    had said in his evidence that he had no need to send money directly  to
    the appellant since she lived with her parents and there were  cultural
    reasons why she could not collect the money.  Therefore it does  appear
    that he had regard to that evidence in any event but was  not  able  to
    reach a conclusion about the subsistence of the marriage on  the  basis
    of that assertion.  It is notable  in  the  present  context  that  the
    appellant herself did not even provide a recent  witness  statement  in
    order to corroborate, for example, the answers that she  had  given  on
    her application and to amplify those answers so as  to  strengthen  the
    position and to particularise what was  stated  there  in  fairly  bald
    terms.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  refer  specifically   to   the
    surprising absence of any such evidence before it.

14.  As to the ongoing  contacts,  the  Tribunal  did  have  regard  to  the
    statement made by the sponsor that is also supported by the application
    that  there  had  been   telephone  contact.   However,  there  was  no
    telephone record or record of the  alleged  Skype  contact  that  could
    support this bare assertion.  Therefore it appears to us that the First-
    tier Tribunal did have regard to  the  evidence  before  it,  both  the
    witness statement, the oral evidence and the other matters to which  we
    have referred.  However the Tribunal was not persuaded on  the  balance
    of probability that such evidence did show that there was a  subsisting
    marriage over the period.

15.  The judge granting permission appears to suggest that it was  necessary
    for the First-tier Tribunal to say specifically that it was  not  going
    to accept the sponsor's oral evidence and to make a clear finding as to
    the sponsor's credibility.

16.  In our judgment that is simply not necessary. It is plain on  the  face
    of the determination that the judge did carefully take account of  what
    he had heard from the sponsor and the other matters to  which  we  have
    referred.  However, at the end of the day he was not persuaded that the
    account given by the sponsor was credible and he explained his  reasons
    for rejecting that account.  That is  all  that  is  necessary  in  the
    present context and we would not support the suggestion  that  anything
    more is expressly needed so as to avoid an error of law.

17.  The decision therefore is that there was no error of law in this  case.
     The First-tier Tribunal had proper regard  to  all  relevant  evidence
    before it and did not exclude any evidence that was relevant.   It also
    reached a finding of fact that was reasonably open to it on  the  basis
    of the evidence that it heard.

18.  Therefore for those  reasons  the  determination  is  upheld  and  this
    appeal is dismissed.



Signed:

     [pic]
pp The Honourable Mr Justice Parker
          Date: 16 September 2014
