
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/00054/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th February 2018                 |On 22nd February 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                 SHAIZA NOOR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Naumann (Solicitor, Magrath LLP)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In this appeal the term Appellant refers to Shaiza Noor  and  the  term
    Respondent refers to the Secretary of State this avoids  the  confusion
    that arises from this being the Secretary of State's appeal against the
    decision under consideration. There is a history to this  appeal  which
    makes it desirable to maintain the same appellations for the parties as
    will become apparent.

 2. The Appellant is the spouse of Sajjad Ahmad, the Sponsor, who is  lives
    in the UK but at present only with discretionary leave. On the  1st  of
    May  2014  she  applied  for  entry  clearance  as  his  spouse,   that
    application was refused for the reasons given in the Refusal Notice  of
    the 20th of November 2014. In the Refusal Notice the reasons given were
    that the ECO was not satisfied that the marriage was  genuine  and  the
    Appellant did not meet the English language requirements.

 3. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Thanki on
    the 14th  of  August  2015.  The  appeal  was  allowed  in  a  decision
    promulgated on the 28th of August 2015. In the  decision  Judge  Thanki
    found that the Appellant did meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 4. The ECO did not raise the Sponsor's status in the UK as an issue in the
    Refusal Notice and it was not raised as an issue in the hearing  before
    Judge Thanki. In paragraph 36 of the decision Judge Thanki  noted  that
    the Sponsor appeared to have only discretionary leave but as the  point
    was not taken before him did not take that a reason to find against the
    Appellant so leading to the finding that the  Appellant  did  meet  the
    Immigration Rules. The decision of Judge Thanki was not  challenged  by
    the Respondent as there was no application for permission to appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 5. Following the decision of Judge Thanki nothing happened until  the  5th
    of January 2016 when the Appellant wrote to the ECO for the appropriate
    endorsement to be placed in her passport. The response  was  a  further
    Refusal Notice of the 20th of January 2016 in which the ECO raised  the
    issue of the Sponsor's status in the UK  and  refused  to  endorse  the
    passport on the basis that he did not have settled status or leave on a
    basis that permitted the Appellant entry as a spouse. That was the only
    ground of refusal.

 6. The Appellant appealed that decision which came before Judge Farmer  at
    Hatton Cross on the 19th of June 2017, the  appeal  was  allowed  in  a
    decision promulgated on the 21st of June 2017. In that  decision  Judge
    Farmer set out the history and quoted directly paragraph  36  of  Judge
    Thanki's decision in paragraph 7.

 7. In paragraph 9 of the decision Judge  Farmer  recorded  the  concession
    made by Mr Naumann that the Sponsor could not be found to be a  settled
    person by virtue of the nature of his leave and that he  did  not  meet
    the requirements of appendix FM. The claim was pursued under article  8
    outside the rules.

 8. In finding that the  interference  in  the  Appellant's  and  Sponsor's
    family life was not in accordance with the law Judge Farmer referred to
    TB (Jamaica) [2008] EWCA Civ 977. That was a deportation case where  it
    was decided that the Secretary of State could not raise an  Appellant's
    criminal convictions to exclude him from refugee status when that issue
    could have been raised at an earlier stage in the process. The Court of
    Appeal observed that such a matter could be raised where fresh evidence
    that had not been previously available was relied on or there had  been
    a change in the law or circumstances.

 9. In paragraph 16 Judge Farmer went on to find that  the  ECO's  decision
    which was made on evidence that was available at the time of the First-
    tier Tribunal hearing and the original decision was not  in  accordance
    with the law. It was not raised by the Secretary of State in  the  2014
    decision of in the 2015 appeal but was the sole ground  of  refusal  in
    January 2016.

10. The Home Office sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on
    the grounds  that  Judge  Farmer  had  used  article  8  as  a  general
    dispensing power. It was accepted that  the  ECO  had  not  raised  the
    Sponsor's status in the first decision but it was  submitted  that  the
    situation was different from that in  TB,  that  involved  the  refugee
    convention and an absolute right. It was  incumbent  on  the  Judge  to
    ensure that all aspects of the Immigration Rules were  satisfied,  Kwok
    on Tong. It was a fact that the Sponsor did not have settled status and
    could not satisfy the rules. the Judge had not considered  whether  the
    Appellant and Sponsor could enjoy family life in Pakistan and  had  not
    identified obstacles to their  doing  so  and  so  had  not  adequately
    considered the proportionality exercise.

11. Permission was granted by Judge Saffer stated that it was arguable that
    the Judge had erred in not carrying  out  an  adequate  proportionality
    balancing exercise by not weighing up all factors (including  the  fact
    that the Immigration Rules were not met) and just relying on 2 facts of
    the Appellant's side.

12. At the hearing the representatives made submissions in line with  their
    respective positions. These are set  out  in  full  in  the  Record  of
    Proceedings. For the Home Office it was submitted that  the  Judge  had
    not carried out a balancing exercise as it had been accepted  that  the
    Immigration Rules were not met. There was no guarantee that the Sponsor
    would be granted ILR. It was suggested that the status of  the  Sponsor
    could not be ignored and the proportionality of the decision had to  be
    overcome, it needed a proportionality assessment and the Judge had  not
    looked at both sides. TB was an asylum case which was different.

13. For the Appellant it was submitted that the Judge was right to look  at
    the legality of the decision and TB should have been applied. The issue
    was raised unexpectedly but the circumstances were the  same.  The  ECO
    had had the opportunity to challenge the decision of Judge  Thanki  but
    had  not  taken  it,  the  decision  of  Judge  Thanki  could  not   be
    circumvented  administratively  and  the  decision  was  binding.   The
    Secretary of State was bound by the decision of Judge Thanki.

14. In the course of argument I was provided with a number of  authorities.
    Although Kwok on Tong was referred to I was not given  a  copy  of  the
    decision itself and have not been able to locate one. On that  point  I
    was handed RM (Kwok On Tong: HC 395 para 320) India [2006] UKAIT 39.  I
    was  also  provided  with  Chomanga  (binding  effect   of   unappealed
    decisions) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 312 (IAC) and TB.

15. In paragraph 10 of RM Judge Ockelton said "In Kwok On Tong (and also in
    R v IAT ex parte Hubbard [1985] Imm AR 110) the Court had  to  consider
    what the position was if a refusal of entry clearance was based on  one
    element of the Rules, but by the time of the hearing it became apparent
    that there was some other requirement of the Rules which the  appellant
    could not meet. Both those cases decide that the notice of  refusal  is
    not equivalent to a pleading; if new elements of the Immigration  Rules
    come into play they are to be dealt with on the appeal, and the parties
    must be allowed any appropriate  adjournment  in  order  to  avoid  the
    injustice of being taken by surprise."

16. In TB at paragraph 34  and  35  the  basic  rule  and  exceptions  were
    explained: "In R (Boafo) v Home Secretary [2002] EWCA Civ, [2002] 1 WLR
    44, Auld LJ said at [26] in a judgment with which the other members  of
    the  Court  of  Appeal  agreed,  "...  an  unappealed  decision  of  an
    adjudicator is binding on the parties." In R (Saribal) v Home Secretary
    [2002] EWHC 1542 (Admin), [2002] INLR 596, Moses J said:

             "17. The decision in ex parte Boafo demonstrates an  important
             principle at the heart of these proceedings. The Secretary  of
             State is not entitled to disregard the  determination  of  the
             IAT and refuse a  claimant's  right  to  indefinite  leave  to
             remain as a refugee unless he can set aside that determination
             by appropriate procedure founded on appropriate evidence."

          1.     Of course, different considerations may apply where  there
             is relevant fresh evidence that was not available at the  date
             of the hearing, or a change in the law, and the principle  has
             no application where there is a  change  in  circumstances  or
             there are new events after the date of the decision: see  Auld
             LJ in Boafo at [28]. But this is not such a case."

17. In Chomanga the headnote  summarised  the  position  as  follows:  "The
    parties are bound by unappealed findings  of  fact  in  an  immigration
    judge's decision. It is therefore not open to the respondent  following
    a successful and unchallenged appeal by an appellant to make a  further
    adverse decision on the same issue relying  on  the  same  evidence  as
    before unless there is evidence of  fraud  or  one  of  the  exceptions
    identified in para 35 of  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Secretary of State v TB [2008] EWCA 997 applies."

18. Chomanga was not an asylum or international protection case but was  an
    immigration decision based on  an  ancestry  application  made  by  the
    Appellant in that case.  When  the  Appellant's  application  had  been
    refused and appealed the Respondent had failed to provide  evidence  to
    support assertions that the birth certificates relied on were false and
    that deception had been used. Following that  finding  the  matter  had
    been  remitted  to  the  Respondent  who  then  provided  the  evidence
    supporting the claims made.

19. The Judge found that was an abuse of process  and  was  upheld  by  the
    Upper Tribunal following a discussion of the issues at paragraphs 18 to
    23. Judge Latter with the principal reasoning in paragraphs 20  and  21
    "I am satisfied that the application of these principles  resolves  the
    issues which have arisen in this appeal and that  the  arguments  about
    abuse of process raised in the grounds are largely  beside  the  point.
    The respondent was bound by the findings made by IJ Ross  who  was  not
    satisfied that she had produced  any  or  any  sufficient  evidence  to
    maintain the assertion that the appellant had  obtained  her  leave  to
    remain on the basis of UK ancestry by submitting false documents.   The
    respondent had had the opportunity of filing  evidence  in  support  of
    that contention but had failed  to  do  so  or  indeed  to  attend  the
    hearing.  By making a further decision by  relying  on  evidence  which
    could and should have been produced at that hearing, the respondent was
    in substance attempting to circumvent  the  judge's  decision.   It  is
    right that in para 17 of his determination the judge expressed the view
    that it was open to the respondent to curtail the leave  again  and  to
    produce the relevant documents on any  subsequent  appeal  but  in  the
    light of TB that view was incorrect.  He said that the issue of falsity
    had not been resolved but it had by the respondent's failure to produce
    evidence and by the immigration appeal being allowed.   These  comments
    made obiter by the judge did not give the respondent the power to  take
    a course of action not open to her under the law.

         21.      None of the exceptions to the general  principle  that  an
         unappealed decision is binding  set  out  in  para  35  of  Stanley
         Burnton LJ's judgment apply in the  present  case.   There  was  no
         fresh evidence which was not available at the date of the  hearing,
         no change in the law and no relevant change of circumstances or new
         events after the date of decision.  This was also not a case  where
         there was subsequent evidence of fraud: see EB  (fresh  evidence  -
         fraud- directions) Ghana [2005] UKAIT 000131.  The issue before  IJ
         Ross was whether  false  documents  had  been  relied  on  and  the
         evidence on which the respondent based her subsequent decision  was
         exactly the same as the evidence previously relied on."

20. The final case that is relevant is  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKAIT  000702*.
    That case established the authority that a decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal is to be taken as the starting point for the consideration  of
    the facts in any subsequent appeal. The full guidance is as follows:

         "39.     In our view  the  second  Adjudicator  should  treat  such
             matters in the following way.

             (1)       The first Adjudicator's determination should  always
             be the starting-point. It is the authoritative  assessment  of
             the Appellant's status at the time it was made.  In  principle
             issues such as whether the Appellant was properly represented,
             or whether he gave evidence, are irrelevant to this.

             (2)        Facts  happening  since  the  first   Adjudicator's
             determination can always be taken into account by  the  second
             Adjudicator. If those facts lead the second Adjudicator to the
             conclusion that, at the date of his determination and  on  the
             material before him, the appellant makes his case, so  be  it.
             The previous  decision,  on  the  material  before  the  first
             Adjudicator and at that date, is not inconsistent.

             (3)        Facts  happening  before  the  first  Adjudicator's
             determination but having no relevance to the issues before him
             can always be taken into account by  the  second  Adjudicator.
             The first Adjudicator will not have been concerned  with  such
             facts, and his determination is not an assessment of them.

          1.     We now pass to matters that could  have  been  before  the
             first Adjudicator but were not.

             4)  Facts personal to the Appellant that were not  brought  to
             the attention of the first  Adjudicator,  although  they  were
             relevant to the issues before him, should be  treated  by  the
             second  Adjudicator  with  the  greatest  circumspection.   An
             Appellant who  seeks,  in  a  later  appeal,  to  add  to  the
             available facts in an  effort  to  obtain  a  more  favourable
             outcome is properly regarded with suspicion from the point  of
             view of credibility. (Although considerations  of  credibility
             will not be relevant in  cases  where  the  existence  of  the
             additional fact is beyond dispute.) It must also be  borne  in
             mind that the first Adjudicator's determination was made at  a
             time closer to the events alleged and in terms of  both  fact-
             finding and general credibility assessment would tend to  have
             the advantage. For this reason, the adduction  of  such  facts
             should  not  usually  lead  to  any  reconsideration  of   the
             conclusions reached by the first Adjudicator.

             (5)       Evidence  of  other  facts  -  for  example  country
             evidence  may  not  suffer  from  the  same  concerns  as   to
             credibility, but should be treated with caution. The reason is
             different from that in (4). Evidence dating  from  before  the
             determination of the first Adjudicator might  well  have  been
             relevant if it had been tendered to him: but it was  not,  and
             he made his determination without it.  The  situation  in  the
             Appellant's own country at the time of that  determination  is
             very  unlikely  to  be  relevant  in  deciding   whether   the
             Appellant's removal at the time of  the  second  Adjudicator's
             determination   would   breach   his   human   rights.   Those
             representing the Appellant would be better advised to assemble
             up-to-date evidence than to  rely  on  material  that  is  (ex
             hypothesi) now rather dated.

          1.     The final major category of case is  where  the  Appellant
             claims that his removal would breach Article 3  for  the  same
             reason that he claimed to be a refugee.

             (6)       If  before  the  second  Adjudicator  the  Appellant
             relies on facts that are not materially different  from  those
             put to the first Adjudicator,  and  proposes  to  support  the
             claim by  what  is  in  essence  the  same  evidence  as  that
             available  to  the  Appellant  at  that   time,   the   second
             Adjudicator should regard the issues as settled by  the  first
             Adjudicator's determination and make his findings in line with
             that determination rather than allowing the matter to  be  re-
             litigated. We draw attention to the phrase 'the same  evidence
             as that available to the Appellant' at the time of  the  first
             determination. We have chosen this phrase not only in order to
             accommodate guidelines (4) and (5) above, but also because, in
             respect of evidence that was available to  the  Appellant,  he
             must be taken to have made his choices about how it should  be
             presented. An Appellant cannot be expected to present evidence
             of which he has no knowledge: but if (for example) he  chooses
             not to give oral evidence in his first appeal, that  does  not
             mean that the issues or the available evidence in  the  second
             appeal are rendered any different by his proposal to give oral
             evidence (of the same facts) on this occasion."

21. The common feature that runs through the decisions  set  out  above  is
    that a point should be raised when it first arises and that  it  cannot
    be raised at a  later  stage  unless  there  is  new  information  that
    justifies the earlier failure to raise it. The unchallenged decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge is binding on the ECO and is the starting
    point for the consideration of the facts by  a  Judge  considering  any
    subsequent appeal.

22. From the approach taken by Judge Latter in Chomanga, a  decision  which
    was not challenged in the Court of Appeal, I am satisfied that there is
    no  difference  in  principle  between  an  asylum  decision   and   an
    immigration decision. The ECO in the first decision did  not  take  the
    point about the Sponsor's status, it could have been taken in the first
    appeal but was  not  leading  to  the  unchallenged  finding  that  the
    Appellant met the Immigration Rules. That decision is  binding  and  as
    there is no suggestion that there was new information  before  the  ECO
    making the second decision or a justification for the point  not  being
    raised earlier I find that the Judge Farmer was right to find  that  it
    could not be raised in the second decision.

23. The situation is complicated by 2 other matters. The first is that  the
    decision of Judge Thanki was made under the old appeal rights  when  an
    appeal could be allowed on the simple basis that the Appellant met  the
    Immigration Rules, as he found. The subsequent  Tribunal  decision  was
    made under the new  appeal  regime  where  the  Immigration  Rules  are
    relevant to the assessment of the proportionality of the decision under
    article 8. The finding that a person meets the Immigration Rules  is  a
    strong reason in their favour in the balancing exercise that follows.

24. The second issue is that this case is confused by the  concession  that
    the Appellant did not meet the  Immigration  Rules  by  virtue  of  the
    Sponsor's immigration status.  That  concession  is  troubling  because
    there was a decision that the Appellant did meet the Immigration Rules,
    that decision was binding on the ECO in  the  second  refusal  and  was
    itself the starting point for the consideration of the facts  by  Judge
    Farmer.

25. Given the unfortunate history of the case, the findings previously made
    and the troubling concession I  am  satisfied  that  Judge  Farmer  was
    entitled to consider article 8 on the basis that there were exceptional
    reasons to consider the claim outside the  rules.  In  the  alternative
    Judge  Farmer  could  simply  have  held  that,   notwithstanding   the
    concession, the Immigration Rules were met and that with the  continued
    exclusion of the Appellant and the birth  of  the  couple's  child  the
    decision was disproportionate.

26. It is not entirely clear that Judge Farmer needed to carry out  a  full
    balancing exercise but if such an exercise was required and the failure
    to do so was an error I find that the  error  is  not  material.  Judge
    Farmer was right in finding that the ECO could not raise the  Sponsor's
    status as an issue in the second refusal.  With  a  decision  that  the
    Appellant met the Immigration Rules the Judge was entitled to find,  as
    indicated in paragraph 25, that exclusion was disproportionate.

27. Following from Judge Thanki's decision there are  a  number  of  routes
    that could have been taken by Judge Farmer. In my view all lead to  the
    same finding, that the Appellant met the  Immigration  Rules  and  that
    continued exclusion was disproportionate. There was no  material  error
    in the decision of Judge Farmer which stands as the  disposal  of  this
    appeal.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  I  make  no
order.

Fee Award

This was an appeal by the Secretary of State which I have dismissed, I  make
no fee award, the fee award of the First-tier Tribunal remains in force.



Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 16th February 2018

