
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA007192015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25th April 2017                            |On 5th May 2017              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL  JUDGE
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                         MS LEILA AHMED ABDUL SHIKUR
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (PRETORIA)
                                 Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:   Mr M Shrimpton (Counsel instructed by UK LAW)
For the Respondent:  Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this matter  is  Ms  Shikur.  I  shall  refer  to  the
    parties as "the appellant"  and  "the  Respondent"  who  is  the  Entry
    Clearance officer /Secretary  of  State.   This  is  an  error  of  law
    hearing. I consider whether or not there is a material error of law  in
    the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge   Devittie)("FTT")
    promulgated  by  on  27th  September  2016  in  which  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

Background

2.  The Appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia.  She  made  an  application  for
    leave to enter as the spouse/family  member  of  a  refugee  under  the
    family reunion provisions in paragraph  352A  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Respondent refused the application on 27.11.2014 on  the  grounds  that
    there was insufficient evidence to show that the Appellant was  a  part
    of the spouse's  pre  flight  family  in  Eritrea.   There  was  little
    evidence to show that the parties were  in  a  subsisting  and  genuine
    relationship, in particular from previous years. It was considered that
    Libya was not the country of habitual residence  for  the  sponsor  who
    fled from Eritrea.  The Appellant waited until 2014 to  apply  to  join
    her husband when he had been granted leave in 2012   The  decision  was
    upheld in a review by the Entry Clearance  manager  on  25.6.2015  with
    reference to Immigration Rules paragraph 352A(i)(ii)(iv).

FTT decision and reasons

3.   In a decision and reasons the FTT found that the Appellant  was  not  a
    member of the sponsor's family at the time he fled  from  Eritrea.   It
    found that Libya was not the sponsor's country  of  habitual  residence
    which was Eritrea. It was claimed that the parties had met and  married
    in Libya, where the sponsor had lived for 6 years prior  to  coming  to
    the UK where he claimed asylum.  The FTT did not accept  the  Sponsor's
    account that whilst out shopping in Tripoli, the  Appellant  was  taken
    and deported to Sudan and then she returned to  Ethiopia  [8(ii)].  The
    FTT found that the account about her exit from Libya lacked the  detail
    that would have been given to the sponsor by his wife if they were in a
    genuine relationship. [8(iii)] The FTT found a lack of evidence to show
    previous cohabitation in Libya between 2008 -2011 as  claimed.  It  was
    accepted that the sponsor mentioned his wife  in  his  application  for
    leave to  remain,  a  marriage  certificate  was  produced,  there  was
    correspondence with the Red Cross dated  2011  indicating  attempts  to
    locate the Appellant made by the sponsor and evidence that the  sponsor
    visited the appellant in Addis Ababa in 2015 together with evidence  of
    financial support [8(i)]. The FTT dismissed the appeal  with  reference
    to habitual residence and genuine and subsisting relationship.

Application for permission to appeal

4.  It was argued that the FTT erred by reaching a  negative  conclusion  as
    to the genuineness of the marriage which was against the weight of  the
    evidence. Further the FTT  made  a  material  misdirection  in  law  by
    failing to consider AA Somalia (Marriage, country of nationality)[2004]
    UKAIT where it was accepted that a country of habitual residence  could
    include a country where a person had resided for one month.





Grant of permission

5.  On renewal permission was granted by  UTJ  Rintoul  who  found  arguable
    grounds that the FTT made a misdirection as to the country of  habitual
    residence being Eritrea rather than Libya where the sponsor lived for 6
    years. Further it was unclear if the FTT had put to the sponsor  or  to
    the appellant's representatives any of the negative points relied on to
    reach its evaluation of the evidence.

Submissions

6.  Mr Shrimpton cited  and  relied  on  AA(Somalia)  and  argued  that  the
    country of nationality was not confined to the country of  nationality.
    The marriage predated the grant of asylum and habitual residence was  a
    broader test than was applied by the FTT.  The sponsor lived  in  Libya
    for  an  appreciable  period  of  time  and  it  was  a  place  adopted
    voluntarily for settlement purposes.  The FTT  failed  to  put  to  the
    sponsor the matters that formed the basis of the  FTT's  reasoning  for
    rejecting the appellant's evidence.  There was no cross examination  as
    there was no presenting officer and it had not been stated by  the  FTT
    that those matters were put to the sponsor by the FTT.  The appellant's
    explanation had to be considered in the light of the civil war in Libya
    at the time.  There was a wealth of evidence to support the genuineness
    and subsistence of the relationship as set out in [8(i)].

7.  Mr Tufan accepted that the case law cited supported the first ground  of
    appeal and that Libya could  be  treated  a  the  country  of  habitual
    residence, notwithstanding that the sponsor had not fled from Libya  in
    fear of persecution.  The FTT ought to have put the  questions  to  the
    sponsor but there was insufficient evidence overall to show that it was
    a genuine or subsisting relationship.   Any  error  was  not  therefore
    material and the FTT made adequate findings  to  sustain  the  decision
    reached.

Discussion and conclusion

8.  At the end of the hearing I confirmed my decision that  ground  one  was
    made out and that the FTT erred by failing to treat Libya as a  country
    of habitual residence given that the sponsor lived there  for  6  years
    before being granted refugee status.  I reserved  my  decision  on  the
    second ground.

9.  I am satisfied that the FTT erred in failing to put to  the  sponsor  or
    the appellant's representative the negative points taken by the FTT  in
    support of its decision.  There was no presenting officer  present  and
    so it was incumbent on the FTJ to raise concerns at  the  hearing  thus
    allowing for an opportunity to respond.    This  was  material  in  the
    light of the fact that there was considerable evidence  in  support  of
    the appellant's claim, which  the  FTT  set  out  at  [8(i)]  including
    mention of the spouse in the sponsor's asylum application, the marriage
    certificate showing date of marriage as 16.6.2010, correspondence  from
    the Red Cross dated 2011, and  remittances  from  the  sponsor  to  the
    appellant between  September  2015  and  August  2016.   The  appellant
    claimed that she traced the sponsor in 2014 and it  was  the  sponsor's
    unchallenged evidence that he visited the appellant in 2015.

Decision

10.     There are material errors of law disclosed  in  the  decision  which
shall be set aside.

11.      At the end of the hearing I proposed that if  I  were  to  find  an
    error of law on ground two, the matter could be dealt with by the UT or
    remitted to the FTT for a re hearing.  I have decided to  re  make  the
    decision without further hearing.  I heard full submissions  from  both
    representatives. Whilst acknowledging that one of the  errors  was  the
    failure to put matters to the sponsor, I  nevertheless  take  the  view
    that there is more than sufficient evidence produced by  the  appellant
    to show on balance of probabilities  that  she  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with the sponsor. None of which was  challenged
    by  the  respondent  in  the  refusal  letter  save  for  the  marriage
    certificate which could  not  be  verified.   Looking  at  all  of  the
    evidence in the round in particular  that  predating  the  more  recent
    reunion, I am satisfied that the appellant has shown that  she  married
    and lived with the sponsor in Libya until 2011  and  that  they  became
    separated until 2014.  There was evidence of  current  contact  in  the
    form of financial remittances  and  a  visit  in  2015,  together  with
    evidence of past references to  the  marriage  both  in  the  sponsor's
    asylum  application  screening  interview  and  asylum  interview   and
    correspondence with the Red Cross.

12.  Accordingly I allow the appeal on immigration grounds.   The  appellant
    has met the requirements of paragraph 352A and  is  entitled  to  entry
    clearance as the spouse of a person with limited leave to remain  as  a
    refugee.


                               Signed                 Date 3.5.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






NO ANONYMITY ORDER
NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed                 Date 3.5.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


