
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/00789/2013
                                                               OA/00801/2013
                                                               OA/00806/2013
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 24 June 2014                               |On 7th July 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     BK
                                     RA
                                     FA
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Iqbal, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. An anonymity order applies to this case.  The appellants will be called
    BK, RA and FA.  They  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Widdup dated 9 January 2014 in which he dismissed  their
    appeals against the Entry Clearance Officer in Dhaka's refusal of their
    applications to enter the United Kingdom on 22 October 2012.

 2. The appeal, which has been attractively put by Mr Iqbal, is essentially
    founded  on  the  proposition  that  the  learned  Immigration  Judge's
    treatment of the evidence which led him to conclude  that  the  sponsor
    had  failed  to  prove  that  he  had  "sole  responsibility"  for  the
    appellants was not made out.



The Facts

 3. The basic facts of this case were that the sponsor entered  the  United
    Kingdom as a visitor in  December  1995.   He  was  an  overstayer  but
    obtained indefinite leave to remain in January 2012 by reason  of  long
    residence in excess of fourteen years.  He returned  to  Bangladesh  in
    2012 for the first time since he left in 1995.  On that  visit  he  met
    his twin daughters for the first time and FA for the first  time  since
    she was 4 months old.  Since 1995 the appellants had been brought up in
    Bangladesh by their mother with help from  other  family  members.  The
    burden was on the sponsor to show that he had "sole responsibility" for
    the appellants.



Determination

 4. The learned Immigration Judge said this about the appeals:

         "32. These appeals are wholly without merit.  That is not meant  as
             a criticism of KM, still less of  the  appellants  themselves,
             but I find that there is no evidence  whatsoever  which  could
             lead me to find that KM has had sole  responsibility  for  the
             appellants at any time since 1995."



Analysis

 5. It is not surprising that the learned Immigration Judge  came  to  that
    conclusion.  He asked KM how he said he had sole responsibility for the
    children and quotes KM's answer in paragraph 26 of  the  decision:  "He
    said that their mother had had responsibility and that  he  had  helped
    financially."

 6. This answer alone sells the lie to KM's case because  out  of  his  own
    mouth he effectively said that it was not him but the  mother  who  had
    responsibility for the appellants. Mr Iqbal sought  to  suggest,  doing
    his best for his client, that KM may have misunderstood the meaning  of
    "responsibility". We do not see  how  there  could  be  any  scope  for
    misunderstanding of such a simple concept, still  less  one  which  was
    central to the appeal before the learned Immigration Judge.

 7. Mr Iqbal suggested that the learned Immigration  Judge  had  not  given
    appropriate factual scrutiny to the facts or taken full account of  the
    guidance in TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT  00049.  The  importance  about  TD
    (Yemen) is that it shows that the concept of sole responsibility is not
    a fine forensic legal concept but one that is rather more practical and
    prosaic.  As the court  commented  when  discussing  Nmaju  v  SSHD  at
    paragraph 30:

         "The Court of Appeal  saw  'sole  responsibility'  as  a  practical
         (rather than exclusively legal) exercise of 'control'  by  the  UK-
         based parent over the child's upbringing and whether what  is  done
         by the carer is done 'under the direction' of that parent."




 8. It is plain beyond the peradventure that the learned Immigration  Judge
    had the relevant test in mind because he said in paragraph 35 that:

         "KM's own evidence on this was clear.  Since  1995  the  appellants
         have been brought up by their mother and paternal grandmother  with
         help from their two uncles."




 9. The judge went on to find that KM had sent money to them over the years
    and had maintained contact with the family and discussed  such  matters
    as their education and health with them  but  he  did  not  accept  his
    evidence that he had chosen the children's schools or that he  was  the
    sole provider of finance to the family  since  there  was  evidence  of
    financial help from the uncles.

10. The burden was at all material times on the sponsor to prove the  case.
    It is not surprising that the learned Immigration  Judge  concluded  in
    paragraph 37: "KM's evidence taken  as  a  whole  falls  far  short  of
    showing that he had sole, as opposed to shared, responsibility  of  for
    the appellants."  Mr Iqbal goes on to take issue with the next sentence
    in the legal decision, "this was clear when KM was unable to  point  to
    any major decision he had taken independently of other family  members"
    and submits that this shows that the judge was not applying  the  right
    test.  We disagree.  Taken in context, this latter sentence was  simply
    the judge reinforcing the fundamental finding by pointing out that  the
    sponsor could not even point to any major decision of any sort  at  any
    time that he had taken independently of the other family members.



11. As was pointed out in the hearing, the finding in paragraph 38  of  the
    decision really tells it all in this case:

         "One feature of his evidence was telling, namely that the  role  of
         his wife and his own mother featured far less in his evidence  than
         that of his own role or that of the two uncles.  I  find  that  the
         reality is that the appellants' mother and grandmother have brought
         them up albeit with assistance from their father and uncles."

12. In view of the 14 year absence of the sponsor  from  Bangladesh  whilst
    these children were growing up the finding in paragraph 38  can  hardly
    be described as anything other than unsurprising.

13. There was a separate point raised for which permission  to  appeal  was
    granted, namely whether or not the Tribunal made an error  in  relation
    to its approach to the requirements of paragraph 297 of the Immigration
    Rules. We can find no such error. The learned Immigration  Judge  dealt
    with paragraph 297(i)(d) clearly and appropriately in paragraph  39  of
    the decision.

14. For these reasons, the appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the Secretary  of  State.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date


Mr Justice Haddon-Cave


