
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00397/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2015                            |On 4 February 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               Lawrence Ayeni
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - shefo

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Smith, instructed by Adonai Beulah, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Lawrence Ayeni was born on 10 June 1965  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Nigeria.  On 18 November  2013,  the  respondent  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer Shefo refused the appellant entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as a partner of a person present and settled here.   The
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge M  Davies)  which,
    in a determination promulgated  on  8  September  2014,  dismissed  the
    appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There are a number of grounds of appeal which are  not  expressed  with
    any cogency in the documents submitted by the appellant's solicitor.  I
    was, however, assisted at the hearing by Miss Smith of  Counsel  and  I
    shall deal with the grounds in the  order  in  which  she  raised  them
    before me.

 3. First, it is  common  ground  that  the  initial  refusal  by  the  ECO
    incorrectly cited paragraph 320 of HC 395 as a ground of refusal.   The
    judge had before him a determination of  Judge  Lambert  dated  21  May
    2013.  In that determination, one reads that the appellant had made two
    applications for leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  (in  2008  and
    2010 respectively) which Judge Lambert described as "dishonest as  well
    as frivolous and vexatious."  Judge Lambert found  that  the  appellant
    had absconded whilst in the United Kingdom and further  that  it  would
    not be unreasonable to expect the appellant's wife and her children  to
    join the appellant in Nigeria to  continue  their  family  life  there.
    Judge Davies acknowledged that:

         "those findings ... support the respondent's  contention  that  the
         appellant's behaviour calls into question his character and conduct
         and as such it makes it undesirable to grant entry clearance.   The
         appellant made two dishonest applications for entry clearance (sic)
         whilst in the United Kingdom and absconded as found by  Immigration
         Judge Lambert is clear evidence in my view  that  the  respondent's
         decision was in accordance with the Immigration Rules."

    Paragraph 320 of the Immigration Rules cannot be used in the case of  a
    marriage application such as this.  At the hearing  before  him,  Judge
    Davies allowed the Presenting Officer to raise paragraph 320(19) as  an
    alternative  (i.e.  the  correct)  Immigration  Rule  under  which  the
    appellant's previous conduct might be addressed.  The grounds of appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal object to that course  of  action.   Miss  Smith,
    before me, did not seek to press that point and I can  see  nothing  in
    the determination or the record of proceedings  to  indicate  that  the
    appellant's representative objected before the First-tier Tribunal.  In
    any event, the appellant does not dispute the findings of Judge Lambert
    regarding his previous immigration history and I can identify no  error
    in law in Judge Davies's determination at [21] where he found that that
    history might be invoked by the ECO in the present application to  deny
    the appellant entry clearance.

 4. The judge moved on to consider whether Article 8 ECHR was engaged.   At
    [24]  he  wrote  "the  respondent's  decision  does  not   engage   the
    appellant's Article 8 rights as it has no effect upon  the  status  quo
    that exists."  The grounds of appeal take  issue  with  that  statement
    with good reason.  Whilst it is arguable that the  appellant  has  been
    left in the same position following the ECO's decision as he was before
    he made his application and that his family life  has,  therefore,  not
    suffered any interference as a result of the immigration  decision,  it
    is arguable that the judge's  comment  ignores  the  duty  on  decision
    makers to promote, as well as avoid interfering with, Article 8 rights,
    including those of individuals living abroad.  I find  that  the  judge
    did err by stating that he would not consider Article 8 at  all  simply
    because  he  had  before  him  an  out  of  country   entry   clearance
    application.

 5. However,  the  position  is  further  complicated  by  the  fact  that,
    notwithstanding the judge's statement at  [24],  he  went  on  [26]  to
    direct himself to the familiar guidance set out in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    27.  Quite why he did so having earlier found that Article  8  was  not
    engaged is not  clear.   I  assume  that  he  did  so  for  reasons  of
    completeness.  Having said that, his Article 8 analysis at  [26(6)]  is
    brief:

    In this appeal there are no exceptional circumstances that  engage  the
    Article 8 rights of the appellant, his spouse or her  dependant.   Even
    if that were the case no evidence has been produced to show  that  that
    would lead to unjustifiable hardship.

 6. Earlier, at [25] the judge had considered the Article 8 and  Article  3
    rights of the  appellant's  stepchild  who  suffers  from  sickle  cell
    anaemia.  I can identify no errors of law in that part of  the  judge's
    analysis.  The question remains whether the judge  significantly  erred
    in law in his treatment of  Article  8  ECHR  to  the  point  that  his
    determination should be set aside.  I am satisfied the  judge  has  had
    adequate regard to all the relevant circumstances in this case.  He has
    dealt [as I have noted above] with the health issues of the  stepchild,
    with  the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  the  nature  of  his
    relationship with the child's mother.  It was open  to  the  judge,  as
    regards the child's illness, to find that no evidence has been produced
    to show that the condition could not  be  treated  in  Nigeria.   Brief
    though it is, the judge's conclusion that refusal  of  entry  clearance
    would not lead to unjustifiable hardship was plainly open to him.   The
    appellant was  properly  excluded  from  entering  the  United  Kingdom
    because he could not comply with the  Immigration  Rules  and  I would
    agree with the judge that there  was  nothing  unusual  or  exceptional
    arising from the facts of this case which might justify  the  grant  of
    entry clearance outside the Immigration Rules.  I find therefore  that,
    although the judge has made somewhat contradictory  findings  regarding
    the engagement of Article 8, he  reached  a  valid  conclusion  on  the
    evidence.  Indeed, it is a conclusion which I would have repeated had I
    set aside the determination and remade the decision on the basis of the
    same  evidence.   In  consequence,  I  decline   to   set   aside   the
    determination and this appeal is dismissed.

NOTICE OF DECISION

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 22 January 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date 22 January 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

