



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
OA/00996/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 2nd December 2014                 |On: 3rd December 2014                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                             Baldev Singh Raath
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble , Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    -


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of India date of birth 10th October  1982.
    On the 3rd September 2014 the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  L  Murray)
    allowed his appeal against a decision to  refuse  to  grant  him  entry
    clearance as the spouse of a Tier 2 Migrant.


 2. The Respondent had previously come to the UK as the dependent spouse of
    another PBS migrant, a  Tier  4  (General)  Student  Migrant.   He  had
    subsequently  extended  his  leave  to  enter  on  the  basis  of  that
    relationship. Then in November 2013 he had applied to return to the UK,
    this time as the spouse of  a  different  woman.  The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (ECO), perhaps understandably, called him in for interview.  As
    a result of the answers that he gave during that interview the  present
    application was refused with reference  to  paragraph  320(7A)  of  the
    Rules. The ECO found that the statements  made  by  the  Respondent  at
    interview  about  when  this  relationship  was  established   directly
    contradicted the statements he had made, and  documents  submitted,  in
    the course of earlier applications  about  his  relationship  with  his
    former wife. The ECO was satisfied that false representations had  been
    made  and  invoked  paragraph  320(7A).  The  application  was  further
    rejected on the basis that  this  was  not  a  subsisting  and  genuine
    relationship.

 3. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal upheld the Entry Clearance  Officer's
    decision  to  refuse  with  reference  to   paragraph   320(7A).    The
    determination properly notes that the burden of proof lay on the  Entry
    Clearance Officer and found that cogent evidence had been presented  to
    show that false representations had indeed been used. The Tribunal  did
    however accept that the Respondent and his partner were  in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship and on that basis allowed the appeal  under
    the Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

 4. This decision contains errors of law such that the decision must be set
    aside. The refusal under paragraph 320(7A) meant that the appeal had to
    be dismissed under the  Rules.  That  is  the  nature  of  a  mandatory
    refusal.   Whether this was a genuine marriage was irrelevant once  the
    'false representations' had been proved. As for Article 8 the  decision
    contains no reasoning at all as to why it should  be  allowed  on  this
    ground.

 5. I remake the decision only in respect of Article 8.   The Tribunal  has
    found that this is a genuine marriage and  there  is  no  challenge  to
    those findings.  I am therefore satisfied that there is a family  life.
    I cannot be satisfied that the decision shows a lack of respect for  it
    because I have  absolutely  no  information  about  where  his  Sponsor
    presently is. She may be in India with the Respondent.    Even  if  the
    Article is engaged and there is an interference I am satisfied  on  the
    evidence before me, that the decision is a proportionate  one  for  the
    Entry Clearance Officer to have made. That  is  because  Tier  2  is  a
    temporary status and the Sponsor would have only been in the UK  for  a
    short time. If she wanted to be with her husband she could remain  with
    him in India. Further there is a very great weight to  be  attached  to
    the public interest in denying entry clearance to applicants who lie in
    the course of their applications or interviews.

      Decisions

 6. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
    it is set aside.

 7. The decision in the  appeal  is  remade  as  follows:  "the  appeal  is
    dismissed on all grounds".


                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             2nd December
                                    2014
