

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/00231/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3 March 2016                           |On 18 May 2016                   |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between


                        pankajkumar jagishbhai patel
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Chohan instructed by Citadel Immigration Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of India born on  10  November  1985.  On  24
   October 2014 the Respondent served on  him  a  notice  of  removal  under
   section 10 of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  1999.  The  Respondent
   concluded that he was a person who had sought  leave  to  remain  in  the
   United Kingdom by deception. The Respondent stated in the notice that the
   Appellant had submitted a certificate from  Educational  Testing  Service
   ("ETS") to  his  sponsor  in  order  for  them  to  provide  him  with  a
   Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies.  The Respondent stated  that  ETS
   had a record of his speaking test. ETS undertook a check of his test  and
   confirmed to the  Respondent  that  there  was  significant  evidence  to
   conclude that his certificate was fraudulently obtained by the use  of  a
   proxy test taker. His scores from the test taken  on  24  April  2012  at
   Synergy Business College  of  London  had  been  cancelled  by  ETS.  The
   Respondent was satisfied that there was substantial evidence to  conclude
   that his certificate had been fraudulently obtained.


2.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  under  s82   of   the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. His appeal  was  heard  and
   dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson in a decision  promulgated
   on 24 June 2015. The Appellant sought permission to appeal  against  that
   decision and permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett
   on the basis that it was arguable that the Judge erred in  purporting  to
   take into account oral evidence when  there  was  none  while  making  no
   reference to the Appellant's seven page witness statement.


   The Grounds


3.  The  Appellant  argues  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  material
   evidence. He stated at [4] and [6] of the decision  that  he  heard  oral
   testimony and made a record of the oral evidence. However, the  Appellant
   did not attend the hearing  as  he  was  in  India  having  left  the  UK
   voluntarily at his own expense following the  Respondent's  decision.  He
   had submitted a 7 page witness statement addressing the issues raised  by
   the Respondent in the decision to cancel  his  leave  to  remain.  It  is
   asserted that the Judge did not  engage  with  the  Appellant's  evidence
   properly in his assessment of the veracity of the case put forward by the
   Respondent.


4. It is also asserted that the Judge made an irrational finding and  failed
   to give adequate reasons. The Appellant argues that the sole issue before
   the Judge was whether the he had relied on a false document,  an  English
   language test certificate. The Judge stated that the statements relied on
   by the Respondent were not  specific  to  any  individual  appellant  but
   described the situation discovered by Panorama and the steps taken by ETS
   to identify those tests  that  were  taken  by  an  imposter.  The  Judge
   concluded, having noted that the statements  were  not  specific  to  the
   Appellant, that he was satisfied that  their  evidence  showed  a  robust
   checking system that could be relied upon. It is asserted that the  Judge
   failed to give adequate reasons for his conclusions in this respect.  The
   evidence relied upon by the Respondent was  generic  in  nature  and  the
   Judge had failed to consider the evidence,  resolve  disputed  issues  of
   fact and make findings accordingly.  The  Judge  had  the  benefit  of  a
   detailed  witness  statement  that  he  should  have  considered  in  his
   assessment of the case before reaching  his  conclusion.  The  Judge  had
   given no rational basis for his findings and had failed  to  explain  who
   the generic evidence was sufficient to  meet  the  required  standard  of
   proof and prove that the Appellant used deception.






   The Respondent's Rule 24 Response


5. The Respondent argues that the First-tier Tribunal recorded at  paragraph
   2 of the decision that there were no witnesses and the hearing  proceeded
   on the basis of submissions only. The fact that  reference  was  made  to
   oral evidence at paragraphs 4-6  was  immaterial  as  the  reference  was
   clearly generic, a mistake, and did not refer to  any  specific  evidence
   that was erroneously taken into account. It was submitted the  First-tier
   Tribunal was clearly mindful of  the  Appellant's  witness  statement  at
   paragraph 3. It is asserted that the First-tier Tribunal  identified  the
   main points in the Respondent's evidence  and  found  that  the  checking
   system was robust and could  be  relied  on.  It  is  asserted  that  the
   Appellant's complaint amounts to nothing more than  a  disagreement  with
   the First-tier Tribunal's findings.


   The Appellant's Rule 25 Response


6. The Appellant maintained  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  material
   errors of law and the Respondent's evidence was generic  in  nature.  The
   Respondent had failed to provide cogent  and  direct  evidence  that  the
   Appellant had obtained his English language qualification  by  deception.
   The First-tier Tribunal, properly directed, would not conclude  that  the
   Respondent had discharged the burden of proof.


   The Hearing


7. Mr Chohan relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He  submitted  that  the
   determination was extremely brief. It did not deal with  the  Appellant's
   evidence. His evidence was very detailed and  he  said  his  English  was
   good. That evidence was not detailed in the decision. The Judge  did  not
   deal with the Appellant's academic ability. There were  ongoing  appeals.
   He did  not  deal  with  the  Appellant's  report  by  Dr  Harrison.  The
   Respondent was arguing that it knew that the fraud happened  but  it  did
   not identify that the Appellant took  the  test.  He  had  appealed  from
   abroad. On the substance of the appeal itself, whether the Appellant  was
   a party to the fraud, the Judge  had  not  referred  to  the  documentary
   evidence. The Appellant also said that the university  had  had  to  make
   arrangements for him to study a Masters in India. His  education  was  in
   English in India and he did this test because he was required to  do  so.
   The Respondent had never produced evidence relating to an individual.  On
   cases where an appellant was out of the country the best he could do  was
   produce a witness statement. The evidence did not meet the standard.


8. Mr Mills said that it was suggested that there was nothing before him  to
   tie the conclusion to the Appellant but there was the spreadsheet  print-
   out. It might not have been great evidence, but it was what was provided.
   Once they had gone through the check twice it was invalidated.  That  was
   what the Respondent said was sufficient checking to show  that  the  test
   was taken by an imposter. The  test  case  was  being  heard  but  absent
   authority, this Judge was entitled to find that it was sufficient. It was
   clear from paragraph 3 that he was conscious of what the Appellant argued
   and submitted. It was unfortunate that paragraphs 3 to 7 had crept in. He
   had forgotten or had misunderstood.  He  drew  the  conclusion  that  the
   Respondent had discharged the burden of proof and he got the  burden  and
   standard right in [13]. Until a higher court said the  evidence  was  not
   good enough it was open to a Judge to find that it is.  He  asked  me  to
   uphold the decision.


9. Mr Chohan accepted that there was no  current  authority.  The  Appellant
   would not pursue this appeal if he had  committed  fraud.  He  was  at  a
   mainstream education provider and they were satisfied with his ability to
   do the course. The University examinations required  a  higher  level  of
   English then TOEIC. The Respondent's witness statements were generic. ETS
   was authorised by the Respondent and interestingly the Respondent had not
   asked them for evidence to use for each candidate.  ETS  had  closed  its
   door on individual applicants. We were getting  computer  generated  data
   without  an  individual  being  involved.   The   Judge's   finding   was
   inadequately reasoned.


10. In relation to disposal Mr Mills  submitted  that  if  the  Respondent's
   evidence could not meet the burden then the appeal should be allowed  but
   if the decision was inadequately reasoned then I should  considered  then
   remittal. Mr Chohan agreed.


   Discussion and Findings


11. It is evident that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains
   careless errors. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  recorded  that  he  heard
   oral testimony through the medium of an interpreter when he did  not  and
   that he made a record of the oral evidence which he could not  have  done
   as there was none. In ML(Nigeria) v SSHD 2013 EWCA  Civ  844,  where  the
   Tribunal had referred to skeleton arguments where  there  were  none  and
   referred to a Sri Lankan in a  Nigerian  appeal  it  was  held  that  the
   essential question was whether the appellant had had the fair hearing  to
   which he was entitled before adverse findings of credibility were  found.
   In that case the carelessness showed that he could not have carefully and
   conscientiously  considered  the  arguments  both  for  and  against  the
   appellant.


12. The First-tier Tribunal in this case notes at paragraph 3  the  evidence
   submitted by both parties. I conclude, having perused the  evidence  that
   was before the First-tier Tribunal, that that summary  was  accurate.  In
   the circumstances I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal  carelessly
   failed  to  delete  standard  paragraphs  from  his  decision   but   did
   demonstrate that he was aware of the evidence before him.


13. However, I find that the decision contained material errors of  law  for
   the following reasons. The findings were brief and made at paragraphs  12
   to 14 of the decision:


       "12. The witness  statements  of  Millington  and  Collings  are  not
       specific to any  individual  appellant  but  describe  the  situation
       discovered by Panorama and the steps taken by  the  ETS  to  identify
       those tests that  were  taken  by  an  imposter.  They  describe  the
       safeguards built into  the  audit  to  minimise  the  risk  of  false
       positives.


       13.  Having considered this evidence carefully, and noting  that  the
       statements are not specific to the  appellant,  I  am  satisfied,  on
       balance, that the respondent's case is made out and that the decision
       that the appellant has relied on a deception to remain in the  UK.  I
       am satisfied that their evidence shows a robust checking system  that
       can be relied upon.


       14.  In making this finding I acknowledge that the appellant has been
       in the UK for some eight years and is undertaking an MSc at  Bradford
       University.  I also note his evidence that he  spent  a  considerable
       amount in tuition fees. He has also told me that the  university  has
       facilitated his completing the course in India."


14. The First-tier Tribunal did not have the benefit hearing submissions  on
   the case R (on the application of Gazi) v Secretary of State for the Home
   Department (ETS - judicial review) ILJ  [2015]  UKUT  00327  (IAC).  That
   judgment was delivered on 27 May  2015  after  he  heard  but  before  he
   promulgated the decision.  However the Appellant relied  on  a  107  page
   bundle which contained the report of Dr Phillip Harrison which challenged
   the evidence in Mr Millington's and Ms Colling's  witness  statement.  Dr
   Harrison is critical of the level  of  detail  provided  in  the  generic
   witness statements of Ms Collings and Mr Millington. He describes  it  as
   insufficient.  He criticises  the  lack  of  information  concerning  the
   initial testing and highlights that there  is  a  dearth  of  information
   concerning the comparability of the test samples with the TOEIC  samples.




15. The First-tier Tribunal did not  engage  with  this  evidence.  In  Shen
   (Paper Appeals: Proving Dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 236  (IAC),  following  a
   long line of authority, the Upper Tribunal held that where the  Secretary
   of State alleges that an applicant has practised dishonesty or  deception
   in an application for leave to remain, there is an evidential  burden  on
   the Secretary of State. This requires that sufficient evidence be adduced
   to raise an issue as to the existence  or  non-existence  of  a  fact  in
   issue. There is then an evidential burden on the Appellant  to  raise  an
   innocent explanation. Where an innocent  explanation  has  been  provided
   burden then rests on the Secretary of State to establish, on the  balance
   of probabilities, that the Appellant's prima facie  innocent  explanation
   is to be rejected.

  16. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal made reference to some of the points in
      the Appellant's witness statement he did  not  give  reasons  why  the
      innocent explanation provided by the Appellant should be rejected.  He
      did not consider the evidence of Dr Harrison  in  considering  whether
      the Appellant had discharged  the  evidential  burden  of  raising  an
      innocent explanation or in assessing the quality and  cogency  of  the
      Respondent's generic evidence. He  therefore  failed  to  engage  with
      material evidence. He also failed to take a number of relevant matters
      set out in the Appellant's witness statement into account. He did  not
      engage with  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he  had  prior  to  the
      cancelled test and in order to gain admission to the UK completed  the
      IELTS English language test and that no issue had been taken with  his
      English language ability nor did he take account of  the  evidence  of
      his academic ability.


  17. In the circumstances I find that the First-tier Tribunal both failed
      to take into account material evidence and failed to give adequate
      reasons for its conclusions.


  18. In the light of these findings and in the light also of the fact-
      finding required I find that this appeal should be remitted to the
      First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing with no findings preserved.


  19. No application was made for anonymity and none is appropriate on the
      facts.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law. I  set  the  decision  aside.  In  the
light of the fact-finding required the matter is remitted to the  First-tier
Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                             Date 18 May 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

