
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/00600/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 September 2016                 |On 26 October 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  f--- a---
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Dr R Moffat, Southwark Law Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the respondent.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because the Respondent is 9 years old  and  is  entitled  to
    privacy.

 2) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  allow  the
    appeal of the present Respondent, hereinafter  "the  Claimant"  against
    the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer refusing her leave to  join
    her mother in the United Kingdom.

 3) This in many ways is a very unusual case.  I do not want to get lost in
    the procedures but rather to set out what this is really all about.

 4) The Respondent is a child who was born in 2007.   In  2008  her  mother
    left her in the Gambia when she was less than year old and travelled to
    the  United  Kingdom  to  pursue  a  claim  for  protection  which  was
    unsuccessful. Her mother appealed and her appeal was allowed  on  human
    rights grounds in December 2011 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mace.  The
    appeal was allowed solely because  the  mother  had  a  child  born  in
    November 2011 who has Down's syndrome, and it was the view of the judge
    deciding that appeal that, in all the circumstances of the  case,  that
    child could not go to the Gambia. As a consequence the mother  and  the
    child were allowed to remain.

 5) For reasons that are not clear the mother had not told anybody  in  the
    United Kingdom about the child who is the present Respondent. She  also
    has other children who are now  adults,  and  they,  with  the  present
    respondent, and two more children born in 1998  and  2003  applied  for
    leave to enter the United Kingdom in September 2014.

 6) The other two minor children were given leave. The Claimant and the two
    older, now adult, children, were refused leave. The three of  them  who
    were refused leave each appealed. The older children were  unsuccessful
    and did not challenge that decision.  The minor  child  was  successful
    and the Secretary of State has challenged  that  decision.  I  make  it
    plain (because it is not plain from the way the matters were set out in
    the papers) that there is only one appeal before me and  that  concerns
    the minor child who succeeded before the First-tier Tribunal.

 7) The key paragraph here is paragraph 22 of the Decision and Reasons.  In
    the second part of that  paragraph,  having  reminded  himself  of  the
    decision in SS (Congo) the judge said:

         "However, notwithstanding that observation, the fact of the  matter
         in this case, is that the [Secretary  of  State]  did  grant  entry
         clearance to two minor children of the sponsor, namely  M  and  HM,
         and the only reason given for not granting entry clearance to F was
         because it was not accepted that she was the biological daughter of
         the sponsor. As I have noted above, the sponsor  has  now  provided
         unchallenged DNA evidence to prove that relationship which  I  have
         accepted."

 8) With respect, the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  clearly  right  about
    this.  If we look at the decision in the case of  the  Claimant  it  is
    plain that the  application  was  refused  solely  because  the  family
    relationship had not been established. No  other  reason  was  offered.
    The family relationship has now been established  and,  in  short,  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  said  that  because  the  only  reason  the
    Claimant was not allowed into the United Kingdom was because the family
    relationship was not established the fact that family relationship  has
    now been established he should, and did, allow the appeal.

 9) That decision was made on human rights grounds and two criticisms  were
    made.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   granting   permission   gave
    permission on one ground only.  Miss Isherwood asked for my  permission
    to argue the second ground today and because the  claimants  could  not
    show me any unfair prejudice in being expected to meet the point I gave
    Miss Isherwood permission to argue both grounds.

10) The ground on which permission was granted is summarised at point 3  of
    the judge's grant of permission where the judge said:

         "However it is arguable that the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate
         analysis and sufficient reasoning to the fact  that  the  sponsor's
         own leave is precarious when considering that there are 'compelling
         circumstances'  for  the  third  appellant  to  be  granted   entry
         clearance at this time."

11) I cannot accept that.  The compelling circumstances in the judge's mind
    were expressed at paragraph 23 of the judge's decision. It is perfectly
    clear that the judge's concern was  that  this  minor  child  had  been
    treated differently from the other minor children in  the  case  for  a
    completely wrong, albeit  understandable,  reason,  namely  a  mistaken
    belief that they were not related as claimed. The judge was  trying  to
    re-establish family unity.

12) The grounds are not critical of the  reasoning  behind  that  decision.
    Maybe there were points that could have been made  but  they  were  not
    made in the grounds and Miss Isherwood properly declined to try  to  go
    behind the case that had been pleaded.  If follows therefore that there
    plainly compelling circumstances as required to support a  decision  to
    allow an appeal outside the rules and they are  obviously  identifiable
    from the Decision and Reasons. The point goes nowhere.

13) The second point in the grounds is the point I gave permission to argue
    at the hearing, namely that the Secretary of State  complains  that  no
    proper regard was had to the public  interest.  I  found  the  argument
    rather convoluting. It was said that judge misdirected himself  by  not
    appreciating that there was a public interest in excluding a person who
    does not satisfy the requirements of the Rules.

14) He did not acknowledge that interest in terms but that  is  not  really
    the point. The point is that the judge decided that all  three  of  the
    Claimant's mother's minor children should be allowed  into  the  United
    Kingdom if two of them were allowed in to the United Kingdom.  There is
    no stronger public interest in keeping out one  of  the  children  than
    there would be in keeping out three.  The provisions of family unity by
    keeping children together are generally regarded as weighty matters.

15) I think it is necessary to go on to make the point  that  I  anticipate
    that the effect of this decision will be to give this Claimant leave in
    line with her mother's.  It may be that nothing very much comes of this
    because it may be that the mother will not be allowed to remain when it
    is next reviewed. If, as is also a very likely outcome, the  mother  is
    allowed to remain for the sake of the Down's syndrome child,  all  that
    this decision means is that all the minor children would be allowed  to
    be together in the United Kingdom. That is a decision that  was  within
    the options open  to  the  judge  and  I  find  that  it  was  reasoned
    sufficiently and not challenged adequately in the grounds.

    Notice of Decision

16) It follows therefore that I dismiss the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal
    against the decision.





|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 25 October 2016                |

