



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00622/2013,

                                                      OA/00633/2013,

                                                      OA/00639/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                    |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th May 2014                                 |On 21st May 2014           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             mr zaryab Tasaddiq
                             mr khasham mahmood
                            miss alishba tasaddiq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss J Iqbal, of Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. In this appeal, for ease of reference, I shall refer to  the  Secretary
    of State as "the Respondent" and Mr Zaryab Tasaddiq, Mr Khasham Mahmood
    and Miss Alishba Tasaddiq as "the Appellants".

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Pakistan. They are the minor children of
    Tasaddiq Mahmood, a Pakistani national who is currently in the UK  with
    limited leave to remain "the Sponsor". They applied for entry clearance
    to join their father who at the date of their applications, had limited
    leave to enter the UK only.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer who dealt with the Appellants' applications
    refused them, on the sole ground that he could not  be  satisfied  that
    the sponsor had sole  responsibility  for  their  upbringing  Paragraph
    301(i)(b) of the Immigration Rules. The  Sponsor  and  the  Appellants'
    mother separated in 2008. She remains in  Pakistan.  The  Sponsor  left
    Pakistan on 22nd February 2012 in order to join his present wife in the
    United Kingdom, leaving the Appellants in the care of his brother.

 4. The Appellants' applications were refused on  21st  November  2012  and
    following those refusals, the Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal in a determination promulgated  on  17th  March
    2014 allowed the appeals of  all  three  Appellants  making  favourable
    findings, not under the sole responsibility Rule  but  under  Paragraph
    301(c). The relevant finding is contained in paragraph 22 of the First-
    tier Tribunals determination  wherein the Judge says,

         "Having considered the totality of the evidence, I have come to the
         view that whilst the sponsor may not have had  sole  responsibility
         for the appellants' upbringing up to the point of decision of these
         applications, I find  that  the  appellants'  exclusions  from  the
         United Kingdom to be undesirable".

 6. The Respondent sought and was granted permission to appeal.  The  grant
    of permission states:

         "The Respondent seeks permission to  appeal,  in  time,  against  a
         decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Hussain)  who,  in  a
         determination  promulgated  on  17th  March   2014,   allowed   the
         Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decisions to refuse to
         grant them entry clearance for settlement.

         The decisions to refuse were all  under  Paragraph  301(b)  of  the
         Immigration  Rules.  At  paragraph  16  of  his  determination  the
         Immigration Judge found that the  Appellants  could  not  meet  the
         Immigration Rules under this paragraph. However he then went on  to
         consider, in part,  the  provisions  of  Paragraph  301(c)  of  the
         Immigration Rules. It would appear from the  determination  he  did
         not indicate to the Respondent that this is what he intended to do.
         In such circumstances he should have adjourned the hearing in order
         that the Respondent may be prepared to deal with that paragraph  of
         the Immigration Rules. Further, the Judge only considered  part  of
         the paragraph and not all of the provisions. As a result he made no
         findings in respect of the whole of Paragraph 301(c)

         Accordingly I find there  is  an  arguable  error  of  law  in  the
         determination".

 7. Thus the matter comes  before  me  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination discloses an error of law such that  it  needs
    to be set aside and the decision remade.

 8. At the hearing before me the Appellant was represented by  Miss  Iqbal,
    the Respondent by Mr Jack. I heard briefly from  both  representatives.
    Miss Iqbal handed in a belated Rule 24 response which I note contained,
    what appeared to be an attempt to issue a cross appeal   and  was  done
    without notice to the Respondent

 9. Following submissions  I announced to the parties that I was  satisfied
    that the First-tier tribunal's determination  must  be  set  aside  for
    legal error. My reasons for doing so are as follows. The Respondent  in
    her grounds seeking permission states that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    determination contains a procedural unfairness.  I  am  satisfied  that
    this is correct. The decisions to refuse the  Appellants'  applications
    were all made under Paragraph 301(b)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    grounds appealing those decisions were all on the basis of that part of
    the Rules.

10. At  paragraph  16  of  his  determination  the  Judge  found  that  the
    Appellants could not meet the Immigration Rules under  this  paragraph.
    However instead of disposing of the appeal at that point,  he  went  on
    erroneously to consider in part only the provisions of Paragraph 301(c)
    of the Immigration Rules. Nowhere  in  the  determination,  can  it  be
    shown, that the Judge indicated to the Respondent that this is what  he
    intended to do. That must amount to a procedural unfairness  because  a
    finding or comment that is inflicted on a party unheard is unjust.

11. Further the Judge compounded the error in that he only considered  part
    of the paragraph and not all of the provisions. As a result he made  no
    findings in respect of the whole of  Paragraph  301(c).  Those  factors
    alone amount to the determination disclosing legal error such  that  it
    cannot stand. But added to this, Article 8  ECHR   was  raised  in  the
    grounds of appeal and I see no consideration of  that  ground   in  the
    determination.

12. It follows that such findings of fact that have been made cannot  stand
    since they are tainted by procedural unfairness. It is necessary to set
    aside the whole of the First-tier Tribunals determination and  for  the
    matter to  be  heard  afresh  with  new  findings  of  fact  made.  Any
    application to vary the grounds must be made in the appropriate  manner
    following the Procedure Rules.

DECISION

13. The First -tier Tribunal made an error of law and its decision  is  set
    aside. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Hatton
    Cross on a date to be fixed.

No anonymity direction is made



Signature                                             Dated
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



