

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number OA/00638/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard at Field House
                         Determination Promulgated
On 23rd October 2014
Prepared 23rd October 2014
                             On 31st October 2014
                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                             HAFIZ HUSSAIN AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: No appearance
For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The term Appellant refers to the Appellant before the First-tier
   Tribunal and Respondent refers to the Secretary of State. The Appellant
   applied to enter the UK as the spouse of a PBS migrant who, at the time
   of the application and until recently, was in the UK. The application was
   refused for the reasons set out in the Refusal Notice of the 12th of
   November 2012, these are referred to below. The Appellant's appeal was
   heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Del Fabbro on the 21st of November
   2013 and allowed in a determination promulgated on the 24th of December
   2013.


2. The Respondent took issue with the determination and the findings of the
   Judge and sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. This was
   granted by Judge Heynes on the 26th of March 2014. The case first came
   before me on the 7th of May 2014 in Birmingham when I indicated that I
   was satisfied that there was an error of law in relation to whether the
   Appellant had sought to frustrate the immigration rules. I also indicated
   that there was no error in relation to a failure to grant the
   Respondent's application for an adjournment and that reasons would be
   given in a later determination.


3. There was a further hearing on the 16th of July 2014. By that time the
   Respondent had served additional evidence but that was late under the
   directions that had been given. In the circumstances the case was again
   adjourned for the Appellant's representative to take instructions on the
   evidence that had been provided by the Secretary of State.


4. The listing directions for the hearing on the 23rd of October 2014 were
   sent out on the 10th of September 2014. On the 22nd of October 2014 at
   18.05 the Appellant's representatives sent a fax to the Upper Tribunal
   indicating that they had received a letter from the Appellant, which was
   attached, indicating that he wished to withdraw his appeal.


5. The Appellant's letter of the 22nd of October 2014 was to the effect
   that the Sponsor's sponsorship had been cancelled and she was now back in
   Pakistan, as she had left the UK permanently he did not wish to pursue
   the appeal. I am satisfied that the Appellant has had sufficient time to
   instruct his representatives in relation to the matters under appeal and
   to discuss the merits of continuing with the case and the consequences of
   the decision not to contest the Secretary of State's appeal.


6. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is the appeal of the Respondent against
   the First-tier Tribunal decision. It is not the Appellant's appeal to the
   Upper Tribunal and the Appellant is not in a position to withdraw the
   appeal. I take the letters from the Appellant and his representatives as
   being an indication that he does not wish to contest the Upper Tribunal
   proceedings and as I have indicated I take it that he is aware of the
   potential consequences of that decision.


7. At the hearing on the 23rd of October 2014 brief submissions were heard
   from the Respondent and the determination reserved. The reasons for
   finding that the First-tier Tribunal erred and consequences are set out
   below.


8. The application was refused as the Appellant had indicated in his
   application that there was nothing to indicate he would not be considered
   as a person of good character. Records indicated that the Appellant had
   been in adverse contact with the Police 3 times and the application was
   refused under paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules.


9. In addition it was noted that the Appellant had previously held a 5 year
   multi-entry visa that had been issued on the 13th of April 2005. Records
   indicated that the Appellant had overstayed his visa on the occasions set
   out in the Refusal Notice on 3 occasions and he had worked as an Imam in
   a mosque, he had been detained in immigration detention but purchased his
   own ticket and was removed on an emergency travel document. The
   application was further refused under paragraph 320(11) on the basis that
   the Appellant had contrived in a significant way to frustrate the
   Immigration Rules.


10. Before the Appellant's appeal came before Judge Del Fabbro directions
   relating to the service of documentation had been made on the 28th of
   January 2013 and the 22nd of April 2013. The case was first listed on the
   29th of July 2013 but adjourned with further directions relating to the
   service of documents and re-listed, eventually being put back to the 23rd
   of November 2013. By that date the Respondent had still failed to supply
   information relating to the assertions made in the Refusal Notice about
   the Appellant's contact with the Police, an application was made to
   adjourn for that information to be obtained.


11. As the ECO had been in possession of the information when the decision
   to refuse the application was made it cannot be said that it was
   something that required further investigation. The ECO would have known
   that the obligation lay on them to prove the assertions made in the
   Refusal Notice and the directions repeatedly issued would only have
   reinforced that. There was no explanation for the repeated failure to
   provide what was, on the basis of the Refusal Notice, clearly relevant
   information which was already in the possession of the ECO.


12. In my view Judge Del Fabbro was right to refuse the application for an
   adjournment. The ECO had been given more than sufficient time to provide
   evidence that was relevant and necessary to support the assertions being
   made. There was no explanation for the failure to comply with repeated
   directions and no guarantee that the information would be available
   within a reasonable time. As if to reinforce this point of view it had
   not been provided for the first hearing before the Upper Tribunal either.


13. The other matter that the Secretary of State raised was the treatment
   of the Appellant's behaviour and whether that amounted to frustrating in
   a significant way the Immigration Rules. It appears from paragraph 13 of
   the determination that it was not in dispute that the Appellant had
   stayed at the mosque and that he had led prayers, his case being that he
   was not employed. In the findings in paragraph 21 the Judge found that
   the Appellant had overstayed on his last visit by 8 months, the
   Appellant's explanation was accepted but there were no findings whether
   he had worked in the UK and no findings on the Respondent's submissions
   that he had worked as minister of religion.


14. Employment is widely defined in the Immigration Rules in paragraph 6 as
   follows: "employment" unless the contrary intention appears, includes
   paid and unpaid employment, paid and unpaid work placements undertaken as
   part of a course or period of study, self employment and engaging in
   business or any professional activity.


15. In undertaking the role of a prayer leader in a mosque while being
   accommodated at that mosque I am satisfied that the Appellant can
   properly be said to have been working. There is also the finding that he
   had overstayed by about 6 months to the 8th of December 2010 which added
   to the fact that he was working by leading prayers at the mosque where he
   was staying aggravates the position.


16. As indicated above the ECO finally provided the information referred to
   in the Refusal Notice relating to the Appellant's contact with the
   Police, this had led to an adjournment for the Appellant and his
   representatives to consider this material. It is clear that the Appellant
   was removed from the UK as an alternative to criminal proceedings being
   taken against him and he would have been well aware of that when making
   the application that forms the basis of his case. It is not an error on
   the part of the Judge to have decided that this allegation was not made
   out, it is not an error to not consider evidence not provided despite the
   many opportunities offered.


17. It is significant that having overstayed by 6 months the Appellant was
   then able to arrange his departure within 2 weeks suggesting that his
   delay in leaving was due to his own choice and could not be said to be
   due to matters beyond his own control.

18. On the evidence that was before the Judge I am satisfied that the
   Appellant can properly be said to have contrived in a significant way to
   frustrate the immigration rules and refusal under paragraph 320(11) was
   justified. The Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of the
   First-tier Tribunal is allowed, the decision is remade and the
   Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law and I set aside the decision. I re-make the
decision in the appeal dismissing the appeal of H A.

Anonymity and Fee Award

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 31st October 2014


