
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: OA/00733/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 December 2015                          |On 18 January 2016            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Mr Juvencijus Masiliunas
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Gurung-Thapa promulgated on 8 July 2015.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge
    allowed Mr Masiliunas's appeal against a decision of the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department refusing to readmit  him  to  the  United
    Kingdom under  the  European  Community  law  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary  of  State  was  satisfied  that  grounds  of  public  policy
    justified such a decision.


2.   Although before me the Secretary of  State  is  the  Appellant  and  Mr
    Masiliunas is the Respondent, for the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  I  shall  hereafter  refer  to  Mr
    Masiliunas  as  the  Appellant  and  the  Secretary  of  State  as  the
    Respondent.


3.   The background to the case is set out with commendable clarity  in  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Further  to  that  I  note  in
    particular the following matters:

    (i) The Respondent's decision is dated 19 December 2014 and is  in  the
    following terms:

         "You have sought admission to the United Kingdom under  EC  law  in
         accordance with Regulation 11 of the Immigration (European Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 on the ground  that  you  are  a  Lithuanian
         national.  However I am satisfied that your exclusion is  justified
         on serious grounds of public policy.
         Specifically, you have been convicted of  a  firearms  offence  for
         which you have been sentenced to 8 years in  prison  in  Lithuania.
         It is for this reason that the Secretary  of  State  has  initiated
         deportation proceedings against you.
         Furthermore, it has come to the Home Office's attention that whilst
         in the United Kingdom between April 2013 and August 2014  you  have
         been convicted  4  times  for  9  offences  ranging  from  domestic
         violence  and  assaulting  police  to  going  equipped  for  theft,
         damaging property and driving a  vehicle  under  the  influence  of
         alcohol whilst uninsured.  Therefore your exclusion on the  grounds
         of public policy is further justified due  to  your  propensity  to
         reoffend.
         I therefore refuse you admission to enter  the  United  Kingdom  in
         accordance with Regulation 19."

     (ii) In his Notice of Appeal the  Appellant  stated  his  grounds  very
    briefly in the following terms:

         "My wife and daughter live in Scotland.  Under laws of  the  EU  my
         conviction has expired.  I have a job in London."

     (iii) Despite the issuing of directions by the Tribunal  neither  party
    filed documents in the appeal beyond the Notice of Immigration Decision
    and the Notice of Appeal, to which I have already referred.  The First-
    tier Tribunal Judge identifies this circumstance at paragraphs 7 and  8
    of the decision.  (The matter is not helped by the  fact  that  neither
    party has filed any further documents  in  the  context  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing - either to clarify matters in respect of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing or by way of evidential  material  in  the  event
    that the appeal  requires  to  be  remade  as  is  the  requirement  in
    accordance with standard directions that were issued to the parties  in
    this appeal in the usual way.)


4.    The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  essentially  considered   that   the
    Respondent had not made out her case under Regulation 19 and Regulation
    21, and in large part did  so  because  of  the  failure  to  file  any
    evidence.  In all of the circumstances, for the reasons set out in  her
    decision, the  Judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  exclusion  and
    subsequent removal was in breach of the EEA Regulations and allowed the
    appeal.


Challenge

5.   The Secretary of State broadly has raised three bases of  challenge  in
    the grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal.  Ms
    Everett seeks to emphasise the second of those  grounds  which  I  will
    come to shortly.  In my judgment she does well not to seek to emphasise
    either the first or third ground.


6.   The first ground is based on an allegation that  the  Judge  failed  to
    record the existence of a conviction for robbery.  It is said  in  this
    context in  the  Respondent's  grounds  that  when  the  Appellant  was
    sentenced  in  Lithuania  in  1998  he  was  sentenced  for  possessing
    prohibited weapons (firearms) and robbery.  It  is  to  be  noted  that
    neither the date of the conviction nor  the  fact  that  there  was  an
    element of robbery involved was mentioned in the Notice of  Immigration
    Decision, and because of the failure to file any further  materials  in
    the appeal there was no reference  to  robbery  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge at all. Necessarily the Judge cannot be  criticised  for
    not having mentioned it.


7.   The Respondent's third ground of appeal  relates  to  the  circumstance
    that the appeal proceeded 'on the papers' without a hearing.  The Judge
    clearly was aware that she was dealing with a case 'on the papers'.  It
    is suggested in the grounds  that  given  the  gravity  of  the  issues
    involved in this case, and the strong public interest, the Judge should
    have turned her mind to directing that there be an oral hearing in  the
    appeal.  I fail to see how that could have been in any way material  to
    the outcome of this case in circumstances where the Secretary of  State
    had not filed any evidence in any event,  and  the  Appellant  was  not
    present in the United Kingdom to give oral evidence in support  of  his
    appeal.


8.   The ground upon which Ms Everett does  place  reliance  is  essentially
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to recognise that  there  was
    in effect a hierarchy of public interest considerations in play in  the
    context of the exclusion provisions under the EEA Regulations.  In this
    regard in particular the provisions of Regulations 19(1) and 21(3)  are
    to be contrasted.  Under 19(1) "a person is not entitled to be admitted
    to the United Kingdom by virtue of Regulation 11 if  his  exclusion  is
    justified on grounds of public policy, public security or public health
    in accordance with Regulation 21."  Under Regulation 21(3) "a  relevant
    decision may not be taken in respect of a person with a permanent right
    of residence under Regulation 15 except on serious  grounds  of  public
    policy or public security."  The difference is that  "serious"  grounds
    are required in respect of a person with a permanent right of residence
    whereas only "grounds" are required sufficient to justify the  decision
    in respect of  a  person  who  does  not  have  a  permanent  right  of
    residence.


9.   There was no express evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  as
    to the Appellant's status prior to the decision  to  refuse  admission.
    The best that could be gleaned from the available information by way of
    the Notice of Immigration Decision was that the Appellant had  been  in
    the United Kingdom between April 2013 and August 2014.  As  it  happens
    Ms Everett is able to tell me that he came  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities in April 2013 - that is not a date of entry to the UK.   Be
    that as it may, there is  no  overt  indication  on  the  face  of  the
    Respondent's decision that the Appellant was a  person  with  permanent
    residence, nor does the Appellant make any such  assertion  or  provide
    any supporting documentation in this regard either in  his  grounds  of
    appeal or otherwise.


10.  However, the First-tier Tribunal Judge alighted on  the  words  in  the
    Notice of Immigration Decision in the first paragraph  quoted  above  -
    "your exclusion is justified on serious grounds of public policy".


11.  At  paragraph  10  of  her  decision  the  Judge  observes  that  "this
    therefore  implies  that  the  Appellant  has  a  permanent  right   of
    residence".  In my judgment that was an unsafe inference,  and  it  has
    had the effect  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  looked  at  the
    question of whether or not the Appellant's conduct justified  exclusion
    on an erroneous basis: the available facts indicate that the  Appellant
    had not acquired permanent  residence,  and  accordingly  the  'serious
    grounds'  test  was  the  wrong  test.   I  am  satisfied   that   that
    circumstance is sufficient to amount to an error of law which justifies
    setting aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


Remaking the decision

12.  In looking to remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal I  observe
    again that I am not greatly assisted by the effective failure  of  both
    parties to  participate  fully  in  these  proceedings  by  filing  any
    documents or relevant information.  I am prepared nonetheless to accept
    that the Appellant was convicted of firearms offences in Lithuania  for
    which he received a sentence of eight years.  I accept this fact on the
    basis that it is asserted in the Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  and
    that assertion is in itself some form of evidence as it  is  reasonable
    to infer that a competent decision-maker would not have  made  such  an
    assertion without some material before them to support it. Moreover the
    Appellant has not in any way sought to question that asserted  fact  in
    his Notice of Appeal or otherwise.


13.  I am similarly prepared to take into account the assertion made in  the
    Notice  of  Immigration  decision  as  to  the  Appellant's   offending
    behaviour in the United Kingdom - which is again not contested  in  the
    Notice of Appeal or otherwise.


14.  In those circumstances it does on  the  face  of  it  appear  that  the
    Appellant is an  individual  with  a  serious  criminal  record  and  a
    significant number of offences over a relatively short period of  time,
    which is at the very least indicative of a propensity to reoffend which
    might  readily  excite  the  public  policy  concerns   identified   in
    Regulation 19(1).


15.  However, what I am concerned about in this case is that there does  not
    on the face of it appear to have been any consideration  given  to  the
    provisions of Regulation 21(6) which is in the following terms:

         "Before taking a relevant decision on the grounds of public  policy
         or public security in relation to a person who is resident  in  the
         United  Kingdom  the  decision   maker   must   take   account   of
         considerations such  as  the  age,  state  of  health,  family  and
         economic situation of the person, the person's length of  residence
         in the United Kingdom, the person's social and cultural integration
         into the United Kingdom and the extent of the person's  links  with
         his country of origin."


16.  It is of  course  entirely  possible  that  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision maker did have regard to such matters, but if that is the case
    the consideration of such matters did not find its way into the  Notice
    of Immigration Decision and accordingly I find  that  the  Respondent's
    decision on its face does not  comply  with  the  requirements  of  the
    Regulations and is not in accordance with the  law.  On  that  basis  I
    allow this appeal as being not  in  accordance  with  the  law  to  the
    limited extent that the effect is that  the  matter  now  needs  to  be
    reconsidered in accordance with the law by the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

17.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.


18.  I remake the decision in the appeal. The Respondent's decision was  not
    in accordance with the law and the appeal is allowed to the extent that
    matters remain outstanding before the Respondent who must  now  make  a
    decision in accordance with the law.


19.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.

The above represents a corrected transcript of an ex tempore decision  given
at the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed                                  Date: 15 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid I have  considered
making a fee award. I have decided to make no  fee  award.  The  appeal  has
been only been allowed to a limited extent and on  procedural  grounds;  the
Appellant has not actively  participated  in  proceedings  or  provided  any
evidence in pursuit of his challenge that  his  exclusion  from  the  UK  is
justified on public policy grounds, and has thereby not assisted in any  way
in promoting full disposal of the appeal.

Signed                                  Date: 15 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
