
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA003322014
     OA003332014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 May 2016                            |On 15 June 2016                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                                     sak
                                     sok
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S McTaggart, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants applied on 11 September 2013 for entry clearance as Tier
    2 Dependants.   Their  applications  were  refused  with  reference  to
    paragraph 319H  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Essentially,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer ("the ECO") was not satisfied that their  sponsor  in
    the UK, their father, has and has had sole responsibility for them.

 2. Their appeals came before First-tier Tribunal Judge S  Gillespie  ("the
    FtJ") on 27 January 2015.  He dismissed both appeals,  concluding  that
    the appellants had not established that they met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 319H in terms of sole responsibility.

 3. The grounds of appeal before me can be summarised as  follows.   It  is
    argued that the FtJ erred in terms of his assessment of the evidence in
    relation to his knowledge of where the appellants went to  school.   It
    is also said that he was not entitled  to  conclude  that  the  divorce
    documents in respect of the sponsor and his ex-wife would need to refer
    to the children of the marriage, which the documents do not.  No expert
    evidence was adduced in that respect and  therefore  the  FtJ  was  not
    entitled to conclude that such documents would necessarily refer to the
    children.  The FtJ had not explained why  he  did  not  find  that  the
    Nepalese Country Code assisted the appellants in  terms  of  why  there
    would be no reference to them in the divorce proceedings.  It  is  also
    argued that the FtJ had been  wrong  to  take  into  account  that  the
    sponsor did not explain the grounds on which he and his wife  divorced,
    and that he would not be drawn into an explanation  of  those  grounds.
    Furthermore, it is argued that the FtJ did not  give  the  sponsor  the
    opportunity to deal with any of  the  issues  raised  at  [21]  of  the
    decision in terms of the FtJ's concerns about the  sponsor's  ex-wife's
    witness statement, or his concerns about the credibility of his ex-wife
    having deserted the two appellants.

 4. The respondent's 'rule 24' response, in essence, contends that the  FtJ
    gave sustainable reasons for his conclusions.  So far  as  the  Country
    Code is concerned, the ECO had also  raised  concerns  as  to  why  the
    divorce documents did not refer to the appellants  and  the  ECO  would
    have been best placed to make an assessment of applications  for  entry
    clearance from Nepal.  It is argued  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  in
    relation to the FtJ's decision are nothing  more  than  a  disagreement
    with the findings.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The FtJ said at [17] that the sponsor gave conflicting and  implausible
    evidence relating to the appellants' school.  He  said  that  the  fact
    that the sponsor did not know the address  of  the  appellants'  school
    damaged his credibility.  Furthermore, he noted that the  evidence  was
    that the boarding school was within a five to ten  minutes'  walk  from
    the family home, in Wami, Gulmi.  However, he said that  Chitwan  where
    the school is located, is 120 kilometres away from the family  home  in
    Wami.

 6. At [18], dealing with the  divorce  decree,  he  noted  that  it  makes
    reference to the sponsor's former wife making no claims to alimony, and
    concluded that it was not credible to claim that the family proceedings
    would not mention custody where two children are concerned, or  at  the
    very least mention their existence as children  of  the  marriage.   He
    referred to the Country Code and what it says about  the  father  being
    responsible for guardianship and upbringing of any  children  in  cases
    where the mother does not wish to do so after divorce.  If  the  mother
    wants to take care of the children under 5  years  of  age  until  they
    become 5 years old, she is permitted to do so.  If she does not want to
    do so then the father must take care of them.  He said that he was  not
    persuaded that  that  explanation  accounts  for  the  absence  of  any
    reference to the children in the divorce proceedings.

 7. At [20] the FtJ said that he was struck by the fact  that  the  sponsor
    would not relate the grounds on which his wife  divorced  or  be  drawn
    into an explanation of those grounds, save for his  statement  both  in
    cross-examination and in re-examination that he believed he had  looked
    after her well.  The FtJ concluded that the sponsor's evidence on  that
    point was more likely to have arisen from a lack of  knowledge  of  the
    contents of the (divorce) document.

 8. As regards the written statement from the sponsor's ex-wife,  he  noted
    that it was in English, without any accompanying statement in Nepalese.
     He noted that it does not claim to be a translation.  Other  documents
    before him were certified as translations.  He said  that  it  was  not
    clear from the certificate on the statement that it  was  read  to  the
    witness in a language she understood.  How and  in  what  circumstances
    she made the statement the FtJ considered to be unclear.  He said  that
    it was "by far" the best crafted document before him.

 9. Although the sponsor's ex-wife claimed  in  the  statement  to  have  a
    knowledge of the Country Code, that was "pretending to a knowledge that
    must be outwith her experience".  He found that her renunciation of all
    interest in the appellants was "unnaturally emphatic" and he  concluded
    that the statement had been prepared to a blue  print  rather  than  in
    accordance with her experience.  In the same paragraph he found that it
    was not credible that a mother would desert her 26 month and  15  month
    old boys at divorce, disclaim all future interest in them and not  even
    express an interest in seeing them 12 years after being separated  from
    them in circumstances where their father had been abusive to her.

10. He considered that there was weight in the point made on behalf of  the
    respondent before him to the effect that the  divorce  decree  document
    was inconsistent with family proceedings  in  its  heading  "Individual
    Criminal No.176 of the year 2001".

11. He expressed particular concern about the sponsor's "clear evidence" on
    where the school was in relation to  the  family  home  in  Gulmi,  his
    inability to give the address, and its actual location  120  kilometres
    away.

    Submissions

12. Mr McTaggart contended that it appears that the FtJ undertook  his  own
    research in terms of the distance  between  Gulmi  and  Chitwan,  since
    there was no reference to a distance of 120 kilometres at  the  hearing
    or in the documents before the FtJ.  This is significant because it was
    a fundamental aspect of the FtJ's conclusions.  Furthermore,  this  was
    not a matter that was put to the sponsor.

13. In relation to the point about where  the  appellants  actually  lived,
    with reference to the school, Mr McTaggart was not able  to  direct  my
    attention to the evidence which supported the contention in the grounds
    to the effect that the sponsor's evidence was that the  family  have  a
    permanent home in Gulmi but the family resided in  Chitwan,  where  the
    school was located.

14. Reliance was placed in submissions on the contention that there was  no
    reason for the  FtJ  to  conclude  that  the  divorce  documents  would
    necessarily refer to the children.

15. Given that the FtJ had said at [23] that the evidence taken as a  whole
    "does not tip in favour of the Appellants", it is evident that the  FtJ
    concluded that the decision was finely balanced.

16. Furthermore, the FtJ  did  not  undertake  an  assessment  of  all  the
    necessary  factors  to  be  taken  into  account  in  terms  of   'sole
    responsibility'.

17. Mr Duffy relied on the rule 24 response.  It was submitted that the FtJ
    gave adequate reasons for his conclusions.  Although it was conceded on
    behalf  of  the  respondent  that  it  is  not  clear  where  the  '120
    kilometres' distance came from, the FtJ said that the sponsor  did  not
    know the address of the school.  Furthermore,  the  evidence  from  the
    sponsor's witness statement at [5] was to  the  effect  that  when  the
    sponsor went to go and work in  Dubai  in  2003,  the  appellants  were
    living with him and his mother and father and aunt in  his  house,  and
    that they continued living there when he left.   It  would  not  appear
    from the sponsor's evidence that they did move to Chitwan.  The FtJ was
    therefore entitled to find that the appellant did not live five to  ten
    minutes walk away from the family home in Wami, Gulmi.

18. At the time of the divorce the appellants were aged  3  and  under  and
    would generally be looked after by their mother.  The FtJ was  entitled
    to take this into account in terms of the  lack  of  reference  to  the
    children in the divorce documents.  Furthermore, the FtJ  was  entitled
    to find as he did in relation to the statements said  to  be  from  the
    sponsor's ex-wife.

19. Once the FtJ had concluded that the sponsor was not  being  candid,  he
    was entitled to conclude that he did not have sole  responsibility  for
    the appellants.

    My Assessment

20. I do not accept the submission on behalf of the appellant before me  to
    the effect that the FtJ felt that the decision was finally balanced  or
    a "close decision" as it was put to me.  It is  clear  from  the  FtJ's
    reasons that he emphatically rejected the credibility of  the  sponsor,
    and the claim that he had sole responsibility for the appellants.

21. As regards the lack of reference  to  the  appellants  in  the  divorce
    documents, I am satisfied that the FtJ was entitled to conclude on  the
    evidence before him that it was not credible that  there  would  be  no
    reference to the children in those divorce proceedings.   Although  the
    Country Code was relied on on behalf of the  appellants,  the  FtJ  was
    entitled to reject the contention that that explained why there was  no
    reference to the children, who were aged 3 years and 1 year old at  the
    time of the divorce.  Whilst the  Country  Code  explains  what  is  to
    happen in the event that a mother does not want to  take  care  of  the
    children on divorce, that did not explain to the FtJ's satisfaction the
    lack of reference to them in the divorce documents.  This is  a  matter
    that the sponsor was asked about, as recorded  at  [11]  of  the  FtJ's
    decision.  Asked to explain why the divorce decree did not mention  the
    children, his answer was that they were very  young  at  the  time  and
    perhaps that was the reason.  It may be that he could have gone  on  to
    state that reference to them was not  required  in  the  light  of  the
    Country Code, but that was not his evidence before the FtJ.  It was for
    the appellants, through the sponsor, to explain that and  other  issues
    to the satisfaction of the FtJ.  There is no irrationality in the FtJ's
    conclusion in this regard.

22. In addition, at [20] the FTJ remarked on  the  fact  that  the  sponsor
    would not relate or be drawn on the grounds on which his wife  divorced
    him, stating that he believed  he  looked  after  her  well.   That  is
    inconsistent with the information in the divorce  document  as  to  his
    alleged behaviour.  The FtJ's conclusion was that this  was  likely  to
    have arisen from a lack of knowledge on the part of the sponsor  as  to
    the contents of that document.

23. It is also to be noted that whereas the divorce document says that  for
    some  years  after  their  marriage  they  had,  in  effect,   a   good
    relationship, and there is detailed reference to what is said  to  have
    been the sponsor's behaviour towards his ex-wife, there is  no  mention
    at all of their having had any children.

24. At  [21]  the  FtJ  gave  detailed  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    statements said to be from the sponsor's ex-wife suffered from  several
    credibility issues.  He was entitled to  conclude  that  the  statement
    appeared to be prepared "to a blueprint" rather than in accordance with
    the  witness's  experience.   Similarly,  the   conclusion   that   her
    renunciation  of  all  interest  in  the  appellants  was  "unnaturally
    emphatic" was a conclusion that was open to him on the evidence.  It is
    also to be noted that at [15] the FtJ asked the sponsor why it was that
    his ex-wife  was  so  willing  to  cooperate  in  the  application  (by
    providing a written statement).  His explanation was that it  could  be
    that she had no interest in helping the children, although that on  the
    face of it does not clearly address the FtJ's question.  It is not  the
    case, as suggested in the grounds, that the sponsor did  not  have  the
    opportunity to address the question of why the appellant's mother would
    desert her very young children at the time of divorce.  The matter  was
    put to him as recorded at [9] and the sponsor was not able  to  explain
    why this was so.

25. Otherwise, in terms of the FtJ's assessment of  the  witness  statement
    said to be from the sponsor's ex-wife, it was  for  the  appellants  to
    establish their case, including with reference to relevant  documentary
    evidence.  It was not incumbent on the FtJ to put every  point  to  the
    sponsor in relation to that document.  The sponsor was asked about  it,
    as is clear from [9] and [15].  The FtJ was entitled to reject  it,  in
    particular bearing in mind the  lack  of  explanation  as  to  why  the
    appellants' mother would  abandon  them.  Additionally,  the  FtJ  also
    remarked  on  the  fact  that  the  divorce  document  had  the   words
    "Individual Criminal  No.176  of  the  year  2001"  on  it,  which  was
    inconsistent with family proceedings.

26. So far as the location of the school is concerned, although at  [6]  it
    is recorded that the sponsor said that the school was in Bharatpur - 8,
    Chitwan, at [14] it is recorded that  the  sponsor  did  not  know  the
    address of the school, simply saying that it was near the  family  home
    and took about five to ten minutes walking.  It  appears  that  at  one
    point at least, the sponsor was unable to recall  the  address  of  the
    school.

27. Although it is said in the grounds that the sponsor's evidence was that
    the family have a permanent home in Gulmi but  the  family  resides  in
    Chitwan, I was not directed to anything that supports  that  contention
    as  to  the  sponsor's  evidence.   I  do  note  that   the   character
    certificates in relation to the appellants at pages 28 and  29  of  the
    appellant's  bundle  do  appear  to  state  that  the  appellants   are
    inhabitants of "VDC/Municipality Bharatpur  ward  no.10  Chitwan",  but
    that appears to be the only  possible  source  of  information  to  the
    effect that the appellants live at an address very close to the school.

28. Having  said  that,  it  is  not  clear  where  the  FtJ  obtained  the
    information about Gulmi and Chitwan being 120 kilometres apart.  In the
    absence of any indication that this was evidence before  him,  it  does
    appear that the FtJ may have undertook his own research on  the  point.
    If so, as is clear from authority, that was entirely inappropriate  for
    many obvious reasons.

29. However, the point remains that on the basis of the evidence before the
    FtJ, the school was in a different place from where the appellants  are
    said to have lived.   To  that  extent  the  FtJ's  assessment  of  the
    sponsor's evidence was justified.

30. When considering the FtJ's decision as a whole, I am satisfied that  it
    provides legally  sustainable  reasons  for  his  conclusion  that  the
    sponsor  has  not  and  did  not  have  sole  responsibility  for   the
    appellants.  The FtJ was entitled to reject  the  suggestion  that  the
    appellants' mother expressed no interest in them at  the  time  of  the
    divorce or since.  He gave reasons  for  concluding  that  the  witness
    statement said to be from the appellant's mother could not  be  'relied
    on', albeit that the FtJ did not use that  phrase.   There  were  other
    respects in which the sponsor's evidence was found  to  be  lacking  in
    credibility.

31. In those circumstances, the FtJ plainly rejected  the  contention  that
    the sponsor had sole responsibility for  the  appellants  as  had  been
    claimed, in terms of taking decisions in their lives and so forth.   It
    is evident that he rejected the sponsor's evidence in that respect.

32. Whilst it is the case that  the  FtJ's  decision  is  not  immune  from
    criticism, when his decision is considered overall I am satisfied  that
    it is legally sustainable.  I am not satisfied that there is any  error
    of law in the FtJ's decision, or any that is material to  the  outcome.
    The decision to dismiss the appeal therefore stands.

Decision

33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to dismiss the appeal of each
    appellant therefore stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 14/06/16

