
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00626/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  11 October 2013                           |On 22 October 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-NAIROBI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            JOTHAM NJOROGE MARAI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Not represented.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



    1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a  decision
       of First-tier Tribunal Judge Coleman  who  allowed  the  appellant's
       appeal against a decision to refuse entry clearance  as  a  partner.
       The refusal was based on Appendix FM of HC  395  (as  amended).  For
       convenience, I refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
       tier Tribunal.

    2. The sponsor was given notice of the hearing before me by letter from
       the Tribunal but she did not attend. There was  no  notification  to
       the Tribunal that she had wanted to attend but  was  unable  to  for
       some reason. The appellant was also notified  of  the  hearing,  the
       significance of that being that he would also have been able to  ask
       his wife to attend. There was no reason to do other than to  proceed
       with the hearing notwithstanding the absence of the sponsor.

    3. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya, born on the 13 September  1969.
       The application for entry clearance was refused on the basis that he
       had not satisfied the financial requirements of the rules  in  terms
       of evidence provided in relation to  his  sponsor's  employment  and
       salary.

    4. Judge Coleman concluded at [9] that the appellant was  not  able  to
       succeed in his appeal under the Immigration Rules because he had not
       provided  his  sponsor's  contract  of  employment  and   the   bank
       statements did not coincide with the  period  covered  by  the  wage
       slips. The latter months were not covered  in  the  bank  statements
       although the earlier months were. There were no wage slips  for  the
       earlier months.  At [10] she stated that the Rules are specific  and
       do not admit of any discretion.

    5. In relation to Article 8, she appears to have found at [13] that the
       appellant could not meet the 'Article 8' rules, although she did not
       express it that way. She made reference to the requirement of  there
       being  insuperable  obstacles  to  family   life   being   conducted
       elsewhere, although whether in any event  that  requirement  of  the
       Rules accords with Article 8 is doubtful (see  MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]
       EWCA Civ 1192 at [49]).

    6. Nevertheless, in going on to consider Article 8 proper, and adopting
       the structured approach set  out  in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,  she
       concluded that the decision to refuse entry clearance  would  amount
       to a disproportionate interference with the appellant's family  life
       and thus allowed the appeal.

    7. Her reasons for so concluding were firstly  that  it  would  not  be
       reasonable to expect the appellant's wife, who has indefinite  leave
       to remain and is settled and has employment in the UK, to  leave  so
       that they could be together in Kenya. Secondly, she found  that  the
       evidence was more than sufficient to show  that  the  sponsor  earns
       considerably more than  the  minimum  requirement  to  maintain  and
       accommodate them. It  was  only  because  of  the  lack  of  certain
       specific pieces of evidence that the appeal under the Rules  failed,
       and changes in the rules meant that the application would  now  have
       been allowed.

    8. She concluded that given that all that would be served by dismissing
       the appeal was that  the  appellant  would  have  to  make  a  fresh
       application, the interference was disproportionate.

    9. On the question of accommodation, she resolved that issue in  favour
       of the appellant, albeit within the Article 8 assessment.

   10. Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  It
       was submitted that the appellant would be able  to  make  a  further
       application  for  entry  clearance  and  so  the  decision  was  not
       disproportionate (under Article 8).

Conclusions

   11. It is clear from Judge Coleman's determination  that  the  appellant
       was not able to meet the financial requirements of  the  Immigration
       Rules for entry clearance as a partner, as set out in  Appendix  FM.
       Judge Coleman allowed the appeal effectively on the basis  that  the
       appellant had almost met those requirements and  because  the  Rules
       subsequently changed in a way that meant that  the  appellant  would
       have been able to meet  the  requirements  if  the  new  Rules  were
       applied.

   12. It is understandable why she allowed the appeal under Article 8  but
       in doing so I am satisfied that she erred in law. Judge  Coleman  in
       effect allowed the appeal on the basis that the appellant  had  only
       failed to satisfy the requirements of the Rules by a  small  margin.
       In other words she dealt with it, in part, on the basis of  a  'near
       miss'. As the respondent's grounds point out, this  is  contrary  to
       the decision in Miah [2012] EWCA Civ 261, where at [26] it was  said
       that "there is no Near-Miss principle applicable to the  Immigration
       Rules".

   13. Although Judge Coleman  concluded  that  the  appellant  would  have
       succeeded in the application had it been  decided  under  the  later
       version of the Rules that came into force shortly after the decision
       in her case, that it  not  necessarily  so.  Under  Appendix  FM-SE,
       2A(ii) the ECO may grant the application where  the  applicant  does
       not submit a signed contract of employment, if  satisfied  that  all
       the requirements of the Appendix relating  to  employment  are  met.
       There is also a discretionary element in paragraph D of Appendix FM-
       SE, a part of the Rules that the judge also referred to.

   14. Whilst any discretion would have to  be  exercised  reasonably,  the
       fact that there is a discretionary aspect to the Rules as  modified,
       in so far as they relate to circumstances similar to those  of  this
       appellant, means that there is no certainty that the application for
       entry clearance would  have  been  granted.  That  aside,  the  fact
       remains that at the date of the decision the appellant was not  able
       to meet the requirements of the Rules.

   15. I am satisfied that in dealing with the proportionality issue partly
       on the basis of 'near miss' and in  concluding  that  the  appellant
       would have succeeded in the application if made under the new Rules,
       the First-tier judge erred in  law.  The  'near  miss'  approach  is
       illegitimate and the judge did not apparently give any consideration
       to  the  requirements  of  predictability  and  certainty   in   the
       application of the Rules, as explained by  the  House  of  Lords  in
       Huang, cited below. Accordingly, I set aside her decision.

   16. It is only the proportionality aspect of Article 8 that needs to  be
       re-decided. In this context I bear in mind that the appellant  would
       be able to make a fresh application for entry clearance in which  he
       would  be  able  to  submit  the  specified  financial   documentary
       evidence. I  accept  that  that  would  involve  some  expense,  but
       nevertheless it is an option that is available to him.  There  would
       be some delay but the application which  was  the  subject  of  this
       appeal was decided by the ECO in about five weeks.

   17. In considering the proportionality of the decision I  bear  in  mind
       that in Huang [2007] UKHL 11, the House of Lords referred at [16] to
       "the general administrative desirability of applying known rules  if
       a system of immigration control  is  to  be  workable,  predictable,
       consistent and fair as between one applicant and another " and  "the
       damage to good administration and effective control if a  system  is
       perceived  by  applicants  internationally  to  be  unduly   porous,
       unpredictable or perfunctory..."

   18. The legitimate aim under Article 8 in this case is the economic well-
       being of the country  expressed  as  the  maintenance  of  effective
       immigration control. Bearing in mind the  principle  of  applying  a
       predictable and consistent application of the Immigration  Rules,  I
       am not satisfied that the decision of the respondent does amount  to
       a disproportionate interference with the  appellant's  family  life.
       The appellant has the option of making a fresh application for entry
       clearance which is likely to be decided within  a  reasonable  time.



Decision

   19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law in terms of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.  The
       decision of the First-tier Tribunal in that respect is set aside.

   20. The decision to dismiss  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules
       stands.

   21. The appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR is dismissed.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 21/10/13
