
[pic]
IAC-YW-LM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/00907/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 April 2015                     |On 04 June 2015                      |
|Prepared on 30 April 2015            |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                           DR RAHMATULLAH HAMDARD
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Spart Hamdard, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 17 June 1937  and  is
    therefore now aged 78 years.  He appealed against  a  decision  of  the
    Respondent dated 17 December 2013 which was to refuse  his  application
    for entry clearance as an adult dependent relative of a British citizen
    pursuant to Appendix FM section E-ECDR.   His  appeal  was  allowed  at
    first  instance  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Phull.   The
    Respondent appeals with leave against her decision.  Thus  whilst  this
    matter came before me initially as an appeal by the Respondent, for the
    reasons which I have set out below I set the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal aside on the grounds of error of law and reheard  the  matter.
    I therefore continue to refer to the parties  as  they  were  known  at
    first instance for the sake of convenience.

Immigration Law and Rules relevant to the Appellant

2.   Section E-ECDR of Appendix FM sets out the requirements to be met by  a
    person seeking entry clearance as an  adult  dependent  relative.   The
    burden of proof of establishing that the requirements of the  paragraph
    are met rests upon the Appellant and the standard of proof is the usual
    civil standard of balance of probabilities.  E-ECDR 2.5 states that for
    entry clearance to be granted the applicant must be unable,  even  with
    the practical and financial help of the Sponsor, to obtain the required
    level of care in the country where they are living because  (a)  it  is
    not available and there is no person in that country who can reasonably
    provide it, or (b) it is not affordable.

3.   Appendix FM-SE paragraph 34 prescribes, in the case of adult  dependent
    relatives, what form the evidence should take to show that as a  result
    of age, illness or disability the applicant requires long-term personal
    care. This should be medical evidence that the applicant's physical  or
    mental condition means that they cannot perform everyday tasks and must
    be from a doctor  or  other  health  professional.   Evidence  is  also
    required that the applicant is unable,  even  with  the  practical  and
    financial help of the Sponsor in the UK, to obtain the  required  level
    of care in the country where they are living and it should  be  from  a
    central or local health authority, a local authority  or  a  doctor  or
    other health professional.  Where the  Appellant's  required  care  has
    previously been provided through a private  arrangement  the  applicant
    must provide details of that  arrangement  and  why  it  is  no  longer
    available.

The Hearing at First Instance

4.   The evidence before the Judge came from the Appellant's son,  Mr  Spart
    Hamdard, the Sponsor in this matter who also appeared before  me.   The
    Judge summarised the Sponsor's evidence at paragraphs 5 to  10  of  her
    determination as follows:

         "5.  In answer to my questions the Sponsor  said  that  his  father
             requires help on a daily basis to perform everyday tasks.   He
             also travelled to India when his father  travelled  there  for
             medical treatment in 2013.  He had to take care of his father,
             taking him to  the  bathroom,  help  with  washing,  changing,
             dressing, help with heating food and drinks.  His father needs
             this help because he is blind in one eye and has a cataract in
             the other.  His father is very weak and cannot walk.  This was
             his father's situation in December 2013.  His  father  had  to
             return to Kabul after his visa was refused.  His father had  a
             supply of medication with him.

         6.   In cross-examination the Sponsor said that his  father's  lung
             disease started in December  2012.   His  father  returned  to
             Afghanistan at the beginning of 2012 to run  his  clinic.   He
             then travelled to India  for  medical  treatment  because  his
             situation  was  very  serious.   His  father's   friends   and
             colleagues transferred him to Kabul.  The journey to Kabul  is
             approximately ten or eleven hours by  car.   When  his  father
             went to India friends and colleagues helped  with  the  flight
             and a neighbour travelled with him.

         7.   The Appellant's application was made whilst he was  in  India.
             The Sponsor travelled to India.  The Appellant  was  in  India
             from May to December 2013 but had  to  return  to  Afghanistan
             when his application was refused.  Normally they  ask  friends
             to provide that care but  they  can  only  provide  short-term
             care.  There is no private or government organisation to  help
             with long-term care.

         8.   His father went to hospital in Kabul for the lung  disease  in
             June 2012 from his home town.  He remained in  hospital  until
             he went to India.  He submitted  a  petition  written  to  the
             local provincial  council  to  ascertain  whether  they  could
             accommodate the elderly.  The petition was put to the governor
             who sent it to various departments in Afghanistan.  They  have
             said they cannot help.

         9.   Care facilities are unavailable in their home  town  and  even
             Kabul.  His father needs care on a daily basis because of  his
             age and illness; friends and neighbours cannot help on a long-
             term basis.  He has a letter from the  doctor  in  India  that
             says his father needs attention and someone to look after  him
             and may require two people to attend  if  he  does  any  heavy
             exertion.  His father has serious health problems, is 77 years
             of age and requires  help  to  perform  everyday  tasks.   The
             clinicians cannot confirm the services  his  father  requires.
             They have submitted all the evidence which speaks for  itself.
             His father is currently in Kabul receiving medical  treatment.
             They have a young student helping his father  on  a  temporary
             arrangement.  He will leave to continue with his studies.

         10.  The Sponsor submitted that his statement deals with the issues
             raised by the Respondent who has not considered  the  case  on
             its merits.  He has provided evidence from clinicians that his
             father's health is not in a good condition,  he  is  77  years
             old,  isolated  because  he  lives  in  a  remote  corner   of
             Afghanistan, which is affected by  the  war.   As  the  eldest
             child he is the only one that can provide care for his father.
              He is in full-time employment, has a family here  and  cannot
             relocate to Afghanistan because he has employment  and  family
             commitments.  He has given assurances that he  will  care  for
             his father without recourse to  public  funds  and  healthcare
             insurance.  He wants a chance to care for his father."

5.   The Judge accepted the medical evidence  of  the  treatment  which  the
    Appellant had received and found that the Appellant required  long-term
    personal care to perform everyday tasks.   The  Appellant  was  unable,
    even with the practical and financial help of the  Sponsor,  to  obtain
    the required level of care in Afghanistan because it was not  available
    and there was no-one in Afghanistan who could  reasonably  provide  it.
    The  Appellant's  lung  disease  was  incurable  and  impacted  on  the
    Appellant's other activities.  The Appellant lived in a  very  isolated
    and rural part of Afghanistan, the nearest hospital being 95 kilometres
    away.  It was not a requirement  of  Appendix  FM  that  the  Appellant
    should apply to move to Germany where other members of his family  were
    and the argument that the Sponsor should move  to  Afghanistan  ignored
    the fact that he was a British national and was not required  to  leave
    the UK.   Despite  the  Sponsor's  practical  and  financial  help  the
    Appellant could not obtain  the  required  level  of  care.  The  Judge
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.





The Onward Appeal

6.   The Respondent appealed against that decision, arguing that  the  Judge
    had overlooked the requirements of Appendix  FM-SE  that  evidence  was
    required of the Appellant's long-term personal care needs.   Permission
    was initially refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Chambers on 5
    January 2015, who held that  the  Judge  had  fittingly  explained  her
    findings.  The Respondent renewed the application and the  matter  came
    on the papers before Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor on 4 March 2015.  He
    granted permission to appeal, stating:

         "It is arguable as a consequence of the operation of paragraph b to
         Appendix FM-SE of  the  Rules  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
         required but failed to consider the evidential requirements set out
         in paragraphs 34 to 37 of Appendix FM-SE [which are incorrectly set
         out in the grounds the amendments made on 6 April 2014 by  HC  1138
         wrongly being included therein] despite  such  evidence  not  being
         specified as being required by Section E-ECDR of Appendix FM."

7.   As I explained to the  Sponsor  during  the  hearing,  there  were  two
    points which arose from that grant of permission.  The first  was  that
    in his onward appeal the Respondent had stated that what  was  required
    was independent medical  evidence  that  the  Appellant's  physical  or
    mental conditions meant that he could not perform everyday tasks.   The
    word independent had been asserted into Appendix FM-SE by HC 1138 from
    6  April  2014.   As  this  application  was  made  in  2013  and   the
    transitional provisions were  not  clear,  it  would  appear  that  the
    evidential requirements which govern this application were for  medical
    evidence not independent medical evidence (it is of course arguable  as
    to what practical difference the insertion  of  that  word  independent
    actually makes).

8.   The second point was that Section E-ECDR of Appendix FM does not  refer
    in terms to Appendix FM-SE, there is no direct  link  between  the  two
    appendices in that Section E-ECDR does not state that this Section will
    be satisfied provided that the evidence in Appendix FM-SE is  produced.
    This  can  be  contrasted  to  the  wording  in   points-based   system
    provisions.  I indicated that there was nothing  to  suggest  that  one
    part of the Immigration Rules was superior to another  part.   The  two
    Sections in Appendix FM and Appendix FM-SE were not in contradiction to
    each other and therefore both applied.  It was not  therefore  strictly
    necessary for Appendix FM to state in terms that the Section  would  be
    complied  with  provided  that  the  evidence  in  Appendix  FM-SE  was
    provided.

The Error of Law Stage

9.   As a result of the grant of permission the matter  came  before  me  to
    determine whether there was an error of law.  Judge O'Connor  had  also
    made certain  directions  that  the  parties  should  prepare  for  the
    forthcoming hearing on the basis that if the Upper Tribunal decided  to
    set aside the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  any  evidence
    that the Upper Tribunal might need to consider if it decided to  remake
    the decision should be so considered at that hearing.  Thus if I  found
    that there was a material error of law in the Judge's  determination  I
    would go on to rehear the matter.  If there was no material error  then
    the decision would stand.

10.  In oral submissions the Presenting Officer stated  that  the  issue  of
    the evidence to support the Appellant's care needs was  highlighted  in
    the Entry Clearance Manager's response to the appeal.  Although it  was
    argued that the Appellant's situation had deteriorated,  there  was  no
    evidence to show that.  The Respondent's case was  that  the  Appellant
    was not living in unacceptable conditions.

12.  The Sponsor in reply  stated  that  as  the  case  had  progressed  the
    Respondent had formulated a number of different  reasons.   His  father
    had  now  been  diagnosed  with  atherosclerosis.   Evidence  had  been
    produced confirming his father's lung disease from the  hospital.   The
    evidence that had been produced was as much as it was possible for  him
    to produce.  His father's condition of atherosclerosis meant that there
    was a flow of blood to his brain and this had  been  diagnosed  in  the
    last two months, he  was  paralysed  now.   He  was  being  treated  in
    hospital but that was difficult because the  hospitals  in  Afghanistan
    were inundated with casualties from  the  war.   The  Appellant  was  a
    doctor and he had ex-colleagues in the hospital so he  could  get  help
    but this was only a short-term fix.  His colleagues could  not  provide
    the long-term care that the Appellant needed.   The  situation  at  the
    moment was that he was bed-bound and the disease he had would lead to a
    stroke or heart attack.

13.  He, the Sponsor, had asked for the appeal to be expedited in the  light
    of this deteriorating situation.  He was not sure that the family could
    provide any further evidence to  convince  the  Home  Office.   He  had
    received independent legal advice from solicitors who had told him that
    he had a genuine case to care for his  father  in  this  country.   The
    Judge had allowed the appeal at first instance and permission to appeal
    had then been  refused.   The  Sponsor,  would  provide  all  necessary
    support to his father once his father was  here.   That  care  was  not
    available in Afghanistan.  His father required complex treatment.   The
    Appellant was a 79 year old man.  He needed to be kept  as  comfortable
    as possible, hospitals would not provide that level of  care.   Doctors
    could only do basic things.

14.  I raised with the Sponsor  the  documents  in  the  Appellant's  bundle
    which referred to previous appeals when the Appellant was seeking entry
    clearance as a visitor.  At that time  in  2007  his  father  had  been
    working in a hospital in Russia and spoke Russian.  When the  situation
    in Afghanistan improved his father went back to Afghanistan and  opened
    his own clinic and after a while started to  get  the  health  problems
    that he now  suffers  from,  although  he  did  work  for  a  while  in
    Afghanistan.  His father's speciality was as a urologist but the clinic
    which he opened in Afghanistan was basically a GP practice dealing with
    minor issues.  It was not a complex or big facility.

15.  At the end of submissions I indicated that I found there was  an  error
    of  law  in  the  determination  at  first  instance.   The  Judge  had
    overlooked the requirements in Appendix FM-SE for evidence  to  support
    the Appellant's requirements for long-term personal  care.   The  Judge
    had before her evidence of the Appellant's serious  medical  conditions
    including his lung disease but that did not  stretch  to  documentation
    showing what the care needs were.  Indeed the Sponsor frankly  accepted
    that he could not obtain that evidence.  The evidence which  the  Judge
    received was from the Sponsor, it was not medical evidence.   The  only
    medical evidence referred to in the determination which had any bearing
    on the Appellant's need for personal care was a reference to the letter
    from the doctor in India, Dr Maini, dated 10 October  2013.   This  set
    out the Appellant's requirement of one attendant to look after him  and
    that he might require two whilst climbing stairs.

16.  What was needed, however, was evidence from a doctor  or  other  health
    professional that the Appellant's physical or  mental  condition  meant
    that he could not perform everyday tasks.   Climbing  stairs  or  heavy
    exertions might or  might  not  be  everyday  tasks  depending  on  the
    circumstances.  I indicated that I found an error of law in the Judge's
    determination because  she  had  not  considered  the  requirement  for
    evidence under the  Rules  and  indicated  therefore  that  I  set  her
    decision aside  and  would  rehear  the  matter.   The  Judge  had  not
    considered Article 8 because the case had not reached that far  as  she
    had allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules but I indicated that
    I would consider the case on both bases.

The Substantive Hearing

17.  The Sponsor gave oral testimony, adopting the  statement  he  made  for
    the proceedings at first instance, in which he had  argued  that  there
    was no-one who could reasonably provide the required level of  care  to
    his father.  His father was single,  elderly  and  severely  ill.   His
    advanced lung disease meant he was in  need  of  a  regular  supply  of
    oxygen cylinders which were not readily available in the area where  he
    lived.  The care he was trying to  obtain  for  his  father  was  badly
    affected by corruption.  For example, his  father  was  entitled  to  a
    pension after long service as a doctor but  this  had  been  refused  a
    number of times with no official explanation.  There were  no  private,
    professional, reliable and trusted providers  of  domestic  care.   The
    hospital dealing  with  his  father's  lung  disease  was  a  makeshift
    building and basic in terms of the provision of healthcare.  His father
    had had to travel to India to get  urgent  treatment.   Whilst  it  was
    possible to get cheaper care in Afghanistan (cheaper than  say  in  the
    UK), the care providers were unable to deliver  the  complex  demanding
    and specialist care that the Appellant's father needed.  Relocation  of
    other family members to Afghanistan was out of the question due to  the
    poor security situation in Afghanistan.  According to the World  Health
    Organisation the average life expectancy in Afghanistan was 65.5  years
    and the Appellant's father was already 78.  His father was in  need  of
    24 hour care.

18.  In oral testimony the Sponsor said that  the  only  evidence  he  could
    give  was  in  his  statement.   His  father's  recent   condition   of
    atherosclerosis for which he was currently being treated at a  hospital
    in Kabul had occurred three weeks ago.   The  Appellant  had  travelled
    from the north of the country to Kabul with the help of an ex-colleague
    who unfortunately had had a heart attack himself  two  weeks  ago.  The
    Sponsor could not approach that person's family for confirmation of the
    hospital visit.

19.  In closing the Presenting Officer stated that  the  issue  was  one  of
    evidence.  There was a requirement to  follow  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The test in a leave to enter case outside the Immigration Rules  was  a
    need to demonstrate exceptional circumstances and that was a matter for
    the Tribunal. In closing the Sponsor stated that whilst he might not be
    able to meet some of the requirements, what the case was about  was  he
    wished to be able to look after his father in the last few years of his
    life.  He had given all the  information  he  could.   There  would  be
    medical health insurance cover for his father.

Findings

20.  The Appellant suffers from a number of serious medical  conditions  for
    which he requires treatment.  Although he lives in  a  remote  part  of
    Afghanistan he is able to access hospital treatment, indeed I  am  told
    he is currently undergoing treatment at a  hospital  in  Kabul  at  the
    present time.

21.  To be able to satisfy the Immigration Rules  the  Appellant  must  show
    that he is unable, even with the practical and financial  help  of  the
    Sponsor, to obtain the required level of care  in  Afghanistan  because
    such care is not available and  there  is  no-one  who  can  reasonably
    provide it.  The alternative limb that it is not affordable appears not
    to be in dispute  in  this  case,  the  Sponsor  acknowledging  in  his
    statement that cheaper personal care  (that  is  cheaper  than  in  the
    United Kingdom) is available in Afghanistan.  The cost to  the  Sponsor
    in looking after the Appellant in this country would be more  expensive
    than if the Appellant continued to live in Afghanistan and the  Sponsor
    sent funds to enable that to continue. It is the Appellant's  case,  as
    articulated by the Sponsor, that the level of care is not available and
    there is no-one who can provide it.

22.  The first issue to decide is the  level  of  care  that  the  Appellant
    actually needs.  The second issue is to see whether there is  no  other
    way the needs can be met other than by  the  Appellant  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom. I accept the point that it is not a valid argument  for
    the Respondent to make that the Appellant could go to  Germany  instead
    of the United Kingdom as that is not the test contained in the Section.
     There is an argument that as the Section requires  that  there  be  no
    person in Afghanistan who can reasonably provide treatment one can look
    at whether there is anyone who could reasonably be expected  to  go  to
    Afghanistan to provide treatment.  The Judge at first instance did  not
    consider that it was reasonable to expect the Sponsor nor  any  of  the
    family members in Germany to go to Afghanistan and I see no  reason  to
    disturb that finding.

23.  This case falls into difficulties on the question of evidence  of  what
    level of care is required.  What was needed in this case was  a  proper
    medical report on the Appellant setting out what he can and  he  cannot
    do, what care he needs and how that care is to be given to him and  who
    can provide it.  That evidence has not been made  available  either  at
    first instance or to me.  The Sponsor states that that evidence  cannot
    be obtained but the Sponsor was able  to  obtain  other  evidence  from
    Afghanistan such as a petition to the Governor of Jawzjan Province that
    there were said to be no facilities to accommodate the elderly in  that
    province. The letter from Dr Maini is  lacking  in  detail  and  it  is
    difficult to see why a fuller letter could not have been obtained  from
    a medical practitioner.

24.  The Appellant as a result of his years working as a doctor, and  indeed
    setting up his own  clinic,  has  access  to  a  number  of  healthcare
    professionals who are willing to assist him, whether it is on a  short-
    term basis as the Sponsor says or otherwise.  In those circumstances it
    is difficult to see why the Appellant has been unable  to  produce  the
    kind of evidence required by the Immigration Rules  and  in  particular
    why a medical report or some such similar evidence cannot  be  obtained
    setting out what the Appellant requires for  long-term  personal  care.
    In the absence of such evidence the case under  the  Immigration  Rules
    cannot be made out and I therefore dismiss the appeal under the Rules.

25.  As I have indicated that means that I must now proceed to consider  the
    case outside the Rules under Article 8.  This  is  an  application  for
    leave to enter in order to obtain care.  The Appellant's case  is  that
    he is dependent upon his son the Sponsor and that his  remaining  years
    will be severely affected  by  not  being  able  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom.  In considering the issue under Article 8, I bear in mind  the
    Razgar step by step approach (while bearing in mind that this is an out
    of country appeal not a removal appeal).

26.  The Appellant has a family life with  his  son  the  Sponsor  but  that
    family life is at present being conducted at a distance and it is  hard
    to see on what basis it can be argued that there is  an  obligation  on
    the United Kingdom to promote that  family  life  by  facilitating  the
    entry of the Appellant into the United Kingdom.

27.  What is apparent is that when the Appellant has required hospital  care
    he has been able to access it either in Afghanistan as at present or in
    India as two years ago.  He still has  a  network  of  friends  in  the
    medical profession from his time as a doctor who he  can  turn  to  for
    assistance.  He has had the benefit of individuals providing  him  with
    personal care.  Those arrangements have not perhaps been  as  long-term
    as either the Appellant or the Sponsor would want but that is a  matter
    of  organisation.   The  cost  of  care  is  significantly  cheaper  in
    Afghanistan then it would be in the United Kingdom.  The Appellant  has
    serious health concerns and it may be that the level of care  available
    in Afghanistan is not at the same level as that in the  United  Kingdom
    but there is no obligation on the United Kingdom  under  Article  8  to
    treat the world, just as in EV (Philippines) it was said  there  is  no
    obligation to educate the world.  Either the Appellant  would  need  to
    access National Health Service treatment once in  this  country,  which
    would be a burden on public funds, or he would need  private  treatment
    which given his various medical  conditions  would  be  at  significant
    cost.  It is difficult to believe (without evidence) that the  cost  of
    private medical treatment in this country for the  Appellant  would  be
    less than the cost of someone to provide  care  for  the  Appellant  in
    Afghanistan. The Sponsor's reference to medical insurance was  somewhat
    vague and it is difficult to see how the Appellant's medical  treatment
    could be dealt with other than under the NHS.

28.  The Entry Clearance Manager recognised the humanitarian  issues  raised
    in this case stating, "I appreciate that [the Appellant] is elderly and
    unwell  and  I  genuinely  feel  for  him  but  he  is  not  living  in
    exceptionally unacceptable conditions".  The Appellant has access to  a
    personal carer or carers and has access to hospital treatment.

29.  The refusal of entry clearance interferes with the Appellant's  Article
    8 rights because it means that he cannot come to the United Kingdom for
    the care  he  states  he  needs.   That  refusal  is  pursuant  to  the
    legitimate aim of immigration control because of the potential cost  of
    care in this country and the fact that the Appellant  cannot  meet  the
    Rules for the reasons which I have set out above.   The  issue  is  the
    proportionality of the interference.  The Appellant is applying outside
    the Rules because he cannot meet them.  The Court  of  Appeal  recently
    analysed those Article 8 cases where the application is  for  leave  to
    enter in the case of SS (Congo).  The Court of Appeal  held  that  what
    was required to succeed outside the Rules in an out of country case  is
    that there should be some exceptional circumstance.  In this case I  do
    not consider there are such exceptional circumstances.   The  Appellant
    is an elderly man with the medical conditions that might be expected of
    someone of that age.  He  is  financially  supported  by  his  son  the
    Sponsor in the United  Kingdom  but  he  is  able  to  access  hospital
    treatment and he could access a carer.  In those circumstances I do not
    consider that the interference with the Appellant's Article 8 rights is
    disproportionate and I dismiss the appeal on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.

I have remade the decision by dismissing the Appellant's appeal  under  both
the Immigration Rules and Article 8.

Appellant's appeal dismissed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.



Signed this 2nd day of June 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Judge made a full fee award having allowed the appeal.  As I have  found
that the Judge erred in law in allowing the appeal and have  set  aside  her
decision, I also set aside her decision to make a fee award.



Signed this 2nd day of June 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

