
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA004582015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9 May 2016                             |On 25 May 2016                    |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BANGKOK
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             TRAN MACH, THI DOAN
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin of the Specialist Appeals Team
For the Respondent:    Mr S Salam, solicitor of Salam & Co.


                            DECISION AND REASONS




The Respondent

 1. The Respondent, Tran Mach, Thi Doan to  whom  I  shall  refer  as  "the
    Applicant", is a citizen of Vietnam born on 6 January  1963.   She  has
    two children (both adult at the date of the application leading to  the
    decision under appeal) by her first marriage which ended in divorce  by
    consent registered in the courts of Vietnam on 31 December 2004.

 2. On 12th September 2014 in the United Kingdom she  married  her  Sponsor
    Stephen Brisco, a British citizen born on 5 January 1959.

 3. The Applicant's passport shows she arrived in the United Kingdom  as  a
    visitor on 3 June 2013 and 26 March 2014 and on  2  August  2014  as  a
    visitor for the purposes of marriage.  Subsequently,  she  returned  to
    Vietnam.

The Decision

 4. She applied for entry clearance as the wife of  the  Sponsor  a  person
    present and settled in the United Kingdom.  On  30  December  2014  the
    Appellant (the ECO),  refused  her  application  on  grounds  that  she
    through her Sponsor who is her  husband  did  not  meet  the  financial
    requirements of Appendix FM and had failed to supply all the  specified
    documents to meet the evidential requirements of Appendix FM-SE of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 5.  The  ECO  also  noted  that  there  was  no  documentary  evidence  to
    corroborate the Applicant's claim that she spent time together with her
    husband in Vietnam because he had not provided evidence to show he  had
    travelled to see her in Vietnam.  His previous wife was deceased.  This
    all led the ECO  to  conclude  there  was  no  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the Applicant and her husband.

 6. The  Applicant  lodged  notice  of  appeal  under  Section  82  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).
     The grounds refer to  the  fact  of  her  husband's  marriage  to  the
    Applicant, his employment and financial circumstances and that although
    he had given the ECO his contact details he had not been  contacted  by
    the ECO for any further information.  The grounds add that  he  suffers
    from a mild form of dyslexia.

The Hearing in the First-tier Tribunal

 7. By a decision promulgated on 30 September 2015 Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Barker allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 8. The ECO sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the  Judge  had
    mis-directed himself in relation  to  the  evidential  requirements  of
    Appendix FM-SE because the Applicant had failed to supply a letter from
    her husband's employer in compliance with the requirements of paragraph
    2(b) of Appendix FM-SE confirming his employment and gross salary,  the
    length of his employment, the period over which he had been paid at the
    level of salary relied upon for the Applicant's application and whether
    his employment was permanent, fixed term contract or agency.

 9. The husband said his employer had refused to issue such  a  letter  and
    the ECO submitted  that  the  Judge  had  erred  in  finding  that  the
    husband's income could be verified from other sources.

10. The ECO submitted that the correct course of action was for  the  Judge
    to have remitted the appeal for reconsideration referring to  paragraph
    2 of the determination in Ukus  (discretion:  when  reviewable)  [2012]
    UKUT 00307 (IAC).

11. On 12 April 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal J  M  Holmes  granted
    permission to the ECO to appeal on the ground that it was  arguable  it
    was not open to the Judge to determine the appeal as he did.  Either he
    had to follow the guidance in Ukus or deal with the Article 8 appeal.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

12. The husband attended the  hearing  and  I  explained  the  purpose  and
    procedure for an error of law hearing.  The  representatives  for  both
    parties agreed the sole issue was whether the Judge had made a material
    error of law in his application of the  provisions  in  Appendix  FM-SE
    relating to the evidence of the husband's income.

Submissions for the ECO

13. Mr Melvin relied on the grounds for appeal.  The employer's letter  had
    not been submitted with the application  and  so  the  Judge  had  mis-
    directed himself in considering later documentation. The proper  course
    would have been for the Applicant to have made a fresh application.

14. The Judge should not have placed weight on  documents  submitted  after
    the date of the Applicant's application.  The  Applicant  had  accepted
    that not all the required documents had been served.   The  consequence
    was she had not shown she met the requirements of the Immigration Rules
    in relation to the specified documents to be  submitted  and  that  the
    document in question, the husband's employer's letter  was  mandatorily
    required.

Submissions for the Applicant

15. Mr Salam submitted that the husband had shown that  he  had  sufficient
    earnings and funds to meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    and Appendix FM and that there was no issue in  that  regard.   If  the
    ECO's argument was correct about the failure to submit  documents  with
    the application then if the decision  were  remitted  to  the  ECO  the
    position would remain unchanged and  the  application  would  again  be
    refused.

16. The husband had now supplied the Tribunal  with  an  employer's  letter
    providing more information which met the requirements of Appendix FM-SE
    but which the husband did not have available at the time the appeal was
    considered in the First-tier Tribunal.

17. There was no reason why  the  Tribunal  should  not  consider  evidence
    submitted after the application for  entry  clearance  had  been  made.
    This was a spouse settlement case and not a Points-Based System  appeal
    to which Section 85A of the 2002 Act applied.

18. The only issue in the appeal was whether  the  Applicant  had  produced
    sufficient evidence to show she or her husband met the requirements  of
    Appendix FM and  this  fell  well  within  the  scope  of  the  Judge's
    discretion.  It did not relate to a complex or complicated issue.   The
    Judge had used such of the evidence required by Appendix FM-SE  as  had
    been provided independently to establish the  facts  which  would  have
    been shown by a letter from the  husband's  employers  referred  to  in
    paragraph 2(b) of Appendix FM-SE.  If there  was  any  issue,  the  ECO
    could have requested more documents  but  he  had  not  made  any  such
    request.  Mr  Salam  submitted  this  was  because  the  ECO  had   the
    information available  from  the  documents  which  the  Applicant  had
    already submitted.

19. Before the Judge the missing documentary evidence  had  been  supplied.
    The Judge was entitled to entertain the new evidence and to  reach  his
    conclusions.

Response for the ECO

20. Mr Melvin reminded me that the requirements of Appendix FM-SE could not
    be ignored and so the decision should be set aside.

Findings and Consideration

21. I accept that at the hearing before the Judge the husband had  supplied
    further evidence but it  was  not  until  10  November  2015  that  his
    employers produced a letter which purported to but in fact did not meet
    the requirements of paragraph 2(b) of Appendix FM-SE.   Indeed  it  was
    not until 6 May 2016 that the employer produced  a  letter  which  does
    comply.

22. At paragraph 27 of his decision, the Judge explained how he came to the
    conclusion that the other documents which had  already  been  supplied,
    showed all the information  which  would  have  been  contained  in  an
    employer's letter complying with paragraph 2(b) of Appendix FM-SE.   As
    already noted this is not an appeal under Part 6A: Points-Based  System
    of the Immigration Rules and so the  principles  for  consideration  of
    evidence outlined in DR (ECO: post-decision evidence)  Morocco*  [2005]
    UKIAT 00038 will apply.  It is to be noted that Section 85A of the 2002
    Act remained in force at the hearing before the Judge.

23. The employer's letter of 6 May 2016 was not challenged at the  hearing.
    Indeed, the earlier letter of 10 November 2015 from the  employers  was
    also not challenged as not complying with the requirements of  Appendix
    FM-SE although as a matter of fact I find that it  cannot  be  said  to
    comply.  The narrow ground for appeal left to the ECO  is  whether  the
    Judge made a material error of law in dealing with the  application  of
    paragraph D of Appendix FM-SE which states:-

         (a)  In deciding an application in relation to which this  Appendix
                 states that specified documents must be provided, the Entry
                 Clearance Officer or Secretary  of  State  ("the  decision-
                 maker") will consider documents that  have  been  submitted
                 with the application,  and  will  only  consider  documents
                 submitted after the application where sub-paragraph (b)  or
                 (e) applies.


         (b)  If the applicant:


                 (i)   Has submitted:


                     (aa)  A sequence of documents and some of the documents
                         in the sequence have been  omitted  (e.g.  if  one
                         bank statement from a series is missing);


                     (bb)  A document in the wrong format (for example, if a
                         letter is not on letterhead paper  as  specified);
                         or


                     (cc)  A document that is a copy  and  not  an  original
                         document; or


                     (dd)  A document which does  not  contain  all  of  the
                         specified information; or


                 (ii)  Has not submitted a specified document, the decision-
                     maker may contact the applicant or his  representative
                     in writing or otherwise, and request  the  document(s)
                     or the correct version(s). The material requested must
                     be received at the address specified  in  the  request
                     within  a  reasonable  timescale  specified   in   the
                     request.


              (c) The decision-maker will not request documents where he  or
                 she does  not  anticipate  that  addressing  the  error  or
                 omission referred to in sub-paragraph (b) will  lead  to  a
                 grant because the application will  be  refused  for  other
                 reasons.


              (d) If the applicant has submitted:


                 (i)   A document in the wrong format; or


                 (ii)  A document  that  is  a  copy  and  not  an  original
                     document, or


                 (iii) A document that does not contain all of the specified
                     information, but the missing information is verifiable
                     from:


                     (1)   other documents submitted with the application,


                     (2)   the website of the organisation which issued the
                          document, or


                     (3)   the website of the appropriate regulatory  body,
                          the  application  may  be  granted  exceptionally,
                          providing the decision-maker is satisfied that the
                          document(s) is  genuine  and  that  the  applicant
                          meets  the  requirement  to  which  the   document
                          relates. The decision-maker reserves the right  to
                          request the specified original document(s) in  the
                          correct format in all  cases  where  sub-paragraph
                          (b) applies, and to refuse  applications  if  this
                          material is  not  provided  as  set  out  in  sub-
                          paragraph (b).


              (e) Where the decision-maker is  satisfied  that  there  is  a
                 valid  reason  why  a  specified  document(s)   cannot   be
                 supplied, e.g. because it is not  issued  in  a  particular
                 country or  has  been  permanently  lost,  he  or  she  may
                 exercise discretion not to apply the  requirement  for  the
                 document(s)  or  to  request  alternative   or   additional
                 information or document(s) be submitted by the applicant.


              (f) Before  making  a  decision  under  Appendix  FM  or  this
                 Appendix, the decision-maker may contact the  applicant  or
                 their representative in writing  or  otherwise  to  request
                 further information or documents.  The  material  requested
                 must be received at the address specified  in  the  request
                 within a reasonable timescale specified in the request.


24. Sub-paragraph (a) provides that the documents to be considered  by  the
    ECO or the Secretary of State (but not any other decision  maker)  must
    be limited to those submitted with the application.  Sub-paragraph  (a)
    deals with a defective sequence of documents or a defective document.

25. Sub-paragraph (b)(ii) sets out conditions  when  the  ECO  may  request
    further documentation but sub-paragraph (c)  provides  that  additional
    documentation will not be requested when the ECO  does  not  anticipate
    that addressing the error or omission will lead to a grant because  the
    application will be refused  for  other  reasons.   In  this  case  the
    application was refused for other reasons,  namely  issues  as  to  the
    amount of the husband's earnings and on grounds of the  subsistence  of
    the relationship between the applicant and her husband.

26. I  turn  to  sub-paragraph  (d)  which  deals  with  the  grant  of  an
    application if the ECO is satisfied the documents are genuine  and  the
    applicant meets the requirements to which the  document  relates.   The
    ECO had sight of the husband's contract  of  employment,  payslips  and
    bank statements.  He had before him Appendix FM-SE and it is clear that
    the ECO having considered the documents found in  error  they  did  not
    show  that  the  applicant's  husband  employment  met   the   relevant
    requirements. In the absence  of  any  express  comment  it  is  to  be
    inferred that the ECO found that a letter from the husband's  employers
    the nature referred to  in  paragraph  2(b)  of  Appendix  FM-SE  would
    disclose further information. Even if the documents before the ECO gave
    and evidenced all the information which a letter  satisfying  paragraph
    2(b) would have contained, there was no obligation on the ECO under sub-
    paragraphs (d) and (e) because in this case,  the  ECO  considered  the
    applicant did not meet all the requisite requirements and in particular
    had  not  shown  her  husband  earned  sufficient  and  the  continuing
    subsistence of their relationship and the effect of  sub-paragraph  (c)
    is that in such circumstances there is no discretion  for  the  ECO  to
    request additional documentation.

27. Looking at all these matters in the round, I find  that  it  cannot  be
    said the ECO failed to comply with paragraph D of Appendix FM-SE.

28. The next question is, given the other findings about the sufficiency of
    the husband's earnings and the subsistence of the marriage, whether the
    Judge was entitled to exercise a discretion similar  to  that  provided
    for in sub-paragraph D(d) of Appendix FM-SE.

29. The Judge at paragraph 27  found  that  the  documentation  before  him
    showed the Applicant's husband  met  the  relevant  requirements.   The
    Judge was entitled to take into account evidence produced subsequent to
    the decision under appeal by reason of Section 85A of the 2002 Act.  It
    cannot be argued that the scope of the ECO's power to consider evidence
    referred to in the Immigration Rules can limit the  scope  of  evidence
    given by statute which the Tribunal may consider.

30. Before the Judge the subsistence of the marriage and the amount of  the
    husband's earnings ceased to be issues. Thus the sole  remaining  issue
    was  the  failure  to  produce  the   employer's   letter.   In   these
    circumstances the Judge was entitled to exercise discretion as  to  the
    absence of the employer's  letter  required  under  paragraph  2(b)  of
    Appendix FM-SE.

31. The representatives referred generically to the determination  in  Ukus
    (discretion: when reviewable)  [2012]  UKUT  00307(IAC).   No  specific
    reference to any part of the determination was made.  I have looked  in
    particular the four situations described when the  Tribunal  considered
    an appeal might arise from the exercise of or a refusal to  exercise  a
    discretionary power identified in paragraph 22, I find that the present
    case is the first situation where the ECO has failed to make  a  lawful
    decision in the purported exercise of the discretionary power vested in
    him and a lawful decision is required.

32. The Judge referred at paragraphs 20-23 and 27 of his  decision  to  the
    financial information before him and at paragraphs 26 and 29 took  into
    account, as he was entitled under DR (Morocco), the evidence  submitted
    to the Tribunal after the date of the decision  but  relating  back  to
    matters at the date of the decision and on the  evidence  and  for  the
    reasons already rehearsed I  find  he  was  entitled  to  exercise  his
    discretion to re-make the decision.

33. In these circumstances I do not find that there is  any  error  of  law
    sufficiently material to the outcome  of  the  appeal  to  warrant  the
    setting aside of the Judge's decision in whole or in part. Indeed,  now
    that a letter satisfying the requirements of paragraph 2(b) of Appendix
    FM-SE has been produced, albeit at a very late stage, I  find  that  no
    other Tribunal would be likely to reach a different decision. The First-
    tier Tribunal's decision shall therefore stand.

Anonymity

34. There was no request for an anonymity order and having  considered  the
    appeal I find none is warranted.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law such that it should be set aside and  therefore  it  shall
    stand.


    The effect is that the ECO's appeal is dismissed.


    No anonymity order is made.

Signed/Official   Crest                                                 Date
24.v.2016




Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

