

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/01666/2013
                                                               OA/01667/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 May 2014                                |On 4 June 2014               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                     KO
                                     SO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BANGKOK

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    The Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 (SI 2008/269) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
      Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify the appellants.  This  direction
      applies to both the appellants and to the respondent and a failure  to
      comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to   Contempt   of   Court
      proceedings.

Background

   2. The appellants are citizens of Thailand who were born  on  7  February
      2001 and  9  April  1998  respectively.   They  are  sisters.   On  24
      September 2012, the appellants applied for entry clearance  to  settle
      in the UK with their mother "JB" who is present and settled in the  UK
      where she is married to a British citizen, "AB".  On 15 November 2012,
      the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  each   of   the   appellants'
      applications under para 297  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (HC  395  as
      amended).  The Entry Clearance Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  the
      sponsor had "sole responsibility" for the appellants' upbringing (para
      297(e)).  On 2 July 2013, the Entry Clearance  Manager  confirmed  the
      ECO's decision and also concluded that  there  were  no  "serious  and
      compelling family or other considerations" which made the exclusion of
      the appellants undesirable (see para 297(f)).

The Appeals

   3.  The  appellants  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Tribunal.    In   a
      determination promulgated on 12 November 2013, Judge  Moore  dismissed
      each of the appellants' appeals. First, he was not satisfied that  the
      sponsor had "sole responsibility" for the appellants'  upbringing  and
      secondly  he  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were  any  serious  or
      compelling family or other considerations which made exclusion of  the
      appellants undesirable.  Consequently the  requirements  of  paragraph
      297 were not met.

   4. The appellants sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   On
      4 March 2014, the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Landes)  granted  each
      appellant permission to appeal on two grounds.  First, that the  Judge
      had arguably failed to take into account all the  evidence  concerning
      the appellants' circumstances in Thailand  in  concluding  that  there
      were no  "serious  or  compelling  family  or  other  considerations".
      Secondly, it was arguable that the Judge had  misdirected  himself  in
      reaching his adverse finding on "sole responsibility" in that,  having
      accepted the evidence of the sponsor's husband, "AB" that she made all
      the major decisions in their lives, he relied on the fact that the day-
      to-day care of the appellants was with their grandparents in Thailand.



   5. Thus, the appeals came before me.

   6. The sponsor did not attend the hearing as, I was told by  her  husband
      "AB", she was in Thailand.  The  sponsor's  husband  attended  on  her
      behalf.  The respondent was represented by Mr Richards.

The Submissions

   7. Mr Richards invited me to find that the Judge had not erred in law  in
      finding that the appellants had failed to establish  that  there  were
      "serious and compelling family or  other  considerations"  under  para
      297(f).  Mr Richards recognised that there  was  evidence  before  the
      Judge of troubling events but  these  had  occurred  after  the  ECO's
      decision and could not be taken into account.

   8. However, Mr Richards  indicated  that  he  had  misgivings  about  the
      Judge's finding in relation to  "sole  responsibility".   Mr  Richards
      submitted that the Judge may well have failed to  apply  the  guidance
      set out in  the  AIT's  decision  of  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(c):  Sole
      Responsibility) Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.   Mr  Richards  acknowledged
      that the grant of permission identified a difficulty  in  the  Judge's
      reasoning, namely his acceptance of AB's  evidence  that  the  sponsor
      made all the major decisions whilst, nevertheless, relying on the fact
      that the appellants' grandparents (with whom they lived  in  Thailand)
      made  day-to-day  decisions  about  the   appellants.    Mr   Richards
      acknowledged that it was inevitable that the carer or carers  overseas
      had day-to-day responsibility for an individual and that, in the light
      of TD, that was not necessarily inconsistent with a sponsor in the  UK
      having "sole responsibility".

   9. Mr Richards indicated that if I was satisfied that there was an  error
      of law in the Judge's  finding  on  "sole  responsibility",  I  should
      remake the decision in the light of all the evidence including that of
      the sponsor's husband,  AB whose evidence the Judge had accepted.   Mr
      Richards did not seek to put forward a positive case that the evidence
      did not establish that the sponsor had "sole responsibility"  for  the
      appellants.

  10. At the conclusion of Mr Richards' submissions, I indicated that I  was
      satisfied that the Judge's decision under the Immigration Rules  could
      not stand and I would remake the decision and  was  satisfied  on  the
      evidence  that  the  sponsor  had  "sole   responsibility"   for   the
      appellants.

  11. My reasons for those decisions I now set out.

Discussion

  12. The relevant Immigration rule is para  297  of  HC  395  (as  amended)
      which, so far as relevant to these appeals, provides as follows:

           "297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
                 leave to enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  the  child  of  a
                 parent...present and settled...in the  United  Kingdom  are
                 that he:

                    i) is seeking to enter to... join a parent...in  one  of
                       the following circumstances:

                 ....

                 (e)   one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                       Kingdom...and has had  sole  responsibility  for  the
                       child's upbringing; or

                 (f)   one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in
                       the  United  Kingdom...and  there  are  serious   and
                       compelling family or other considerations which  make
                       exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and  suitable
                       arrangements have been made for the child's care;..."

  13. It is not suggested in these appeals that the appellants do  not  meet
      the remaining requirements in paragraph 297 of the Immigration  Rules.



  14. The proper approach to the issue of "sole responsibility" is  set  out
      in the AIT's  decision  in  TD  and  is  summarised  at  [52]  of  its
      determination as follows:

           "52.  Questions of "sole responsibility" under  the  immigration
                 rules should be approached as follows:

                  i. Who has "responsibility" for a child's upbringing  and
                     whether that responsibility is  "sole"  is  a  factual
                     matter to be decided upon all the evidence.

                 ii. The term "responsibility"  in  the  immigration  rules
                     should not to be understood as a theoretical or  legal
                     obligation but rather as a  practical  one  which,  in
                     each  case,  looks  to  who  in  fact  is   exercising
                     responsibility for the child.  That responsibility may
                     have been for a short duration  in  that  the  present
                     arrangements may have begun quite recently.

                iii. "Responsibility"  for  a  child's  upbringing  may  be
                     undertaken by individuals other than a child's parents
                     and may be shared between different individuals: which
                     may particularly arise where the child remains in  its
                     own country whilst the only  parent  involved  in  its
                     life travels to and lives in the UK.

                 iv. Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved
                     in the upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional
                     that one of them will have sole responsibility.

                  v. If it is said  that  both  are  not  involved  in  the
                     child's upbringing, one of  the  indicators  for  that
                     will be that the other has abandoned or abdicated  his
                     responsibility.   In  such  cases,  it  may  well   be
                     justified to find  that  that  parent  no  longer  has
                     responsibility for the child.

                 vi. However, the issue of sole responsibility is not  just
                     a matter between the parents.  So  even  if  there  is
                     only one parent involved in  the  child's  upbringing,
                     that parent may not have sole responsibility.

                vii. In  the  circumstances  likely  to  arise,  day-to-day
                     responsibility (or decision-making)  for  the  child's
                     welfare may necessarily be shared with others (such as
                     relatives or  friends)  because  of  the  geographical
                     separation between the parent and child.

               viii. That, however, does not prevent the parent having sole
                     responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.

                 ix. The test is, not whether anyone  else  has  day-to-day
                     responsibility, but whether the parent has  continuing
                     control  and  direction  of  the  child's   upbringing
                     including making all the important  decisions  in  the
                     child's life.  If not, responsibility is shared and so
                     not "sole". "

  15. As [52(ix)] makes clear, the test  of  whether  a  sponsor  has  "sole
      responsibility" for  a  child  is  whether  or  not  that  parent  has
      "continuing  control  and  direction"  of   the   child's   upbringing
      "including making all important decisions in the child's life".   That
      is contrasted with  the  factual  situation  that,  out  of  necessity
      because of geographical separation between a parent and child, another
      person  or  persons  where  the  child  lives  may   have   day-to-day
      responsibility.  That, however, is not inconsistent with a  parent  in
      this country having "sole responsibility" if he or she has  continuing
      control and direction over a child's upbringing including  making  the
      important decisions.

  16. Although Judge Moore cited the italicised headnote in TD at para 28 of
      his determination, it is clear to me that he  misdirected  himself  in
      determining whether the sponsor had sole responsibility.  At  para  19
      of his determination, Judge Moore accepted that AB was "an honest  and
      credible witness who had a concern for  both  appellants".    AB  gave
      evidence that it was the sponsor who made  all  major  decisions  (see
      para 15 of the determination).  AB's evidence is set out as follows:

           "She always determined which schools both appellants  should  go
           to despite the fact that she had been living  in  the  UK  since
           2005.  Whenever the mother was  in  Thailand  she  would  always
           visit the school and teachers to be informed as to the  academic
           progress of her two children.  She would transfer monies for the
           school fees to her own  brother-in-law  in  Thailand  who  would
           himself transfer it to the grandfather's bank account with  whom
           the appellants lived.  It was the grandfather who then paid  the
           school fees as can be seen from the bank account details on page
           33 of the appellant's bundle.  [AB] further  explained  that  it
           was always the mother of the appellants who made  big  decisions
           and not either of the grandparents particularly bearing in  mind
           that both grandparents were now getting older and were unable to
           cope with two young grandchildren."

  17. That evidence is clear and it was  accepted  by  the  Judge.   It  was
      evidence   wholly   consistent   with   the   sponsor   having   "sole
      responsibility" for the appellant and that the grandparents (with whom
      the  appellants  lived  in  Thailand)   only   exercising   day-to-day
      responsibility because the appellants  lived  with  them.  Yet,  in  a
      number of passages in his determination, Judge  Moore  refers  to  the
      grandparents as  having  day-to-day  responsibility  as  part  of  his
      reasoning leading him to find  that  he  is  not  satisfied  that  the
      sponsor has sole responsibility.  So, for example, at para 20,  having
      referred to the fact that the sponsor did not leave  the  UK  in  July
      2013 for five weeks to travel to Thailand after being told that one of
      her daughters had gone missing, stated that:

           "This does not in my view reflect  any  lack  of  compassion  or
           concern by the mother, but is a reflection of the  reality  that
           the mother has commitments in the United Kingdom, and  that  the
           grandparents in Thailand with whom the appellants live deal with
           the  day-to-day  responsibilities  of  taking   care   of   both
           appellants."

  18. Then again at para 24, referring to the fact  that  between  2003  and
      2005 when the sponsor had  worked  away  from  home  had  visited  her
      children at least twice a year, the Judge said:

           "Whilst no doubt such visits maintained physical contact between
           mother and child the day-to-day responsibilities appear to  have
           been conducted by the grandparents."

  19. Then again at para 26 dealing with a period between  August  2008  and
      October 2011 when the sponsor did not visit the children in  Thailand,
      Judge Moore said:

           "I am satisfied that during this  period  also  that  day-to-day
           control  and  direction  of   the   two   appellants   was   the
           responsibility of the grandparents and not the mother."

  20. At para 29, Judge Moore did, however, say this:

           "...it is the grandparents and not the mother who is  exercising
           sole responsibility.  It is not just the fact  that  the  mother
           has not lived with the two appellants permanently  for  over  10
           years or just that the appellants lived with the grandparents in
           their home, rather, it is the fact  that  the  grandparents  are
           exercising  the  relevant  control  and   direction   over   the
           appellants' upbringing including making, albeit to  some  extent
           in conjunction with the appellants' mother, important  decisions
           in the children's lives. It  is  however  the  grandparents  who
           exercise day-to-day control over the care  of  both  appellants.
           It is the grandparents who very much "inform" the mother in  the
           United Kingdom as to the welfare of the two appellants who  live
           with her and her husband in their home.  It is  the  grandfather
           who helps with homework, it  is  both  grandparents  who  attend
           school meetings.  It  is  the  grandmother  who  cooks  for  the
           appellants.  It is these grandparents with whom both  appellants
           have lived all their lives, and in the absence of  their  mother
           for the last 10  years  apart  from  those  occasions  when  she
           visited Thailand."

  21. Whilst the Judge does, of course, appear to address the test for "sole
      responsibility" in TD, as in other passages of his  determination,  he
      seeks to support his finding that  the  sponsor  does  not  have  sole
      responsibility for the appellants by identifying factual  examples  of
      day-to-day responsibility and function of the  residential  carers  of
      the appellants, namely their grandparents.  Even if a parent in the UK
      had sole responsibility, the activities and functions performed by the
      grandparents which the Judge sets out at the end of paragraph 29 would
      necessarily have to be performed by a carer in the country  where  the
      children lived.  They are not, in themselves,  inconsistent  with  the
      sponsor having sole responsibility for the appellants.

  22.  In  my  judgement,  in  reaching  his  adverse   finding   on   "sole
      responsibility" Judge Moore erred in law both in failing  properly  to
      direct himself in accordance with TD and the proper meaning  of  "sole
      responsibility" and also in giving reasons which  could  not  properly
      sustain his finding.  For those reasons, his decision cannot stand and
      I set it aside.

Remaking the Decision

  23. In support of the appellants' appeals, the sponsor and her husband  AB
      submitted  a  substantial  bundle  of  documents  to  the   First-tier
      Tribunal.  Those documents included a statement, a  supporting  letter
      from  a  psychologist,  copies  of  telephone  interviews   with   the
      appellants',  the  sponsor  and  grandmother,  photographic  evidence,
      itemised telephone bills from Sky and Orange and supporting  documents
      in relation to each appellant from their school in Thailand.

  24. In addition, the sponsor's husband, AB submitted a detailed  statement
      and submission of 12 pages.  He  also  gave  oral  evidence  which  is
      recorded in Judge Moore's determination.

  25. The burden of proof is upon the appellants to establish on  a  balance
      of  probabilities  that  they  met,  at  the  date  of  decision,  the
      requirements of para 297.

  26. The background facts are as follows.  The sponsor is 34 years  of  age
      and lived in a village in northern Thailand.  She lived there with her
      parents and, initially, the appellants' father  and  both  appellants.
      The appellants were 11 and 14 respectively at the  date  of  decision.
      The appellants' father abandoned the sponsor and appellants and  there
      is no evidence that he has had any contact  or  involvement  in  their
      lives  since.   Judge  Moore  did  not  suggest  that  he  did.    The
      appellants' father left when the oldest child was 6 which  would  have
      been around 2004.  The sponsor continued living with her  parents  and
      the appellants in the same house following his departure.  In 2003 the
      sponsor  found  work  in  her  sister's  salon  and  left   home   for
      approximately two years.   During  that  time,  she  visited  the  two
      appellants at least twice a year.

  27. In June 2004,  the  sponsor  met  AB  (her  future  husband).    Their
      relationship developed and in September 2005 the sponsor first visited
      the UK.  That was on a holiday visa and she returned  to  Thailand  in
      December 2005.  In March 2006, the sponsor and AB married in  Thailand
      and the sponsor returned to the UK where she remained  until  she  was
      granted indefinite leave to remain in June 2010.

  28. In his statement,  AB  sets  out  the  sponsor's  visits  to  Thailand
      thereafter.  She visited between 17 March 2007  and  4  May  2007;  30
      December 2007 and 13 January 2008 and  between  20  July  2008  and  6
      August 2008.  During that  first  visit,  AB  also  flew  to  Thailand
      between 26 April 2007 and 28 April 2007. He  says  that  these  visits
      were important for the appellants and in  order  to  "check  on  their
      wellbeing at home and in school".  AB says that the sponsor maintained
      contact with the appellants whilst in the UK  initially  by  telephone
      but later  as  technology  developed  by  using  email,  Facebook  and
      Skyping.   Included  in  the  documentation,   are   telephone   bills
      highlighting itemised calls to Thailand.

  29. AB said that the sponsor and he next visited Thailand in October 2011.
       The gap in visits was due to the economic downturn in the UK  between
      2008 and 2010 when his business suffered badly.  AB is a co-owner of a
      company and has responsibilities as contracts manager for it. AB  says
      that the sponsor visited Thailand between 6  October  and  8  December
      2011; 24 May and 14 June 2012; and between 13 September  2012  and  11
      December 2012.  The evidence supports these regular visits,  including
      the interview with the second appellant and  the  interview  with  the
      sponsor's mother.  The latter  states  that  the  sponsor  returns  to
      Thailand twice a year and stays for two months.  The sponsor's  mother
      confirms that the sponsor contacts the appellants almost everyday  and
      that she sends 10,000 Baht per month which is transferred to the  bank
      account of the sponsor's father.

  30. It is clear  that  the  appellants  have  lived  with  their  maternal
      grandparents since the sponsor left to work away in 2003  and,  again,
      since she came to the UK in June 2006 having married AB.  There are  a
      considerable number of documents, in  particular  photographs  showing
      continued contact and affection between the sponsor  (and  indeed  AB)
      and the two appellants.  Continued  contact  by  telephone  and  other
      means is supported by the itemised telephone records, the evidence  of
      the sponsor's mother and of the second appellant.    And,  of  course,
      there is the evidence of AB who gave oral evidence  before  the  Judge
      and who was  accepted  as  an  "honest  and  credible  witness".   His
      evidence was clear that the sponsor took all major decisions including
      where the children should attend school and financially supported them
      by transferring money.  When the sponsor went to Thailand she  visited
      the school and teachers to enquire about the academic progress of  the
      appellants.  The Judge accepted  that  the  sponsor  kept  in  regular
      telephone contact with the two appellants and also their grandparents.



  31. I see nothing unusual in the cultural context in which the sponsor and
      appellants live that the sponsor  should  move  away  to  support  her
      family  (her  own  parents  and  children)  when  her   partner   (the
      appellants' father) left home.  She did so leaving the two  appellants
      where they lived with their maternal grandparents who  had  day-to-day
      responsibility for them.  The appellant visited twice a year.  It  may
      be, at this point, that the sponsor did not have "sole responsibility"
      for the appellants. At least, the evidence may not  be  sufficient  to
      make a positive finding.

  32. However, since the sponsor returned, married AB and has  come  to  the
      UK, the evidence is, in my judgement, that  she  has  exercised  "sole
      responsibility" for the two appellants.  The Judge  was  impressed  by
      the oral evidence of AB and his detailed statement  (and  submissions)
      is equally impressive.  His evidence is that  the  sponsor  makes  the
      major decisions in the appellants' lives.  She keeps  regular  contact
      and visits Thailand for two months periods to visit the appellants and
      also to check on their progress at school.   There is a gap  in  those
      visits between August 2008 and October 2011 but I accept AB's evidence
      that this was due to him (or as he put it in his oral  evidence  "down
      to me") because of the recession which  made  travelling  to  Thailand
      financially difficult.  By 2011, his business had begun to pick up and
      again visits were made in October to  December  2011  and  then  again
      between May and June 2012 and September and December  2012.    In  her
      telephone interview, the sponsor's mother said that it was the sponsor
      who had chosen the school which each appellant attended (see  Question
      47).  Both the second appellant and sponsor's  mother  confirmed  that
      the sponsor contacts the appellants "almost every day".  All of  these
      matters, in my  judgement,  evidence  the  underlying  fact  that  the
      sponsor  has  continuing  control  and  direction  over  each  of  the
      appellants' upbringing.  Whilst the appellants' grandparents have day-
      to-day responsibility for the appellants' welfare (as  the  appellants
      live  with  them),  they  do  not  share  "responsibility"   for   the
      appellants' upbringing.

  33. For these reasons, I am satisfied on a balance of  probabilities  that
      the requirement in para 297(e) of the Immigration Rules  is  satisfied
      and, further, as it is not suggested that the appellants do  not  meet
      the remaining requirements of paragraph 297, I am satisfied that  each
      appellant meets the requirements of paragraph 297 and is  entitled  to
      entry clearance.

  34. In reaching that decision, it is not  necessary  for  me  to  consider
      whether the Judge erred in law when he was not satisfied that  it  had
      not been established that there were "serious and compelling family or
      other  considerations"  which  made  exclusion   of   the   appellants
      undesirable.  Suffice it to say, that the main basis  upon  which  the
      appellants could arguably establish that related to matters which  had
      arisen after the ECO's decisions on 15 November 2012.  In  particular,
      evidence given by AB that one of the appellants had gone  missing  for
      36 hours and  that  there  were  concerns  about  a  peeping  tom.   I
      understand  from  AB,  though  not  in  any  detail,  that  there  are
      continuing concerns in relation to the appellant's welfare and that is
      why the sponsor is currently in Thailand.   Those  matters  could  not
      assist  to  demonstrate  "serious  and  compelling  family  or   other
      considerations" even if I were to remake that decision as this  is  an
      entry clearance case and it is only  the  facts  as  at  the  date  of
      decision which I can take into account.  (see ss.85(5) and  85A(2)  of
      the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).  I need say no more
      as I am allowing the appeal under para  297  on  the  basis  that  the
      requirement in para 297(e) is met.

Decision

  35. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to  dismiss  the
      appeal under the Immigration  Rules,  namely  para  297  involved  the
      making of an error of law.  That decision cannot stand and  I  set  it
      aside.

  36. I remake the decision allowing the appeal under paragraph 297.

                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and I consider it
appropriate to make a whole fee award.


                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:

