
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/01737/2015
                                                               OA/01745/2015
                                                               OA/01746/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued          |
|on 26th July 2016                             |on 17th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mr asad noor jaan
                             mr farhan noor jaan
                             mr nouman noor jaan
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Mathews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr G Singh, of Ethnic Minorities Law Centre, Glasgow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above,  but  the  rest  of  this  decision
    refers to them as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellants are three brothers, all  citizens  of  Afghanistan,  who
    applied for entry clearance with a view to settlement as  the  children
    of a person settled in the UK, their father.

 3. The ECO refused their applications by notices which bear the date  15th
    December 2013, although that seems to be an  error;  they  should  have
    been dated 15th December 2014.

 4. One of the ECO's reasons was that although the applicants  stated  that
    their mother was dead, the evidence submitted was a  death  certificate
    issued by Khyber Teaching Hospital, and "not an officially  recognised,
    State  issued  death  certificate".   It  was  not  considered  to   be
    satisfactory evidence that the mother of the appellants had died.

 5. The ECO was sceptical of the birth certificates submitted, because they
    were obtained long  after  the  births  from  the  Afghan  Ministry  of
    Internal Affairs, and such documents  could  be  "easily  obtained  ...
    based on self-declared information and without  thorough  checks  being
    carried out".  Certificates of birth from Paktia Public Health Hospital
    were not officially recognised State recognised certificates  and  were
    very similar in each case.  Although they bore to be issued at the time
    of the births it was "reasonable to conclude by inspection  that  these
    documents do not date from the time  of  birth  and  were  issued  very
    recently ... it is likely that all three documents were issued  on  the
    same occasion".

 6. The ECO also doubted that the sponsor was the father of the appellants.
     That point has since been resolved by DNA evidence, and is  no  longer
    in issue.

 7. The three appeals  appear  to  have  been  filed  with  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 14th January 2015.

 8. In a decision dated 26th May 2015 an Entry Clearance Manager maintained
    the  adverse  decisions,  noting  that  no  fresh  evidence  had   been
    submitted, and that an  official  death  certificate  would  have  been
    required in order  to  repatriate  the  appellants'  mother's  body  to
    Afghanistan from Pakistan.   Although  the  appellants  said  in  their
    grounds that additional documents would be submitted at a later  stage,
    the ECM found it unclear why this had not been  done  at  the  earliest
    opportunity so that the matter might be  resolved.   The  ECM  requests
    that "any documents submitted for the first time at  the  appeal  stage
    are carefully scrutinised" and that no weight should be given to "post-
    decision documents produced as evidence".

 9. First-tier Tribunal Judge D'Ambrosio allowed the appellants' appeals by
    decision promulgated on 30th November 2015.

10. There are with the tribunal file two copies of the "appellants' primary
    bundle" which comprises 61 items over 273 pages.  Items 18  to  31  are
    headed  "Authenticated  Documents".   The  first  item  is  the   death
    certificate of Merag Noor "stamped and attested  as  authentic  by  the
    Foreign  Ministry  of  Pakistan  and  Ministry   of   Foreign   Affairs
    Afghanistan", page 122.  The documents next  following  relate  to  the
    births of the three appellants.  All  these  items,  in  both  bundles,
    appear to be copies.

11. The judge says at paragraph 6:
         "Before hearing evidence, Mr Singh [for the appellants] asked leave
         to lodge originals of documents Items 17 to 32 inclusive which were
         already lodged in the appellants' bundle.  Mr Govan [the Presenting
         Officer who appeared for the respondent]  opposed  the  lodging  of
         Items 18 to 32 ... for reasons stated in my Record of Proceedings I
         allowed Mr Singh's motion.  I then refused  Mr  Govan's  motion  to
         adjourn the hearing to allow the respondent to check those original
         documents via the ECO abroad.  I so refused for reasons  stated  in
         my Record of Proceedings."

12. I cannot locate on the Tribunal file any originals of  documents  Items
    17 to 32.

13. The ECO's first Ground of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal  complains  that
    when original certificates were produced on the day of the hearing, 6th
    November 2015, they contained stamps which were not  present  when  the
    certificates were submitted with the  application,  and  that  was  the
    first occasion when the ECO had  sight  of  certificates  with  stamps,
    despite these apparently having been in the possession of  the  sponsor
    for three to four months (the date of receipt is taken  from  paragraph
    25 of the judge's decision).  The refusal to adjourn for  the  validity
    of the original certificates to be checked is said to be  a  procedural
    error making a real difference to the fairness of the proceedings.

14. Ground 2 criticises the reasoning of the judge at paragraph  31,  where
    he concluded that the certificates were valid.

15. In a skeleton argument provided to the Upper  Tribunal  the  appellants
    say that the evidence was provided on 28th October 2015 for  a  hearing
    on 6th November 2015, six  clear  working  days  ahead,  "a  reasonable
    amount of time for the ECO to consider the evidence relied upon".   The
    request for adjournment was therefore unreasonable.  The appellants had
    no reason to claim falsely that their mother  was  deceased.   Had  she
    been alive, she  would  have  been  included  in  the  entry  clearance
    application.  The  sponsor  was  found  credible.   It  was  absurd  to
    question whether his wife was alive.  It was  not  normal  in  a  small
    village  in  Afghanistan  to  register  or  obtain  identity  or  birth
    certificates until they were actually needed.  The ECO  had  not  taken
    into account the circumstances of the appellants and the  practices  of
    villages in Afghanistan.  The failure of the ECO to place weight on the
    evidence provided by the documents provided with  the  application  was
    "negligence" on the part of the ECO.  The ECO could have  requested  an
    adjournment earlier, if further time were required.

16. The judge's reasons for refusing the  adjournment  application  do  not
    appear in any Record of Proceedings so far  as  I  have  been  able  to
    identify from the file.  In any event, the reasons for deciding a point
    which was obviously of some  importance  should  be  available  in  the
    decision communicated to the parties.

17. Mr Mathews advised that according to the record kept by the respondent,
    the submission to the First-tier Tribunal had been that an ECO would be
    best placed to check on the validity of the documents, having the local
    contacts to do so.  The representative for the appellants had said that
    they were not submitted earlier because the appellants waited until all
    other evidence was available, and did not  wish  to  submit  piecemeal.
    That was not a good reason for giving the ECO no realistic time  period
    within which to verify the evidence.  The reasons recorded as given  by
    the judge at the hearing were that  even  if  a  document  verification
    report could be obtained, nevertheless he  would  have  to  decide  the
    question;  that  he  could  deal  with  the  matter  on  the  basis  of
    submissions; and that an  adjournment  was  not  in  the  interests  of
    justice, especially as the three appellants were all children.  Whether
    the matter had been renewed in submissions was not recorded.  Mr  Singh
    agreed that the foregoing was a fair account of what took place at  the
    hearing, at which he was present.

18. Mr Mathews submitted that the judge's explanation at paragraph  81  was
    difficult  to  follow  and   appeared   illogical.    It   was   highly
    unsatisfactory  that  the  sponsor  and  appellants  had  the   stamped
    documents three to four months in advance of the hearing, but  did  not
    produce them until shortly before.  The fact that it had  been  thought
    necessary to add stamps to the documents was an implicit admission that
    the  originals  were  insufficient.   The  essence  of  the  point  was
    procedural unfairness.  If the decision were to be set aside, a  period
    of four weeks should be sufficient for verification.  As this  was  the
    only outstanding issue, Mr Mathews accepted that if verification showed
    the  evidence  of  the  mother's  death  to  be  genuine,  no   further
    proceedings should be required.  Alternatively, he  said  that  if  the
    documentation was thought to be false, the matter should revert to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

19. Mr Singh submitted, further to the  skeleton  argument,  that  the  ECO
    could have carried out enquiries based on the unstamped documents.  The
    documents were the same, except for the  stamps.   The  appellants  had
    proved their relationship to the sponsor by way of DNA  evidence  which
    had not been available at the time of the ECO's decision.  The ECO  was
    now  clutching  at  straws.   The  judge's  decision  was  careful  and
    thorough.  It was undesirable that there should be further delay as the
    entire process had already taken two and a half years.   Significantly,
    the evidence of the sponsor had been found credible, and that went also
    to the death of the mother of the appellants.

20. Mr Mathews in response submitted that if the appellants had been  faced
    with  significant  fresh  evidence  at  such  short  notice,   it   was
    inconceivable that they would not have been entitled  to  a  reasonable
    opportunity to make the necessary enquiries and prepare a response.

21. I reserved my decision.

22. It was plainly unsatisfactory to tender significant new evidence only a
    few working days before a hearing, when that evidence could  have  been
    provided much earlier; and it seems that the originals were  held  back
    until the day, without any  explanation  of  that  point.   The  proper
    course would have been to lodge the evidence as soon as  possible  with
    the Tribunal and to intimate it immediately to the respondent, so  that
    any checks thought necessary could be undertaken.

23. The ECO does not challenge the late introduction of the  material  into
    evidence, only the absence of an opportunity for verification.

24. What has become of the originals is not  apparent  from  the  decision,
    from the file or from the  submissions.   It  may  be  that  they  were
    returned to the appellants, or that  they  are  in  the  hands  of  the
    respondent.  Whether further enquiries will have  to  be  made  on  the
    basis of originals or only of photocopies, I cannot say.  In any event,
    even if only photocopies are available  to  the  ECO,  that  should  be
    sufficient for the further enquiries to be carried out.

25. These were documents of manifest importance, the  provenance  of  which
    was already in issue, and to which additions bore to  have  been  made.
    There was obvious unfairness in not enabling the other side to  have  a
    fair period during which to carry out verification.

26. The proceedings have already been quite protracted, but I am  fortified
    in this decision by the indications that no further lengthy delay  need
    result.

27. The First-tier Tribunal materially erred  by  refusing  an  adjournment
    which was obviously required on grounds of  procedural  fairness.   Its
    decision is set aside.

28. The case will be re-listed in the First-tier Tribunal at the first date
    available, not less than four weeks from  the  date  this  decision  is
    issued to the parties.

29. If the verification procedure to be carried out by  the  ECO  discloses
    that  the  documentation  as  stamped,  and  in  particular  the  death
    certificate of the mother of the appellants, is genuine  and  reliable,
    then it is to be anticipated that entry clearance will be issued to the
    three appellants without further delay (unless some entirely novel  and
    presently unanticipated feature emerges).

30. If the verification procedure leads to the ECO taking the position that
    the death certificate is not a reliable document, then  the  case  will
    have to proceed by way of an entirely fresh hearing in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

31. No anonymity order has been requested or made.


                           [pic]


                           15 August 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
