
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/01237/2014
                                                               OA/01244/2014
                                                               OA/01245/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 February 2015                   |On 16 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                         MISS JESSICA DUAH AGYEMANG
                          Mr STEPHEN DUAH AGYEMANG
                              MISS MERCY KORANG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr S Unigwe, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The  respondents'  appeals  against  decisions  to  refuse  them  entry
    clearance, to enable them to join their mother in  the  United  Kingdom
    for settlement were allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Coutts  ("the
    judge") in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 27 October 2014.

2.   The judge heard evidence from the respondents' mother,  their  sponsor,
    and took into account documents contained  in  a  bundle,  including  a
    witness statement from the sponsor's aunt, responsible  for  day-to-day
    arrangements concerning the respondents in Ghana. The judge found  that
    the requirements of the immigration rules contained  in  paragraph  297
    were met.  In particular, he found that the  respondent's  sponsor  had
    had sole  responsibility  for  their  upbringing,  in  the  four  years
    following her departure from Ghana and arrival in the  United  Kingdom.
    He made favourable findings regarding maintenance and  contact  between
    the respondents and their mother.

3.   The Secretary of State applied for  permission  to  appeal,  contending
    that the judge had not explained his favourable finding regarding  sole
    responsibility.  No adequate reasons were given and the judge failed to
    have regard to the guidance given in TD [2006] UKAIT 00049.  Permission
    to appeal was granted in December 2014.

4.   Miss Isherwood handed up a copy of TD.  Mr  Unigwe  handed  up  written
    submissions and a copy of the witness statement which had  been  before
    the judge.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Miss Isherwood relied on the grounds in support of the application  for
    permission  to  appeal.  Paragraphs  15  to  19  of  the  determination
    contained the judge's reasoning but there was no  adequate  explanation
    for his favourable finding on sole responsibility. It was clear from TD
    that the test concerned continuing control and direction over a child's
    upbringing, for the purposes of the  rules.  At  paragraph  44  of  the
    decision in  TD,  the  practicalities  were  highlighted  as  requiring
    analysis and the correct approach appeared at paraas 49 to 51. Evidence
    was required regarding contact between a parent and the person with day-
    to-day care and control, in relation to the important  decisions  in  a
    child's life. The evidence before the judge and the grounds  of  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal contained nothing of real substance  showing
    how the  sponsor  in  the  United  Kingdom  took  important   decisions
    concerning the children.  The focus in the evidence was all about money
    and financial support.  There was  a  letter  regarding  education  but
    this concerned 2006-2007.  There was evidence regarding the payment  of
    fees.  Both the ECO and the ECM raised finance  and  concerns  in  that
    context.

6.   The judge's finding that the sponsor was a  credible  witness  was  not
    enough.  The evidence was not sufficient to show how she dealt with the
    important decisions concerning her children.  The judge found that  the
    children's mother maintained contact with them but there was no  detail
    here about important decisions.

7.   Mr Unigwe said that the  decision  in  TD  supported  the  respondents'
    case. It contained a summary of other  authorities.  The  Secretary  of
    State had not identified what was missing from  the  judge's  decision.
    Paragraphs 15 to 19 contained  his  assessment  but,  before  that,  he
    referred to the evidence before him.  The  mother's  witness  statement
    was important, particularly at paragraphs 14 to  17.   She  said  there
    that she was the person who "solely provided" for  her  children.   The
    judge took this evidence into account. He heard oral evidence from  the
    sponsor and submissions.  There was  documentary  evidence  regard  the
    extent of telephone and other contact and transfers  of  funds.  As  he
    made clear in paragraph  16,  the  judge  found  the  sponsor  entirely
    credible.  It was clear from  the  summaries  in  TD  of  other  cases,
    including Emmanuel, that the  judge  took  into  account  the  relevant
    factors, including financial support  and  contact.   He  assessed  the
    evidence and came to findings that were open to him.

8.   Miss Isherwood said in a brief response that every decision had  to  be
    adequately reasoned.   The  sponsor's  witness  statement  was  largely
    concerned with finances and there was little  about  the  direction  or
    control of the children's lives.  The arrangement made  with  her  aunt
    was a temporary one.

Conclusion on Error of Law

9.   The determination is quite short  but,  I  find,  succinctly  reasoned.
    The judge did indeed find the appellant's mother an  entirely  credible
    witness and he took into account her witness statement,  in  which  she
    claimed to be solely  responsible  for  maintaining  the  children  (in
    paragraph 16).  The judge made findings regarding financial support and
    the transfer of funds to Ghana, in part to meet the  children's  school
    fees.  There was evidence that their mother had recently returned  from
    a visit.  As expressly found by the judge, the arrangements whereby the
    day-to-day arrangements were passed to a close relative  were  intended
    only to be temporary.  They have been in place for some four years.

10.  TD contains a useful  summary  of  earlier  cases,  including  Emmanuel
    [1972] ImmAR 69.  The IAT concluded, in that  case,  that  the  regular
    remittance of funds for a child's upkeep and the maintenance of a close
    interest in and affection for that child were  important  factors  that
    enabled a conclusion that the parent in the United Kingdom had had sole
    responsibility for the child's upbringing.  The emphasis in TD is on  a
    practical assessment of the evidence with  the  focus  on  control  and
    direction of the children by the sponsoring parent.

11.  Notwithstanding Miss Isherwood's able submissions, I conclude that  the
    judge's reasoning, particularly at paragraphs 15 to 18, is sustainable.
     He focused on the issue of sole responsibility there,  having  earlier
    made a favourable finding regarding maintenance.  He drew attention  to
    the temporary nature of the arrangements, the credible answers given by
    the respondents' mother, the nature  of  the  family  arrangement,  the
    contact maintained between the respondents and  their  mother  and  the
    regular remittances  of  funds  to  meet  expenses  which  include  the
    children's education.  As Mr Unigwe  said,  the  judge  made  it  clear
    earlier in the determination that he  had  in  mind  all  the  evidence
    before  him,  including  the  documentary  evidence.    Although   Miss
    Isherwood is right to say that  much  of  the  evidence  concerned  the
    financial support of the children, I find that the judge correctly took
    this into account as a relevant, but not  a  determinative  factor.  It
    formed part of his assessment, as  did  the  close  contact  maintained
    between the respondents and their mother. Overall, I conclude that  the
    judge was entitled to find that "the  whole  weight  of  evidence  here
    points  towards  the  sponsor  having  sole  responsibility   for   the
    respondents",  as he found in paragraph 18 of the decision.

12.  The judge did not err in his assessment of the evidence and  there  was
    no misdirection regarding the relevant law.

13.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

DECISION

14,  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing no  material  error
    of law, shall stand.



Signed        Date 9 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

There has been no direction for anonymity and I make no  direction  on  this
occasion.



Signed        Date 9 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

