
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/01384/2013
                                                               OA/01382/2013
                                                               OA/23806/2012
                                                               OA/22726/2012
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly            |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 6 October 2014                         |On 13 October 2014          |
|                                          |                            |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL
                                   Between
                                 ERICK TONDO
                                YANICK TONDO
                                PATRICK TONDO
                                BRENDA TONDO
                          (ANONYMITY NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms L Barton counsel instructed by Sabz Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr G Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DETERMINATION AND REASONS
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of these Appellants. Having considered all the circumstances  and
   evidence I do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Hague promulgated on 22 October 2013, which dismissed  the
   Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellants are all citizens of the Congo. The  first  two  Appellants
   claimed to be the twin sons of Brigit Bingimenza ('the Sponsor') who  had
   applied for asylum in the United Kingdom and was  granted  status  on  12
   June 2012. They claimed to have been born on 30 December 1994. The  third
   Appellant claimed he  was  born  on  25  November  1995  and  the  fourth
   Appellant claimed she was born on 2 November 1996 and they claimed to  be
   the Sponsor's nephew and niece orphaned by the war and adopted by her  on
   10 June 2006.
4. The Appellants all applied for leave to join the sponsor  in  the  United
   Kingdom. The applications of the first two Appellant were  considered  by
   reference to paragraph 352D of the Rules and in relation to the third and
   fourth Appellants both Rule 352D and 319X were considered.
5. On 29 November  2012  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  first  two
   Appellants applications. The refusal letter reasons can be summarised as:
   it was accepted that the Appellants were the children of the Sponsor  but
   their age was not accepted as being under 18;  their  birth  certificates
   were not accepted as reliable evidence  of  age  as  they  could  not  be
   verified; the Appellants did not appear  from  their  photographs  to  be
   under 18; the birth certificates were not accepted to be genuine  because
   of security and 'other issues.'
6. On 18 October 2012 the Secretary of State  refused  the  applications  of
   the third and  fourth  Appellants.  The  reasons  can  be  summarised  as
   follows: paragraph 352D does not apply to de facto adopted children;  the
   documents  produced  in  relation  to  the  birth  certificates  of   the
   Appellants, their mother, and their parents death certificates  were  all
   photocopies; there were discrepancies in relation to the date of death of
   their parents in the documents and it was not  accepted  that  they  were
   dead;  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  sponsor  had  maintained  the
   Appellants; there was no evidence that  the  accommodation  provided  was
   adequate; there was no evidence that the  Appellant  could  maintain  the
   Appellants.


The Judge's Decision
7. The  Appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Hague  (hereinafter  called  "the  Judge")  dismissed  the
   appeal against the Respondent's decision. The Judge acknowledged  in  his
   determination that were it is alleged  that  false  documents  have  been
   produced the burden of proof is on the Respondent;  he  stated  that  the
   only evidence of the ages and relationships was  from  oral  sources;  he
   found that the birth certificates for the first two Appellants were false
   for the reasons given in the refusal letters and that  this  tainted  the
   other documentary evidence; the first Appellant appeared to be older than
   18 in his passport photograph; there was no evidence that  the  Congolese
   adoption process was the same  or  similar  to  the  United  Kingdom  and
   therefore that the documents relating to that could  be  relied  on;  the
   only oral evidence came from the Sponsor's daughter who was in the United
   Kingdom when the third and fourth Appellants were adopted  and  therefore
   her evidence as to  their  dates  of  birth  and  this  process  was  not
   reliable. He therefore dismissed the appeals under the Rules. He did  not
   find that Article 8 was engaged by the decision.
8. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 1 December 2013 First tier  Tribunal
   Judge Chohan gave  permission  to  appeal  stating  that  the  Judge  had
   arguable reversed the burden of proof in relation to  the  allegation  of
   the production of false documents; the Judge made an  assessment  of  age
   based on a photograph.

9. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Ms  Barton  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that she relied on her skeleton argument.

10. On behalf of  the  Respondent   Mr  Harrison  conceded  that  the  Judge
   appeared to have failed to engage with the issue of where the  burden  of
   proof lay in relation to the production of false documents.

The Law

11.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is  untrue.  If  a  point  of  evidence  of
   significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that is a failure to take
   into account a material consideration.
Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

14. The applications of the  first  Appellants  were  underpinned  by  birth
   certificates  together  with  other  documentary  evidence.  The  refusal
   letters in relation to the first two Appellants stated that the  hologram
   stamp on the birth certificate had not been in use at  the  time  of  the
   issue of the certificates and cited a report that gave other reasons  why
   the certificates were unreliable. The refusal letter gave no  source  for
   the assertion in relation to the hologram nor was there a full  reference
   to the report relied on in relation to the other claimed  concerns  about
   the certificates.

15. While the Judge acknowledged  that  the  burden  of  proof  was  on  the
   Respondent in paragraph 11  he  nevertheless  relied  on  the  assertions
   raised in the refusal letters without satisfying himself as to the source
   and quality of the evidence they were based on.

16. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to fully  address  and  determine
   the issue of the burden of proof in relation to the production  of  false
   documents constitutes a clear error of law in relation to the  first  two
   Appellants and taints the  whole  of  the  determination.  This  error  I
   consider to be material since had the Tribunal  conducted  this  exercise
   the outcome could have been different. That in my  view  is  the  correct
   test to apply.

17. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination cannot stand and must be set aside . Ms Barton  and
   Mr Harrison indicated that  they  were  content  for  me  to  remake  the
   decision on the basis of the documents before me.
The Law

18. The burden of proof  in  this  case  is  upon  the  Appellants  and  the
   standard of proof is upon the balance of probability. I  have  determined
   this matter based upon facts that  were  appertaining  at  the  time  the
   decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  being  constrained  by  Section
   85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002  Act)
   I am entitled to take into account evidence of  matters  occurring  after
   the date of the decision providing that they  relate  to  and  inform  an
   understanding of facts in existence at the time of the decision  pursuant
   to DR   (Morocco ) [2005] UKIAT 00038.
19. Where there is an allegation of forgery, it is often suggested that  the
   burden on the Respondent is a high one.  However, in Re B(Children)  2008
   UKHL 35 the House of Lords said that in fact "there  is  only  one  civil
   standard of proof and that is proof that the fact in issue more  probably
   occurred than not".  There is a  flexibility  to  the  standard,  but  as
   Richards LJ  expressed  it  in  R(N)  v  Mental  Health  Review  Tribunal
   (Northern Region) (2005) EWCA Civ 1605 "the flexibility  ...lies  not  in
   any adjustment to the degree of probability required for an allegation to
   be proved...but in the strength or quality of the evidence that  will  in
   practice be required..." Cogent evidence is thus required in  such  cases
   as Ouseley J said in R (on the application of Beckett) v SSHD  2008  EWHC
   2002 Admin  to satisfy a civil Tribunal that someone had been  fraudulent
   or behaved in some other reprehensible manner.   The  "high  probability"
   standard of proof, as Ouseley J termed it, was addressed to  the  cogency
   of the evidence required to prove an allegation of this type rather  than
   to a shift in the standard of proof itself.
20. The leading case on documentary  evidence  is  Tanveer  Ahmed  (Starred)
   2002 UKIAT 00439 in which the Tribunal said that it is usually  an  error
   to concentrate on whether the document is a forgery.  The  only  question
   is whether the document is one upon which  reliance  should  properly  be
   placed.  The document  should not be looked at in isolation but should be
   assessed along with any other piece of evidence - in the round.
21. The Appellants appeal is pursuant to Section 82 of the 2002 Act.
22. The appeal must be allowed if I find that  the  decision  against  which
   the appeal is brought was not in accordance with  the  law  or  with  the
   Immigration Rules or if the decision or action involved  an  exercise  of
   discretion  by  the  Respondent,  which  should   have   been   exercised
   differently. Otherwise, I must dismiss the appeal.

Findings

23. I am required to look at all the evidence in the round  before  reaching
   any findings.  I  have  done  so.   Although,  for  convenience,  I  have
   compartmentalised my findings in some respects below,  I  must  emphasise
   the findings have only been made having taken account of the evidence  as
   a whole.

First and Second Appellant

24. The only issue raised in relation to the first  two  Appellants  in  the
   refusal letters was whether the Appellants had met the evidential  burden
   of establishing that they were, as  claimed,  under  the  age  of  18  as
   required by paragraph 352D(ii) as it was accepted on  the  basis  of  DNA
   evidence that they were both the sons of the Sponsor.

25. The Respondent had  the  opportunity  to  provide  evidence  as  to  the
   reliability of the documents produced by the Appellants and  have  failed
   to produce cogent evidence of forgery or unreliability.   They  bear  the
   burden of proving forgery and providing cogent evidence of it. The writer
   of the refusal letter asserts that he  'is  aware'  that  the  use  of  a
   hologram in a birth certificate has only been in use 'for the last couple
   of years'. He does not provide the  documentary  evidence  on  which  his
   awareness is based and  therefore  I  am  unable  to  conclude  that  the
   assertion is made out. There are further references to a '2005 report' in
   relation to the reliability of documents from the DRC but the report  has
   not been provided or fully referenced so again I am  not  satisfied  that
   this amounts to cogent evidence of forgery or unreliability.

26. I note that when this application was made it is  not  disputed  that  3
   other children of the Sponsor made similar applications for  reunion  and
   they produced photocopied birth certificates as evidence of their age and
   relationship to the Sponsor. Their applications were granted and I accept
   that the documents they produced  although  photocopies  which  were  not
   contemporaneous with their birth must  have  been  accepted  as  reliable
   evidence of who they claimed to be.

27. I note that the Sponsor although unable to give evidence now because  of
   health issues arising out of her experiences in the DRC  was  interviewed
   at some length by the Respondent and as  a  result  was  granted  refugee
   status . I am satisfied that her account was considered to  be  reliable.
   I take this into account when determining whether to accept her assertion
   that the Appellants were born in 1994 as she claims.

28. These Appellants produced photocopies of  their  birth  certificate  and
   copies of their passports as evidence of their age  and  identity  and  I
   have considered whether these are documents  that  I  can  rely  on.  The
   Appellant's  assert  that  in  relation  to  the  documents   they   were
   photocopies because the originals were lost in the chaos of their  flight
   from the war. I accept that this is a plausible  explanation  as  to  why
   they have copies rather than originals.

29. The birth certificates were  dated  24  July  1989  and  thus  were  not
   contemporaneous with their birth. This is of course not necessarily fatal
   to  their  reliability  as  there  are  many  countries  in  which  birth
   certificates are not issued unless required for  a  specific  purpose.  I
   also note that the Appellant's produced documents the Headmaster of their
   school certifying that they were born on 30 December 1994 as  they  claim
   and they were enrolled in the school  year  2011-2012.   These  documents
   were consistent with the witness statements provided by the  sponsor  and
   her daughter Esther Kahera as to the Appellants age.

30. The Appellant's also produced passports as confirmation of  their  ages.
   It was suggested that in relation to the Appellants their photographs  in
   their passports suggest they are older than  18.  I  accept  that  it  is
   difficult to assess age based on appearance alone  given  the  effect  of
   different life experience and ethnic issues.

31. Looking at all of the evidence in the round in  relation  to  the  first
   two Appellants I accept that they provided satisfactory evidence to  show
   that it is more likely than not that they were under 18 at  the  time  of
   their applications and their appeals should succeed.

Third and Fourth Appellants

32. The third and fourth Appellants are not the biological children  of  the
   sponsor but , it is claimed, her niece and nephew that she adopted  after
   it was claimed their parents died on 5 January 2006.

33. The refusal letter makes clear that their case could not  be  considered
   under paragraph  352D  as  a  'de  facto  adoption'  does  not  meet  the
   requirements of the Rules.  I  am  satisfied  that  treating  this  as  a
   potentially a de facto adoption  is correct given that the Rule  requires
   the Sponsor to be the 'parent'. 'Parent' is defined in paragraph 6 of the
   Rules. This may include  a  child  who  is  adopted  but  the  definition
   requires at 6(d) that the child was adopted in accordance with a decision
   taken by the competent administrative authority or  court  in  a  country
   whose adoption orders are recognised by the UK.  There  was  no  evidence
   advanced on behalf of the Appellants to suggest that they could meet this
   definition.

34. Therefore the application of  these  Appellant  must  be  considered  by
   reference to paragraph 319X of the Rules.

35. I am not satisfied in relation to these Appellants that the evidence  is
   reliable and consistent as there are a number of discrepancies that  have
   not been satisfactorily addressed. The  main  issue  that  has  not  been
   addressed is that although it is claimed that the Appellants were orphans
   whose parents both died on 5 January 2006 the death certificate  produced
   in respect of the Appellant's mother stated that her husband was deceased
   and did not confirm that he died on  the  same  day.  I  also  note  that
   although their mother registered her  own  birth  in  2000  she  did  not
   register the birth of the two Appellants. I also note that  there  is  no
   evidence as to who registered the Appellant's birth on 10 June  2006  and
   it is troubling that the registration occurred  after  the  date  of  the
   purported adoption. These issues were all raised in  the  refusal  letter
   this was not  satisfactorily  addressed  in  the  grounds.  Although  the
   Sponsor suggests the practice in the DRC is for relatives to register the
   birth of relatives and there is no reference to the name  of  the  person
   registering the birth there is no evidence of that before me. Given these
   concerns I am not satisfied that the Appellants have met  the  evidential
   burden of establishing that they are orphans as  claimed  and  have  been
   adopted by the sponsor as she claims.

36. I also note that the Appellant lives in a two bedroomed house. There  is
   no evidence before me to suggest that the  house  could  accommodate  the
   extra occupants this appeal would result in or that the Sponsor would  be
   granted  a  larger  house.  The  Appellant  therefore  cannot  meet   the
   requirements of paragraph 319(vi).The Sponsor is unemployed and therefore
   there is no evidence that the  Appellants  could  be  maintained  without
   recourse to public funds and therefore they cannot meet the  requirements
   of Paragraph 319X(vii)

37. There is no evidence before me to suggest that  there  are  serious  and
   compelling circumstances requiring entry clearance to be granted.

38. I have considered whether Article 8 is engaged by  the  decision.  Given
   my concerns about the  exact  nature  of  the  relationship  between  the
   Appellants and the Sponsor and the fact that there is  no  evidence  they
   ever lived together as a family I do not accept that Article 8 is engaged
   by the decision.

Decision

39. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal such that the decision is set aside

40. I remake the appeal.

41. In relation to the first and second Appellant I allow the appeals.

42. In relation to the third and fourth  Appellant  I  dismiss  the  appeals
   under the Rules and under Article 8.

Signed                                                              Date 12
October 2014
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal in respect of the first and  second  Appellants
and because a fee has been paid or is payable, I have  considered  making  a
fee award and have decided to make a fee award of any  fee  which  has  been
paid or may be payable as I am satisfied that  the  application  could  have
been granted on the basis of the information before the ECO.

I have dismissed the appeal in respect of the third  and  fourth  Appellants
and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell       12.10.2014
