
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/01955/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 September 2016                         |On 06 October 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             TAHIR MOAMMED DUDUB
                       (anonymity directioN NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss N Brissett, Counsel, instructed by Aden & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This an appeal from the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Page
    promulgated on 22 March 2016.  It concerns the  refusal  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in Pretoria of  the  appellant's  application  for  a
    spousal  visa  under  paragraph  E-ECP.3.3  of  Appendix  FM   of   the
    Immigration Rules.

2.    There are particular personal circumstances in this  case  which  were
    outlined by the Judge in the determination and were summarised by Judge
    Pullig when giving permission to appeal in unusually robust terms.

3.    Put shortly, it is accepted that the appellant's  sponsor  would  have
    sufficiently demonstrated the financial requirements under Appendix  FM
    were the figures for independent payment allowance included by  way  of
    income. The point made by the Secretary  of  State  is  that  that  sum
    should not be included because even though it is a qualifying  benefit,
    paragraph E-ECP.3.3 states:

            "the applicant's partner must be receiving one of  more  of  the
    following:
            [...]      (vi) personal independence payment" (emphasis added)

4.    Mr Kandola who represents the Secretary of State argues with that  the
    statutory provision is to be read strictly such that the  sponsor  must
    have actually been receiving payments at the material time. The absence
    of de facto receipt (irrespective of de jure entitlement as  determined
    by a subsequent appeal) means  that  the  sponsor  fell  short  of  the
    required financial minimum figure and accordingly did not qualify under
    paragraph FM.

5.    Miss Brissett who acts for Mr Dudub argues that  where,  as  here,  an
    award of benefit is backdated and particularly  where  the  reason  for
    backdating arises from a failure of a government  department  to  award
    the proper figure at the beginning, then in reality (even  if  strictly
    not within the language of the provision) the individual  can  properly
    be regarded as "receiving" the benefit.

6.    The Judge dealt with this in paragraph 11 as follows  where  she  sets
    out the case argued on the appellant's behalf by Miss Bissett (who also
    acted in the First-tier):

         "Moreover,  she  said,  the  appellant  had  applied  for  personal
         independence  payment  (PIP),  the  benefit  which   has   replaced
         disability living allowance but had been  refused. At the  time  of
         the decision under appeal, 2 December 2104, she had an  outstanding
         appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  [Social  Entitlement  Chamber]
         against  the  respondent's  decision   to   refuse   her   personal
         independence payment. On 10 June 2015 this appeal had been allowed.
          The Tribunal in allowing the appeal said


             'Mrs Hussein is entitled to the daily living component at  the
             enhanced rate from 14 October 2013 to 13  October  2018.   Mrs
             Hussein has severely limited ability to carry  out  activities
             of daily living.'


         It followed that at the  time  of  the  respondent's  decision  the
         appellant had this  severe  disability  and  was  entitled  to  the
         benefit which replaced DLA.  Therefore she was exempt at  the  date
         of the decision and there was adequate evidence of this before  the
         ECO because further enquiry could have been made."

7.    It is implicit from paragraphs 25 and 26  of  the  decision  that  the
    Judge  accepted  these  arguments  and  resolved  the  appeal  in   the
    appellant's favour.

8.    The Secretary of State needs to demonstrate an error  of  law.  Whilst
    my provisional view had been the wording of the paragraph E-ECP.3.3  of
    Appendix FM was plain and should be read  strictly  however  harsh  the
    consequences, I have been persuaded by Miss Bissett that the Judge  was
    entitled to look at the reality of the payments  actually  due  to  the
    sponsor.  When the payment was backdated as the outcome of a successful
    appeal, so is the notional entitlement.

9.    The Judge made findings that the backdated  benefit  was  due  to  the
    sponsor at the material time in consequence of the  later  appeal.  The
    judge further found that in the particular circumstances of  this  case
    amounted to receipt. It may be a different judge could have come  to  a
    different conclusion. However, I do not consider there to be any  error
    of law on the part of the Judge as the conclusion reached was  open  to
    him on the unusual facts of this particular case.


Notice of Decision

There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal and this appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed       Mark  Hill                               Date        3  October
2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


