
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01209/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th September 2014                          |On 17th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                         Mr RAJA TARIQ MEHMOOD khan
                          (anonymity not retained)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Thornhill
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 6th December 1980 is a citizen of Pakistan.   The
    Appellant  was  represented  by  Mr  Thornhill.   The  Respondent   was
    represented by Mr Harrison  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.   The
    Sponsor in this case Mrs Asma was present.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant  had  made  application  on  29th  June  2012  for  entry
    clearance as a spouse under paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules  (in
    existence at that stage).  The application  had  been  refused  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer on 11th December  2012.   The  application  had
    been refused under the terms of paragraph 320(18)  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Appellant had appealed that decision  and  the  appeal  was
    heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Smith sitting  at  Manchester
    on 25th October 2013.  The judge had dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal
    under  both  the  Immigration  Rules  and  Article  8  of   the   ECHR.
    Application for permission to appeal had been made and granted by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Astle on 12th May 2014.  Permission was granted  on
    the basis that it was arguable the judge had misinterpreted the case of
    F USA [2013] UKUT 00309.  The Respondent had opposed  that  application
    by letter dated 10th June 2014.  Directions had been issued firstly for
    the Upper Tribunal to decide if an error of law had been  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the matter comes before me in  accordance  with
    those directions.  Further directions were issued to the  parties  that
    the Tribunal did not have any of  the  documentary  evidence  that  was
    before the Immigration Judge.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 3. Mr Thornhill referred me to the case of F contained within  the  bundle
    presented by him to the Upper Tribunal dated 9th September 2014.  I  am
    grateful for the compilation  of  that  bundle  given  the  absence  of
    documents that were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   It  was
    submitted that it was necessary for the judge, in accordance  with  the
    case of F, to have considered, using his own discretion, the  facts  of
    this case even if it was found that  there  were  strong  compassionate
    reasons for allowing the appeal.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. It was said by Mr Harrison that the judge had looked at the case  of  F
    and was aware of that case and I was referred to paragraphs 14  and  15
    in particular within the determination that  indicated  the  judge  had
    found no discretionary basis for allowing the appeal.

 5. Given the absence of documents that may or may not have been before the
    First-tier Tribunal I, with  the  assistance  of  the  representatives,
    obtained some basic facts concerning the background to the  Appellant's
    position.  Those facts suggested that the Appellant had first  come  to
    the UK as a visitor in 2004 and had thereafter remained unlawfully.  He
    had been caught attempting to leave the United Kingdom  using  a  false
    travel document to go to Pakistan in 2008.  As a result of the  use  of
    that fraudulent document  he  had  been  sentenced  to  twelve  months'
    imprisonment on 8th May 2008.  The  Appellant  had  then  been  removed
    under the Voluntary Removal Scheme on 29th August 2008  and  thereafter
    had remained in Pakistan.  He had married the Sponsor  in  Pakistan  in
    2012.  The Sponsor is a British citizen of Pakistan  origin.   She  has
    three children from a previous marriage.  The marriage between  herself
    and the Appellant was an arranged marriage as she  had  described  they
    were former friends.  Her previous marriage had taken place in 2007 and
    she had been divorced in 2012.

 6. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision to consider
    this case and now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The application in this case had been made before the  changes  to  the
    Immigration Rules on 9th July 2012 and  the  original  application  had
    therefore been made under paragraph 281 of the Immigration  Rules.   It
    would appear to be the case that the Entry Clearance  Officer  had  not
    considered the merits or otherwise of the application  under  paragraph
    281 of the Immigration Rules being satisfied that the Appellant  failed
    to meet the Immigration Rules as a result of paragraph 320(18) of those
    Rules.  That was because the Appellant had been convicted of an offence
    in the United Kingdom punishable with imprisonment for a term of twelve
    months or any greater punishment.  In this case the Appellant had  been
    convicted to a sentence of twelve months for an offence which carried a
    maximum sentence of two years' imprisonment.  That was in  relation  to
    the conviction in 2008 relating to  his  use  of  a  fraudulent  travel
    document.  It was further agreed that that conviction was not  a  spent
    conviction.

 8. Paragraph 320 subparagraph (18) is one of the subparagraphs that  comes
    within the general heading "Grounds on which entry clearance  or  leave
    to enter the United Kingdom should normally be refused".   The  use  of
    the  phrase  "should  normally  be  refused"  suggests  an  element  of
    discretion when applying that Rule.  The terms of paragraph 320(18) has
    built in to it the concept of discretion where it  states  "save  where
    the Immigration Officer is satisfied that admission would be  justified
    for strong compassionate reasons".

 9. It was submitted  by  Mr  Thornhill  that  paragraph  320(18)  requires
    essentially a two stage discretionary approach.  The first stage is  to
    decide if there are strong compassionate reasons.  If  there  are  such
    reasons then there is no need to move to the second stage.  However  if
    there are not strong compassionate reasons to  allow  admission  it  is
    said that the general discretionary heading referred  to  above  allows
    for a second stage analysis of whether there  are  factors  that  would
    allow discretion to be favoured one way or the other.

10. The only guidance that has been referred  to  me  in  this  respect  is
    guidance valid from 31st August 2011 at pages 52 and 53 of  what  where
    then guidance based on the Immigration Rules issued by the Home Office.
     The only relevant parts of that guidance state that if an  Immigration
    Officer decides to refuse an applicant based  on  his  conviction  then
    that Immigration Officer  must  take  into  account  any  human  rights
    reasons and make sure the refusal is both proportionate and reasonable.
     Secondly the guidance in mandatory terms states "You must  not  refuse
    an applicant under paragraph 320(18) if their conviction is spent under
    the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974.  It was agreed that  in  this
    case that did not apply to the Appellant.  The reference to taking into
    account human rights reasons  and  making  sure  the  refusal  is  both
    proportionate and reasonable is  not  directly  linked  to  the  phrase
    within paragraph 320(18) that "Admission would be justified for  strong
    compassionate reasons".  It would seem by  inference  however  that  it
    does  relate  to  that  phrase  and  thereby  providing   guidance   to
    Immigration Officers that if their decision would,  by  application  of
    the correct test at that  time,  infringe  an  individual's  family  or
    private life under Article 8 of the ECHR then that in turn would  be  a
    strong compassionate reason for allowing admission.

11. The judge in this case had before him evidence as to the  circumstances
    relating to the marriage and family life existing between the Appellant
    and the Sponsor and her children.  Insofar as that evidence is referred
    to within the determination it is consistent with those facts  referred
    to above and obtained at this hearing, given the  absence  of  original
    documentation.

12. The judge at paragraph 14 referred to the authority of  F  [2013]  UKUT
    00309 and he had clearly noted that case and referred to  the  headnote
    that made reference to taking a two  stage  approach.   The  judge  had
    reminded himself of the general  heading  that  related  to  paragraphs
    320(8) through to 320(22) that being  that  entry  should  normally  be
    refused.  He had then in paragraph 14  considered  whether  there  were
    strong compassionate reasons in this case why the normal effect of  the
    law to refuse entry should not follow.  He had noted, and  it  must  be
    correctly, that the fact that the parties are married cannot in  itself
    be  the  strong  compassionate  reasons  otherwise  every   matrimonial
    application would have to be allowed which would defeat the purpose  of
    the provision.  He had therefore asked himself whether  the  particular
    circumstances of this case gave rise to strong  compassionate  reasons.
    He had noted that the parties had married in the full knowledge of  the
    Appellant's immigration history and that marriage had  taken  place  as
    recently as 2012 in Pakistan.   He  noted  that  the  children  of  the
    Sponsor had only met the Appellant once at the wedding and  he  further
    noted that from the evidence available  there  was  no  medical  issues
    affecting any of the parties.  He concluded paragraph 14 by stating:

         "There is nothing in this case that appears  to  me  to  amount  to
         anything approaching strong compassionate reasons  as  to  why  the
         normal effect of the law should not take place.  It is my view that
         the application has been properly  refused  pursuant  to  paragraph
         320(18)".

13. He had then noted in paragraph 15 the argument placed before  him  that
    notwithstanding finding there were no strong compassionate  reasons  it
    was said that the ECO had failed to exercise his discretion.  The judge
    noted that that decision  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  been
    reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager who had exercised discretion but
    not in favour of the applicant.  He had noted that  neither  party  had
    placed before him  any  guidance  with  regard  to  how  and  when  the
    discretion is to be exercised but concluded that on the evidence before
    him it certainly appeared that the ECM was aware of  the  consideration
    of applying discretion but had applied it against  the  applicant.   He
    concluded that he was satisfied the discretion  had  been  applied  and
    that the decision was therefore not an unlawful decision.

14. It could be argued that whilst the judge had recognised  the  existence
    of that residual discretion,  and  had  recognised  that  the  ECM  had
    applied it but against the applicant it was nevertheless incumbent upon
    the judge separately and independently to have undertaken that residual
    discretion exercise himself.  If in paragraph 15 he had  done  no  more
    than simply say that he agreed with  the  decision  of  the  ECM  after
    reviewing the evidence then there could be no argument in this case.

15. The judge did not do that.  It was submitted  however  that  the  final
    sentence of the previous paragraph "It is my view that the  application
    has been properly refused pursuant to paragraph 320(18)" is  tantamount
    to the judge having so exercised that residual discretion.  Whilst that
    is one interpretation of the final sentence of paragraph 14 the context
    of the final sentence of paragraph 14 is in respect of the first  stage
    test namely whether there were strong compassionate reasons or not.  It
    would be difficult to read down the final sentence of paragraph  14  to
    incorporate the judge independently exercising the residual discretion.
     Indeed paragraph 15 suggests  that  the  judge  was  responding  to  a
    specific submission that the failure of the Entry Clearance Officer  to
    exercise  residual  discretion  rendered  the   Respondent's   decision
    unlawful.

16. In conclusion it may well be the judge made an  error  of  law  in  not
    independently exercising his own discretion in  terms  of  that  second
    stage approach i.e. the residual discretion  that  still  existed  even
    though strong compassionate circumstances  had  not  been  found.   The
    question is whether that error  of  law,  which  in  some  respects  is
    somewhat semantic led to a material error of law being made in that had
    he exercised  such  residual  discretion  could  it  have  altered  his
    decision.

17. This was not a material error of law.  Firstly as the judge  noted  the
    general heading to this section of paragraph  320  indicated  that  the
    application should normally be refused.  Secondly the judge  thereafter
    had himself found that there were no strong  compassionate  reasons  in
    this case to overturn the normal effect of the  law.   Indeed  he  went
    further where he said that there was nothing that amounted to  anything
    approaching  strong  compassionate  reasons.   Further  and  with  some
    significance the  judge  had  at  paragraphs  16  to  18  independently
    considered whether the decision to refuse entry clearance  would  be  a
    breach of the Appellant's right to a family and private  life  pursuant
    to Article 8.  In this respect he had looked  at  the  facts  presented
    before him with the case of Razgar  [2004]  in  mind.   The  judge  had
    provided clear and proper reasons why he found a refusal would  not  be
    disproportionate in the circumstances of this case.  In  reaching  that
    conclusion the judge had  properly  considered  the  interests  of  the
    children referred to above.

18. Given the factual background of this case and even bearing in mind that
    this application predated the change to the Immigration  Rules,  it  is
    extremely difficult to see how the judge  could  have  arrived  at  any
    other conclusion when properly  applying  the  appropriate  test  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  As noted above there  was  nothing  before  the
    judge or indeed before me in terms of issued guidance on  factors  that
    may or may  not  be  considered  in  the  exercise  of  this  "residual
    discretion".  Having concluded that there were no strong  compassionate
    circumstances; having further concluded that the  facts  did  not  even
    amount to anything approaching strong compassionate reasons and finally
    having properly concluded that the facts did not demonstrate a  refusal
    would be a disproportionate breach  of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  when
    looking at the circumstances both of the Appellant, the Sponsor and her
    children it is extremely difficult if not close to impossible to  think
    of any other facts or other test other than proportionality that  could
    have been applied if the judge had looked at the concept  of  "residual
    discretion".  Accordingly whilst it could be said that one  reading  of
    paragraphs 14 and 15 indicated an error of law, it is clear that it was
    not a material error of law and  that  had  the  judge  exercised  that
    residual discretion, independent of the conclusion reached by the Entry
    Clearance Manager, the judge would have  reached  no  other  conclusion
    than the one that he did reach in dismissing the appeal both under  the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

19. There was no error of law made by the judge in this case and  I  uphold
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
