


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01705/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 7 May 2014                               |On : 8 May 2014              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Varshaben Vanrajbhai Sisodiya
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Greenwood, instructed by Boghal Partners
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO). However, for  the
   purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the ECO as the respondent and
   Ms Sisodiya as the appellant, reflecting their positions as they were  in
   the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 5 June  1988.  In  September
   2012 she applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4
   (General) Student Migrant. Her application was refused on 8 October  2012
   on the grounds that she could not meet the  maintenance  requirements  in
   paragraph 245ZV(c) of the Immigration Rules. She lodged an appeal against
   that decision  and,  following  an  administrative  review  by  an  entry
   clearance manager, the decision was maintained.

3. The appellant's appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 21  January
   2014. Both the appellant and the respondent were represented.  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Callender Smith allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration
   Rules.

4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   and granted on 2 April 2014 with regard  to  the  issue  of  the  judge's
   jurisdiction in the appeal.

Appeal hearing and submissions

5. Ms Greenwood, in her submissions, conceded that the judge  did  not  have
   jurisdiction to allow the appeal under the Immigration  Rules.  She  also
   acknowledged that she was unable to argue that the judge  had  considered
   any human rights grounds. However she submitted that any error of law  in
   that respect was not material, given  that  he  could  have  allowed  the
   appeal under the third stage of R (Razgar) v SSHD (2004) UKHL 27  on  the
   basis of the findings of fact made under the rules.  In  response  to  my
   enquiry as to the appellant's ability to meet the  first  two  stages  of
   Razgar, she submitted that the respondent's decision to refuse her  entry
   clearance affected her private life. I indicated to Ms Greenwood that  it
   did not appear to me that the appellant  had  even  raised  human  rights
   grounds in her appeal and she submitted that  the  fact  that  the  judge
   referred to Razgar  suggested  that  such  grounds  were  raised  at  the
   hearing, although she was unable to confirm that that was the case.

6. Mr Saunders submitted that  the  appellant  had  not  appealed  on  human
   rights grounds, as was evident from the grounds specified in  the  Notice
   of Appeal, and accordingly there was no appeal before the judge.

7. I advised the parties that in my view Judge Callender Smith had erred  in
   law in his decision and that  his  decision  had  to  be  set  aside  and
   dismissed for lack of jurisdiction.

Consideration and findings

8.  Following  the  detailed  grounds  for  refusal   of   the   appellant's
   application under the Immigration Rules, the Refusal of  Entry  Clearance
   dated 8 October 2012 went on to provide  details  of  the  Administrative
   Review process and to advise the appellant of her limited right of appeal
   under section 84(1)(c) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
   2002.

9. The appellant, in response, lodged a Notice  of  Appeal  on  19  December
   2012  enclosing  grounds  which  sought  to  challenge  the  respondent's
   decision in regard to maintenance, alleging confusion and  error  on  the
   part of the respondent, but clearly making no mention  of  Article  8  or
   human rights. The ECM, in his review, referred to the grounds as  raising
   human rights on the basis of the allegation  of  confusion,  but  plainly
   that was incorrect. Indeed,  as  Mr  Saunders  submitted,  the  appellant
   specifically set out in her grounds that they  were  brought  only  under
   section 84(1)(a) and (e) of the 2002 Act.

10. Ms Greenwood submitted that it could  have  been  the  case  that  human
   rights grounds were raised at the hearing, given the judge's reference to
   Razgar, but there is no  suggestion  in  the  determination,  a  skeleton
   argument, a statement or anywhere else that that was the  case.  She  was
   not able to state that such grounds were actually raised  and  I  do  not
   accept that they were.

11. Accordingly, the appeal should never have come before the judge  in  the
   first place. However, once it had done so, he ought  to  have  recognised
   that the appellant had no right to appeal on the grounds that she did and
   that he had no jurisdiction to consider  the  grounds  being  raised.  He
   clearly erred in law by considering the grounds raised in regard  to  the
   Immigration Rules and by allowing the appeal on that basis.

12. Even if the judge  had  engaged  in  a  consideration  of  human  rights
   grounds, which it is clear that he did not, there was plainly nothing  in
   the evidence before him that could have led to a successful  decision  in
   that regard. I find no merit in Ms Greenwood's submission that  he  could
   have allowed the appeal under the third stage of Razgar, when  there  was
   clearly no  evidence  before  him  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  had
   established a private or family life in  the  United  Kingdom  such  that
   Article 8 was engaged.

13.  In all the circumstances, I find that the judge's decision  has  to  be
   set aside and re-made by dismissing the appeal for lack of jurisdiction.

DECISION

14. The making of the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside and
   to that extent the appeal made by the  ECO  is  allowed.  I  re-make  the
   decision and substitute a decision dismissing the appellant's appeal  for
   lack of jurisdiction.






                               Signed                                  Date



                                Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
