
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01594/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 8th April 2014                             |On 11th April 2014           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                               FAHIMA BAKHSHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Gill instructed by Bassi Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Mills - Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge S J Pacey, promulgated on 8th November  2013,  in  which  she
        dismissed the appeal against the  refusal  of  an  Entry  Clearance
        Officer to allow the Appellant to enter the United Kingdom for  the
        purposes of settlement with her husband.


     2. The Judge made the following observations and findings:


      i.    Documentary  evidence  showed  that  the  sponsor  travelled  to
   Afghanistan         in July 2013, retuning the same month [8].


     ii.  The parties would not  have  had  in  mind  the  need  to  provide
   objective      evidence of contact at this late stage but it was accepted
   they have           maintained contact by  the  cheapest  means  possible
   i.e. phone cards. No         adverse inference is being  drawn  from  the
   lack of objective evidence            relating  to  contact  between  the
   parties. The objective  evidence  made           available  significantly
   post dates the date of the decision [9].


     iii. It is not disputed that the  parties  are  married.  The  evidence
   indicates that          the sponsor went to  Afghanistan  in  July  2013.
   Photographs showed the       parties together.  The  sponsor  would  have
   needed time off work to travel        to  Afghanistan  which  would  have
   involved some expense which is a point        in his favour. Set  against
   this is the fact he has an incentive to go  to                Afghanistan
   other than to see his wife as he has family there [10].


     iv. The sponsor only has a few weeks holiday a year and  last  saw  his
   wife on        18th May 2012. He must  have  stayed  in  Afghanistan  for
   several weeks after          the wedding but he has other relatives there
   which would have acted as        an incentive for him to have an extended
   stay [11].


     3. Also in paragraph 11 of the  determination  the  Judge  stated  "It
        seems very strange however, that the sponsor did not go to see  his
        wife (on his own account) until July 2013, well over a  year  after
        the parties last saw each other.  Notwithstanding that he said that
        they maintained contact by telephone means  I  would  have  thought
        that if the relationship was genuine  and  subsisting  the  sponsor
        would have gone  to  his  wife  well  before  July  that  year.   I
        recognise that he said he only had a few weeks  holiday  each  year
        but that does still not explain how it comes to be that  the  visit
        took place so late in the day,  and  so  long  after  the  date  of
        refusal."


     4. As a result of the issues of concern to the Judge she dismissed the
        appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.



Discussion



     5. The application was initially refused under paragraphs  281  (iii),
        (iv) and (v) although the financial aspects were conceded on review
        leaving the only issue whether the criteria of 281 (iii)  could  be
        met.


     6. It cannot be said the Judge failed to consider all the evidence she
        was asked to consider with the required degree of care or that  she
        gave no reasons for the findings she made and so this is an  appeal
        where such findings can only arguably be challenged on the basis of
        irrationality, namely that they were outside the range of permitted
        findings the Judge was entitled to make on the evidence.


     7. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Latter  on
        a renewed application on 24th January 2014  on  the  basis  it  was
        arguable that the Judge may have erred in her assessment of whether
        the marriage was genuine and subsisting.


     8. Guidance on the proper approach when assessing whether  a  marriage
        is subsisting is to be found in two main cases the first  of  which
        is GA (Ghana)* [2006] UKAIT 00046 in which the Tribunal  said  that
        the requirement in paragraph 281 that the marriage be subsisting is
        not limited to considering whether there has been a valid  marriage
        which formally continues. The word requires an  assessment  of  the
        current relationship between the  parties  and  a  decision  as  to
        whether in the broadest sense it  comprises  a  marriage  that  can
        properly be described as subsisting.  The  second  case  is  Goudey
        (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan [2012]  UKUT  00041(IAC)  in
        which the Tribunal held:


              (i)      GA ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana* [2006] UKAIT  00046
   means               that the matrimonial relationship  must  continue  at
   the relevant time                rather than  just  the  formality  of  a
   marriage, but it does  not  require                   the  production  of
   particular evidence of   mutual  devotion  before                   entry
   clearance can be granted;


              (ii)     Evidence of  telephone  cards  is  capable  of  being
   corroborative of the                  contention of the parties that they
   communicate by  telephone,  even  if                   such  data  cannot
   confirm the particular number the sponsor  was                    calling
   in  the  country  in  question.  It  is  not  a  requirement   that   the
   parties also write or text each other;


              (iii)   Where there are no countervailing factors  generating
   suspicion as to                  the  intentions  of  the  parties,  such
   evidence may be sufficient to                      discharge  the  burden
   of proof on the claimant.


     9. In Naz (subsisting marriage - standard of  proof)  Pakistan  [2012]
        UKUT 00040(IAC) the Tribunal held that (i) it is for a claimant  to
        establish that the requirements of the Immigration Rules are met or
        that  an  immigration  decision  would  be  an  interference   with
        established family life. In both cases, the relevant  standard  for
        establishing the facts is the balance of  probabilities.(ii)   Post
        decision visits by a  sponsor  to  his  spouse  are  admissible  in
        evidence in appeals to show that the  marriage  is  subsisting:  DR
        (ECO: post-decision evidence) Morocco * [2005] UKIAT 00038 applied.


    10. The evidence before the Judge was that the  Appellant  and  sponsor
        married in 2012 and that the sponsor remained in Afghanistan  until
        May 2012. The Judge seems to been of the opinion that the fact  the
        sponsor did not return until July 2013 was a visit 'so late in  the
        day' as to justify a conclusion that the marriage did not  subsist.
        The evidence before the Judge of ongoing contact was  accepted  and
        the Judge specifically refers to the  fact  that  adverse  findings
        would not be made on the basis of the evidence made available,  but
        fails to give adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  such  contact,
        following Goudey which the Judge clearly considered, did not  prove
        on the balance of probabilities  and  in  the  absence  of  adverse
        credibility  findings  that  the  relationship  was   genuine   and
        subsisting and that  they  have  the  intention  to  live  together
        permanently.


    11. The evidence of indirect contact was accepted by  the  Judge  which
        indicates that notwithstanding an inability to  visit  between  the
        stated dates the parties'  maintained  regular  contact  with  each
        other.


    12. There was also evidence from the sponsor that he has  contact  with
        his children from his previous marriage every Sunday which requires
        him to remain in the United Kingdom. There was evidence the sponsor
        is employed but does not receive a substantial wage and that he was
        granted  refugee  status  having  fled  from  Afghanistan.   It  is
        accepted that he has family in  Afghanistan  as  the  marriage  was
        arranged by such family members and the Appellant is the  sponsor's
        cousin.  It may be that during any visit to  Afghanistan  he  would
        see family members but that in itself does not appear on  the  fact
        to support a conclusion that it means he did not visit his wife  or
        provide adequate reasons for discounting the sponsors  written  and
        oral evidence that he did.


    13. Having considered the evidence cumulatively,  the  adverse  finding
        based upon the frequency, or lack of, visits and other matters  the
        Judge considered justified the decision make this one of those rare
        cases in which it can be found that such a finding  is  irrational.
        This was also accepted by Mr Mills having had  the  opportunity  of
        reading the determination in full.


    14. I set the determination aside although  the  factual  findings  are
        preserved. Permission was given to the Appellant, pursuant to  Rule
        15  (2A)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  to  introduce
        additional evidence which includes more photographs of the time the
        Appellant and sponsor spent together and evidence that the  sponsor
        has secured a period of extended leave from his employer to  enable
        him to travel to Afghanistan on Friday 18th April 2014. He  returns
        on 26th May 2014 during which period he will visit his  wife,  and,
        no doubt, his other family members.


    15. In remaking the decision I accept that  the  parties  are  married,
        that there is evidence of ongoing intervening contact between them,
        that the sponsor has  provided  a  plausible  explanation  for  the
        visits undertaken  to  date  based  upon  employment  and  domestic
        arrangements in the United Kingdom, and that they have continued to
        maintain contact  as  evidenced  by  the  Viber  telephone  records
        provided. There is clear evidence that the sponsor wishes to travel
        to Afghanistan and has made arrangements to enable  him  to  do  so
        with his employer.  Having followed the guidance in the authorities
        referred  to  above  and  in  the   absence   of   any   sufficient
        countervailing factors, I  am  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  has
        discharged the burden of proof upon her to show that not  only  she
        but also the sponsor consider themselves  to  be  in  a  subsisting
        marriage and that they intend to live together as man and  wife  in
        the United Kingdom.


Decision

    16. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is allowed.


Consequential Directions


    17. Forthwith on receipt of this decision the  respondent  shall  issue
        entry clearance.  [Provided the respondent is satisfied  there  are
        no circumstances arising after the date of this determination / the
        decision under appeal which make it necessary to refuse to do so].


   Anonymity.


    18. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


   Fee Award.


   Note: this is not part of the determination.


    19. In the light of my decision to re-make the decision in  the  appeal
        by allowing it, we have considered whether  to  make  a  fee  award
        (rule  23A  (costs)  of  the  Asylum   and   Immigration   Tribunal
        (Procedure) Rules 2005  and  section  12(4)(a)  of  the  Tribunals,
        Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).


          I have had regard to the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note:  Fee
   Awards in           Immigration Appeals (December 2011).


          I make a whole fee award.


          Reasons: The Appellant succeeded on her  appeal  and  should  have
   done so on          the basis of the information available and before the
   First-tier Tribunal.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson
Dated the 10th April 2014


