

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
OA/01803/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London            |Determination Promulgated |
|On 8 October 2014                       |On 9 October 2014         |
|                                        |                          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER PARIS

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     PDA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                        Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: No appearance

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This determination refers to the parties as they were in the First-tier
    Tribunal

 2. The appellant, a national of Congo, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against a decision made by the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) to  refuse
    his application for an EEA Family Permit to join  his  French  national
    spouse and their five children in the  UK.   Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Harmes dismissed the appeal under  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the EEA Regulations) and  allowed  the
    appeal under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The
    respondent now appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. At the hearing  there  was  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant. I was satisfied that notice of the hearing had been sent  to
    the appellant at the address given on the notice of appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal and that no  other  address  had  been  notified  to  the
    Tribunal. In the absence of communication from  the  appellant  and  in
    considering the matter as a whole I was satisfied  that  the  appellant
    had been notified of the hearing and that it was in  the  interests  of
    justice to proceed with  the  hearing.  I  heard  submissions  from  Mr
    Shilliday.

Background

 4. According to his application form the appellant and his wife married on
    8 January 2002. They have five children together and his wife has  been
    in the UK since 7 March 2006.  In the application  the  appellant  said
    that his wife had been a student in the UK studying at a College  since
    September 2013 and that the course was due to finish on  4  July  2014.
    The ECO refused  the  application  on  the  grounds  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant met the requirements of regulation  12  of
    the EEA Regulations in that he had not provided evidence that his  wife
    held fully comprehensive sickness insurance cover in the United Kingdom
    as required by regulation 4 (1) (d) of the EEA Regulations.

 5. The appellant submitted a European Health Insurance Card (EHIC) in  his
    wife's name with the notice of appeal but the Entry  Clearance  Manager
    noted that this is  not  evidence  of  private  medical  insurance  and
    maintained the decision to refuse.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the appeal on  the  papers  as
    requested.  The  appellant  still  had   not   provided   evidence   of
    comprehensive sickness insurance so  the  Judge  dismissed  the  appeal
    under the EEA Regulations on this basis. Incidentally the  Judge  erred
    at paragraph 16 when he said that section 85 (5)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  required  him  to  consider  only  the
    circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision under appeal  as
    that  section  does  not  apply  to  decisions  made  under   the   EEA
    Regulations. However the error is not material  because  the  appellant
    did not produce evidence showing that he met the  requirements  of  the
    EEA Regulations by the time of the hearing. In any event that  part  of
    the decision is not challenged.

Error of law

 7. The Judge went on to  consider  the  appeal  under  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  The Judge failed to consider  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules before  considering  whether  there
    were arguably good grounds for considering the appeal outwith the Rules
    as set out in the case of  Gulshan (Article 8 -  new  Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) where the Tribunal  examined  the  case
    law and  concluded  [24];  "after  applying  the  requirements  of  the
    rules, only if there may arguably be good grounds for granting leave to
    remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on  to
    consider whether there are compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
    recognised under them".  This  was  further  considered  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in the recent case of Shahzad (Art 8: legitimate  aim)  [2014]
    UKUT 00085 (IAC). The Tribunal's conclusions are summarised in the head
    note as follows;

           "(iv) MF (Nigeria) [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  held  that  the  new
           immigration rules regarding deportation of  a  foreign  criminal
           are a complete code. This was because of the express requirement
           in  them  at  paragraph  398  to  have  regard  to   exceptional
           circumstances and other factors.

           (v) It follows from this that any other rule which has a similar
           provision will also constitute a complete code;

           (v) Where an area of the rules does not  have  such  an  express
           mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary  of  State  for
           the Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)  ([29]-[31]  in
           particular) and  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
           approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) should be followed:  i.e.  after
           applying the requirements of the rules, only  if  there  may  be
           arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain outside  them
           is it necessary for Article 8 purposes  to  go  on  to  consider
           whether there  are  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently
           recognised under them."

 8. In any event Schedule 1, paragraph 1 of the  EEA  Regulations  provides
    that certain provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 have effect in relation to an appeal under the EEA Regulations  as
    if it were an appeal against  an  immigration  decision  under  section
    82(1) of that Act except for section 84(1) (a) and (f).  Section  84(1)
    (a) is  the  ground  that  the  decision  is  not  in  accordance  with
    Immigration Rules. The appellant appealed under regulation  26  of  the
    EEA Regulations against an EEA decision and Schedule 1, paragraph 1  of
    those Regulations therefore prohibits consideration as to  whether  the
    refusal decision is in accordance with the  Immigration  Rules.  Whilst
    there was before the Judge a valid  appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    decision breaches Article 8 he could not therefore consider whether the
    decision was in accordance with the Immigration Rules. However the case
    law referred to above has established that the  Immigration  Rules,  in
    particular Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE, are the starting point for
    an assessment of Article 8 because the respondent has now codified  the
    provisions in relation to applications to remain in the United  Kingdom
    on the basis of their family or private life and those  rules  are  set
    out at Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE.

 9. In these circumstances the Judge should have given taken account of the
    law set out above and given reasons for going on to consider Article  8
    in this case.

10. Even had he done so I am satisfied that  he  materially  erred  in  his
    consideration of Article 8. The Judge had evidence from the appellant's
    wife's GP saying that she was suffering from stress and exhaustion as a
    result of caring for her five children and that her health and that  of
    the children would be greatly improved by the presence of  her  husband
    in the UK. There was also a letter from a Child Protection  and  Family
    Services officer from the children's school expressing concern for  the
    long term effects on the children if their father is  not  admitted  to
    the UK to support his wife. The Judge found that a consideration of the
    best interests of the children  meant  that  it  was  'imperative  that
    immigration control is circumvented in this case for the  appellant  to
    be allowed to enter' [27].

11. The Judge found that the welfare of the five children was  sufficiently
    important to find on these facts that  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
    family are more important than immigration control and that 'the burden
    on the school and health services is likely to be less as a  result  of
    the admission of the appellant' and that the family would  'prosper  if
    reunited'. However there was no evidence before the  Judge  to  support
    the assertion that the burden on the  school  and  the  health  service
    would be less if the appellant were to be admitted to the UK.  In  fact
    the burden on the health service would be less if the appellant's  wife
    obtained the sickness insurance required under the EEA regulations.

12. The Judge went on to say; 'It was said in the case of  Rudolph  v  ECO,
    Columbo [1984] Imm AR 84 that the underlying purpose of the immigration
    rules is to unite families' and that the purpose of the EEA regulations
    is to allow free movement of  EEA  nationals.  However  both  of  these
    purposes are subject to limitations. In the  case  of  the  Immigration
    Rules the limitations are set out in Appendix FM. The  EEA  Regulations
    set out the requirements and limitations on the right of free movement.
    These  include  the  legitimate  requirement   that   a   student   has
    comprehensive sickness insurance. These requirements must  be  part  of
    the balancing exercise when considering the respondent's legitimate aim
    of the maintenance of an effective system of immigration control.

13. Whilst the Judge referred to immigration control he failed to give  any
    detailed consideration to the requirements of  immigration  control  in
    this case. Here in order to obtain an EEA Family Permit  the  appellant
    is required to show that his wife has comprehensive sickness  insurance
    cover in the United Kingdom. The appellant has given no reason why  his
    wife does not have the sickness insurance. This ought to be  reasonably
    easily obtained and a fresh application could be made. In fact the lack
    of the required sickness insurance undermines  the  appellant's  wife's
    status in  the  UK  and  that  of  the  children.  A  further  relevant
    consideration is that the application form states that the  appellant's
    wife's course was due to end on 4 July  2014,  just  a  day  after  the
    Judge's decision was promulgated. These matters were not considered  by
    the Judge who appeared to assume that the appellant's wife and children
    were legitimately in the UK for the long term. In failing to weigh  all
    of these factors in considering proportionality  under  Article  8  the
    Judge fell into material error. In light of the failure to undertake  a
    proper assessment under Article 8 I set aside the part of the  decision
    dealing  with  Article  8  leaving  the  part  dealing  with  the   EEA
    Regulations.



Remaking the decision

14. I remake the decision under Article 8. As set out above I am  satisfied
    on the basis of  this  case  law  that  the  correct  approach  to  the
    assessment as to whether the decision in this  case  is  in  breach  of
    Article 8 is to firstly consider  the  appeal  under  Appendix  FM  and
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules. The grounds of appeal do not
    address how the appellant could meet requirements  of  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE. In any event the 2006 Regulations do  not  permit  an
    appeal under the Immigration Rules and I cannot therefore make findings
    as to whether the appeal should succeed under the Immigration Rules.

15. Despite this issue I  have  considered  the  appellant's  appeal  under
    Article 8 as the appellant does have a right of appeal on  this  basis.
    In undertaking an assessment under Article 8 I follow  the  five  stage
    approach set out by Lord Bingham in R v Secretary of State for the Home
    Department ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.

16. The appellant does not enjoy family life in the UK with  his  wife.  It
    appears that  since  his  wife  came  to  the  UK  in  March  2006  the
    relationship has been conducted through visits. Although  I  note  that
    the appellant previously obtained an EEA Family Permit in  August  2010
    valid until 18 February 2011 and that he appears not  to  have  applied
    for a Residence Card at that time. However, given that the relationship
    appears to be subsisting and that there are  five  children,  I  accept
    that there is a family life between all of the members of  the  family.
    Although there is limited evidence of any interference given  that  the
    family life has been conducted in this way since 2006 in light  of  the
    low threshold I am prepared to accept that the decision  to  refuse  an
    EEA Family Permit may interfere with the family life  in  the  UK.  Any
    interference is in accordance with the law.

17. In considering steps 4 and 5, I weigh in the appellant's favour that he
    is currently separated from his wife and five  children  and  that  his
    wife is suffering from stress and exhaustion as a result of caring  for
    the children. I also weigh  in  his  favour  the  positive  effect  his
    presence would have for the children as detailed in the letter from the
    Child Protection and Family Services Officer.

18. On the other side of the scale I weigh the fact  that  the  appellant's
    wife has by now finished her studies, her course was due to end in July
    2014 and there is no evidence of further studies before me. Further, in
    the absence of a comprehensive sickness cover, the appellant's wife  is
    not residing in the UK in accordance with the EEA Regulations, nor  are
    her children. There is therefore no expectation that they will continue
    to reside in the UK in the long term.

19. Further, it is open to the appellant's wife, if she is still a student,
    to obtain the relevant sickness cover and for the appellant to  reapply
    for an EEA Family Permit. No reason has been given as to why  this  has
    not been or cannot be obtained. A requirement to obtain the appropriate
    medical cover, in compliance with the  EEA  Regulations,  is  a  lawful
    requirement under European law.

20. I am satisfied that  a  temporary  interference  with  the  appellant's
    family  life  whilst  sickness  insurance  is  obtained  and  a   fresh
    application is made, in circumstances where the family have  chosen  to
    live apart since 2006, is proportionate to the respondent's  legitimate
    aim of the maintenance of an effective system  of  immigration  control
    for the prevention of disorder or crime or to secure the economic well-
    being of the country.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the part of that decision dealing with the Article 8 appeal  and
remake it by dismissing it.





Anonymity





The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.





I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed
                       Date: 8 October 2014


A Grimes


Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal















                                      `
