
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
OA/01623/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 8th August 2017                    |      On 15th August 2017             |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                         Mrs lovely begum chowdhury
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Hafiz of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Dhaka,  I
    refer to the parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of  Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  of  19th
    December  2013  to  refuse  her  application  for  a   Certificate   of
    Entitlement to the Right of Abode in the United Kingdom as the child of
    Gousuddin Ahmed Chowdhury.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Adio allowed  the
    appeal and the Secretary of State now appeals  to  this  Tribunal  with
    permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge J M Holmes on 20th June
    2017.

 3. In summary  the  background  is  that  the  Appellant  claims  that  Mr
    Chowdhury is her father and that he registered as a British citizen  on
    17 December 1968.  He has two daughters with  his  first  wife.  It  is
    claimed that he married his second wife (the  Appellant's  mother)  and
    the Appellant was born on 17th March 1982.  Her birth certificate which
    was issued on 24th June 2008 names Mr  Chowdhury  as  her  father.   Mr
    Chowdhury died on 16th August 1995.

 4. The Appellant previously applied twice for a Certificate of Entitlement
    to the Right of Abode. The refusal of the  first  application  was  the
    subject of an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal which was considered by
    Immigration Judge Sharp who, in a decision promulgated on 6th May 2009,
    dismissed that appeal.

 5. In his decision Immigration Judge Sharp accepted that the Appellant was
    born around the time claimed and therefore was born after Mr  Chowdhury
    became a British citizen. Judge Sharp considered the history  where  Mr
    Chowdhury's family made a fraudulent  application  to  bring  in  other
    members of the family and took into account the  oral  evidence  before
    him which he considered to be inconsistent as well as  the  documentary
    evidence and concluded that the Appellant had not established that  she
    was the daughter of Mr Chowdhury.

 6. The Appellant made a further  application  which  was  refused  on  9th
    February 2010 and an appeal against that  decision  was  considered  by
    Immigration Judge Clayton  who,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  20th
    December 2010, considered  the  documentary  evidence  before  him  and
    concluded that it had not  been  established  that  the  Appellant  was
    entitled to a Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of Abode  in  the
    UK through her claimed father, Mr  Chowdhury.   The  Appellant  made  a
    further application which was refused on 19th December 2013.  An appeal
    against that decision was initially dismissed by Judge Fletcher-Hill in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  An appeal against that decision to the  Upper
    Tribunal  was  successful  and  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge   Bagral
    concluded that Judge Fletcher-Hill had made an error of law, set  aside
    the decision and remitted it to the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Adio  heard  the  remitted  appeal  on  10th
    November 2016. Judge Adio considered  the  case  of  Devaseelan  [2002]
    UKIAT 00702 and took the findings of Judge Sharp as his starting point.
     Judge Adio then assessed the evidence of a witness who had  not  given
    evidence to Judge Sharp and further evidence not before Judge Sharp and
    concluded that the Appellant had discharged the burden upon her to show
    on the balance of probabilities that she is related as  claimed  to  Mr
    Chowdhury.

Error of Law

 8. The Secretary of State challenges that decision on three  grounds.   It
    is firstly contended that First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Adio  misdirected
    himself in the approach taken to the finding that all  three  witnesses
    before Judge Sharp were unreliable. It  is  contended  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the damage done to the evidence as a whole.   It  is
    contended that, if the Appellant's claim is true, the judge  failed  to
    consider why there  was  a  necessity  for  any  of  the  witnesses  to
    fabricate evidence in order to prove the case. It is argued  that  this
    issue is further compounded by the serious discrepancy between the  two
    witnesses in this appeal as to whether they were both  present  at  the
    birth of the Appellant.

 9. Judge Adio set  out  the  evidence  of  the  three  witnesses  who  had
    previously given evidence to Judge Sharp.  He noted  that  Judge  Sharp
    had pointed out inconsistencies between the evidence and the judge  did
    not go behind the findings of Judge Sharp [17].  The judge  found  that
    one of the witnesses who had given  evidence  before  Judge  Sharp  and
    before Judge Adio was not reliable [19].   The  judge  also  took  into
    account that there were credibility problems with some of the  previous
    witnesses [21].  The judge explained that he found that the new witness
    to be credible  as  cross-examination  did  not  yield  any  particular
    inconsistency and she had given detailed evidence of family members and
    their relationships [19].

10. In my view it is clear that the judge took into  account  the  negative
    aspects of the other witnesses. I disagree with the  assertion  by  the
    Secretary  of  State  that  inconsistent  and  unreliable  evidence  is
    necessarily fabricated evidence. I find that it was open to  the  judge
    to take  into  account  that  some  of  the  witnesses  previously  had
    credibility problems but, having given reasons for  doing  so,  it  was
    open to the judge to prefer the evidence of the new  witness  who  gave
    evidence before him.  The  issue  of  weight  to  be  attached  to  the
    unreliable evidence given  by  the  witnesses  before  Judge  Sharp  as
    opposed to a new witness was a matter for the judge.

11. The second Ground of Appeal contends that much of the evidence produced
    in the instant appeal could have been produced before Judge Sharp.   It
    is argued that no explanation was given for the failure to produce this
    evidence earlier or as to why the witness now found  credible  did  not
    give evidence before Judge Sharp and it is  contended  that  the  judge
    erred  in  failing  to  resolve  this  issue  in  accordance  with  the
    principles of Devaseelan.

12. It is clear that the judge took into account the guidance in Devaseelan
    in his approach to the decision of Judge Sharp and the analysis of that
    evidence at paragraphs  17  and  18.   The  judge  also  made  his  own
    assessment of the evidence of the witnesses before him at paragraph 19.
     The judge took into account the history of  a  fraudulent  application
    and the credibility problems  with  the  witnesses  who  gave  evidence
    before Judge Sharp [21].  There is no error in the judge's approach  to
    the witnesses.

13. It is further contended in the Grounds of Appeal that the  judge  erred
    in failing to consider reasons  why  evidence  had  not  been  tendered
    before Judge Sharp. At Devaseelan the following guidance  is  given  at
    paragraphs 40 to 42;
         "40. We now pass to matters that could have been before  the  first
         Adjudicator but were not.
              4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were not brought  to
              the attention of the first Adjudicator,  although  they  were
              relevant to the issues before him, should be treated  by  the
              second  Adjudicator  with  the  greatest  circumspection. An
              Appellant who seeks,  in  a  later  appeal,  to  add  to  the
              available facts in an effort  to  obtain  a  more  favourable
              outcome is properly regarded with suspicion from the point of
              view of credibility. (Although considerations of  credibility
              will not be relevant in cases  where  the  existence  of  the
              additional fact is beyond dispute.) It must also be borne  in
              mind that the first Adjudicator's determination was made at a
              time closer to the events alleged and in terms of both  fact-
              finding and general credibility assessment would tend to have
              the advantage. For this reason, the adduction of  such  facts
              should not  usually lead  to  any  reconsideration  of  the
              conclusions reached by the first Adjudicator.
              (5) Evidence of other facts - for example  country  evidence
              may not suffer from the same concerns as to credibility,  but
              should be treated with caution. The reason is different from
              that in (4). Evidence dating from before the determination of
              the first Adjudicator might well have been relevant if it had
              been tendered to him:  but  it  was  not,  and  he  made  his
              determination without it. The situation  in  the  Appellant's
              own country  at  the  time  of  that  determination  is  very
              unlikely to be relevant in deciding whether  the  Appellant's
              removal at the time of the second Adjudicator's determination
              would  breach  his  human  rights.  Those  representing   the
              Appellant would be  better  advised  to  assemble  up-to-date
              evidence than to rely on material that is (ex hypothesi)  now
              rather dated.
           1. The final major category  of  case  is  where  the  Appellant
              claims that his removal would breach Article 3 for  the  same
              reason that he claimed to be a refugee.
              (6) If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies on
              facts that are not materially different from those put to the
              first Adjudicator, and proposes to support the claim by what
              is in essence the same evidence  as  that  available  to  the
              Appellant at that time, the second Adjudicator should regard
              the  issues   as   settled   by   the   first   Adjudicator's
              determination  and make  his  findings  in  line  with  that
              determination rather than allowing  the  matter  to  be  re-
              litigated. We draw attention to the phrase 'the same evidence
              as that available to the Appellant' at the time of the first
              determination. We have chosen this phrase not only  in  order
              to  accommodate  guidelines  (4)  and  (5)  above,  but  also
              because, in respect of evidence that  was  available  to  the
              Appellant, he must be taken to have made  his  choices  about
              how it should be presented. An Appellant cannot  be  expected
              to present evidence of which he has no knowledge: but if (for
              example) he chooses not to give oral evidence  in  his  first
              appeal, that does not mean that the issues or  the  available
              evidence in the second appeal are rendered any  different  by
              his proposal to give oral evidence (of  the  same  facts)  on
              this occasion.
           1. We offer two further comments, which are not  less  important
              than what precedes then.
              (7) The force of the reasoning underlying guidelines (4) and
              (6) is greatly reduced if there is some very good reason why
              the Appellant's failure to adduce  relevant  evidence  before
              the first Adjudicator should not be, as it were, held against
              him. We think  such  reasons  will  be  rare.  There  is  an
              increasing tendency to suggest that unfavourable decisions by
              Adjudicators are brought about by error  or  incompetence  on
              the part of representatives. New  representatives  blame  old
              representatives; sometimes representatives  blame  themselves
              for prolonging the litigation by their  inadequacy  (without,
              of course, offering the public any compensation for the wrong
              from  which  they  have  profited   by   fees).   Immigration
              practitioners come within the supervision of the  Immigration
              Services Commissioner under part V of the 1999  Act.  He  has
              power to register, investigate and cancel the registration of
              any  practitioner,  and  solicitors  and  counsel   are,   in
              addition,  subject  to  their  own  professional  bodies.  An
              Adjudicator should be very slow to conclude  that  an  appeal
              before another Adjudicator has been materially affected by  a
              representative's error or incompetence; and  such  a  finding
              should always be reported (through arrangements made  by  the
              Chief Adjudicator) to the Immigration Services Commissioner.
              Having said that, we do accept that there will be  occasional
              cases where the circumstances of the first appeal  were  such
              that it would be right for the second Adjudicator to look  at
              the matter as if the first determination had never been made.
              (We think it unlikely that the second Adjudicator  would,  in
              such a case, be able to build very meaningfully on the  first
              Adjudicator's determination; but we emphasise that,  even  in
              such  a  case,  the  first  determination   stands   as   the
              determination of the first appeal.)
              (8) We do not suggest that, in the foregoing, we have covered
              every possibility. By covering  the  major  categories  into
              which  second  appeals  fall,  we  intend  to  indicate   the
              principles for dealing with such appeals. It will be for  the
              second  Adjudicator  to  decide  which  of  them  is  or  are
              appropriate in any given case."

14. The new witness explained that she had failed to give  evidence  before
    Judge Sharp because she had some difficulties at that  time  [10].  The
    judge found the new witness to be credible [19 and  21].   I  therefore
    consider it clear that the judge  accepted  the  reasons  why  the  new
    witness did not give evidence to Judge Sharp.

15. The judge considered the documentary evidence  in  paragraph  20.   The
    judge noted, "some of the evidence that is available was not before the
    previous two judges".  This includes a site  visit  by  an  independent
    barrister, DNA evidence, letters from the Sponsor and  land  documents.
    It appears from the conclusions at paragraph 22 that the judge accepted
    that this evidence was not available at the time of the hearing  before
    Judge Sharp.  In my view it is clear that the judge was aware that this
    evidence was not  available  to  Judge  Sharp  or  Judge  Clayton.   At
    paragraph 41 of Devaseelan the Tribunal said that an  Appellant  cannot
    be expected to present evidence of which he has no  knowledge.   It  is
    clear that some of this evidence arose from the site visit carried  out
    by Mr Shafiuddin.  In my view Judge Adio accepted  that  this  evidence
    was not available to Judge Clayton or Judge Sharp and it  was  open  to
    the judge to take this new evidence into account in accordance with the
    guidance in Devaseelan.

16. The third ground contends that the judge failed  to  consider  the  DNA
    results holistically.  The judge had concluded that, as  the  Appellant
    had shown a relationship to one of the claimed half siblings,  this  is
    sufficient to show that she has the same father.   At  the  hearing  Mr
    Nath properly accepted that the conclusions reached  by  the  judge  in
    relation to the DNA evidence were open to him  on  the  basis  of  that
    evidence.  The Appellant claims to  have  two  half-sisters.   The  DNA
    report concludes that it is most likely that she is  half-sibling  with
    one of those but that in relation to the other claimed  half-sister  it
    was concluded that there was 'no relationship determined'.  However, in
    what appears to be a conflict in  relation  to  this  matter,  the  DNA
    report also concludes that the two half-sisters are most likely  to  be
    full siblings of each other.  This at least raises the possibility that
    the Appellant is a half-sibling to both sisters and, in any event,  the
    conclusion of the judge that  one  of  the  siblings  is  found  to  be
    established as a half-sibling  is  sufficient  to  add  weight  to  the
    conclusion that the Appellant is the daughter of her claimed father.

17. In all of these circumstances I am satisfied  that  the  judge  reached
    conclusions open to him on the basis of the evidence before him and  he
    properly followed the guidance in Devaseelan.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

20. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date: 14th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


To the Respondent
Fee Award

I maintain the fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date: 14th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
