
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/01942/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 22nd  August 2016                |On: 26th  August 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer, Kingston
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  Kemar [W]
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C. Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Salam, Salam & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondent is a national of Jamaica born 7th December 1983.  On the
    13th November 2015 the First-tier Tribunal allowed his appeal against a
    decision to refuse to grant him entry clearance as  the  partner  of  a
    person present and settled in the United Kingdom.  The Entry  Clearance
    Officer (ECO) now has permission to appeal against that decision[1].

    Background and Matters in Issue

 2. The  Respondent  made  his  application  for  entry  clearance  online.
    Although a copy of that form is still not available the following facts
    are agreed.  He wanted to come to the United Kingdom to live  with  his
    wife, [SW]. [SW] is a British national. The couple had met  in  Jamaica
    in April 2011 and she had visited him on several  occasions  thereafter
    with the couple finally marrying in January 2014.  The application  was
    refused on the 12th December 2014. The ECO expressly accepted that this
    was a genuine and subsisting relationship, and that the  financial  and
    English language requirements laid down in Appendix FM  were  met.  The
    sole reason for refusal was the failure of the Respondent to declare on
    his application form the facts that he had been, in 2005, convicted  of
    a 'Crime Involving Moral Turpitude' (CIMT)  in  the  United  States  of
    America, had been sentenced to a period in prison,  and  had  then,  in
    2008, been deported from the USA.  The  application  was  refused  with
    reference to paragraph S-EC 2.2(b) of Appendix FM:

         S-EC.2.1. The applicant will normally  be  refused  on  grounds  of
         suitability if any of paragraphs S-EC.2.2. to 2.5. apply.

         S-EC.2.2. Whether or not to the applicant's knowledge-

         (a)      false information, representations or documents have  been
         submitted  in  relation  to  the   application   (including   false
         information submitted to any person to obtain a  document  used  in
         support of the application); or

         (b)      there has been a failure to  disclose  material  facts  in
         relation to the application.

    Although the Respondent's conviction  would  ordinarily  be  considered
    'spent' it should have been declared on the form  because  applications
    for entry clearance are now exempt from the scope of section 4(1), 4(2)
    and 4(3) of the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974:  section  56A  of
    the UK Borders Act 2007 as amended by section 140  of  the  Legal  Aid,
    Sentencing and Punishment of Offenders Act 2012.

 3. When the appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal the Respondent made
    a statement to the effect that prior to making his application  he  had
    taken legal advice from an attorney in the USA who had advised him that
    the conviction in the USA was spent and  that  he  need  not  therefore
    declare it. He was further advised that the deportation  would  not  be
    relevant because it was not from  the  United  Kingdom.  [SW]  appeared
    before the Tribunal to give what was found to be credible evidence that
    this had been her understanding, and that her husband  would  not  have
    omitted the information had he understood it to be relevant.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal noted that the application had not been refused
    under S-EC 2.2 (a).  There  was  therefore  no  allegation  that  false
    documents or information had been supplied.  Nor had the decision  been
    made with reference to the mandatory grounds for refusal at S-EC.1.4(b)
    which is  concerned  with  applicants  who  have  served  a  period  of
    imprisonment.  The focus of the appeal was the decision  to  refuse  on
    the basis that there had been failure to  disclose  material  facts,  a
    matter which would normally lead to refusal.  There  being  no  dispute
    that the Respondent had failed to declare material facts, the  question
    was whether that presumption had been rebutted.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal records that the Respondent had, in his written
    evidence,  offered  an  explanation  for  why  he   had   omitted   the
    information, and that he had taken full  responsibility  for  it.   The
    offence had been committed ten years earlier when he was 21 years  old.
    He had not committed a  criminal  offence  since.  There  were  various
    compassionate circumstances in the case relating to [SW]. She had  been
    "devastated" by the loss of her young child in a house fire some  years
    earlier and had been given huge emotional support  by  the  Respondent.
    She could not contemplate  living  in  Jamaica  on  a  permanent  basis
    because she suffers from a number of  debilitating  health  complaints.
    She has been diagnosed with chronic Gastroperesis  (a  condition  where
    the stomach cannot process  food  properly  due  to  nerve  and  tissue
    damage) and Type 1 Diabetes. She is under medical care in  the  UK  and
    has found to her cost that her conditions  cannot  be  catered  for  in
    Jamaica. For instance, on a recent trip she had become unwell  and  had
    ended up in hospital vomiting blood for 11 days. The  doctors  had  not
    had the botox that they needed to control her  bleeding  and  they  had
    told her it was not available in Jamaica.

 6. Having set out the legal  framework  and  these  background  facts  the
    Tribunal turned to consider whether this application should  have  been
    refused in line with the presumption in S-EC.2.1. At paragraph  23  the
    determination reads: "This raises an issue  of  the  Rehabilitation  of
    Offenders Act and the Home Office Guidance  (version  2.0)  9  December
    2013 as to how this Act applies to immigration decisions  taken  on  or
    after the 1 October 2012".  Mr Salam for the Respondent had  relied  on
    the Supreme  Court  decision  in  R  (on  application  of  T  and  Anr)
    (Respondents) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  and  Anr
    (Appellants) [2014] UKSC 35 in which consideration had  been  given  to
    the obligation to declare 'spent' convictions when applying for certain
    jobs (for instance working with children). The claimants in  that  case
    both successfully argued that  the  legal  obligation  to  declare  old
    cautions (in one case  a  police  warning  given  when  the  individual
    concerned was 11 years old) was a  disproportionate  interference  with
    their private lives.  The obligation to declare such  matters  was  not
    "necessary in a democratic society".    There  had  to  be  a  rational
    connection between disclosure of the offence and the assessment of  the
    individual's current suitability as an employee and this had  not  been
    established. The First-tier Tribunal declined  to  make  a  finding  on
    whether the decision to refuse this application was rational or  lawful
    in light of the decision in T and Ors, but it did consider the dicta in
    that case to be relevant to the way that the ECO had made his decision.
    The Tribunal considered that the decision did not demonstrate that  the
    ECO had had regard to the guidance on the Rehabilitation  of  Offenders
    Act: "this is in my view important as the Guidance  refers  to  matters
    that need to be considered and taken  into  account  that  are  clearly
    relevant to the principle of legality and  necessity  in  terms  of  an
    interference  with  private  life  under  Article  8".   The   Tribunal
    concludes that the decision cannot be considered  'in  accordance  with
    the law' for a failure to examine the policy, which  is  set  out.  The
    appeal was allowed on that limited basis;  in  effect  the  matter  was
    'remitted' to the ECO.

 7. The ECO now challenges that decision on the following grounds:

          i) The extract from the policy that is set out at paragraph 27 of
             the  determination  has  been  incorrectly  transcribed.   The
             Tribunal has added a "not" which does not appear in the policy
             document and this has the effect of reversing the  meaning  of
             the section;

         ii) In any event, on the facts, a failure to consider or expressly
             consider that policy could not logically lead to the  decision
             being 'not in accordance with the law'.  The  application  had
             specifically asked about previous convictions and deportations
             and these had not been  declared.  On  any  measure  that  was
             sufficient to engage S-EC.2.2(b). The Respondent  had  further
             used a new passport and had failed to declare his earlier  one
             which would have contained evidence of  the  deportation  from
             the USA.

    'Error of Law'

 8. At paragraph 27 the determination purports  to  set  out  the  relevant
    extracts from the policy  document  'Rehabilitation  of  Offenders  Act
    -version 2.0 9 December 2013'. The first paragraph in the extract cited
    reads (with added emphasis):

         "Reasons why it is normally not appropriate to refuse on  deception
         grounds include, but are not limited to:

           . More than one offence has not been declared

           .  The  person  was  sentenced  to  a  period  of  imprisonment,
             regardless of whether or not the person  actually  served  any
             time in prison"

 9. Mr Bates took me to page 7 of the policy document  where  that  extract
    appears to be sourced. The actual words read:

         "Reasons why it is normally appropriate to refuse  for  failing  to
         declare a criminal conviction on deception grounds include, but are
         not limited to:

           . More than one offence has not been declared

           .  The  person  was  sentenced  to  a  period  of  imprisonment,
             regardless of whether or not the person  actually  served  any
             time in prison"

10. Since it is not in issue that  the  Respondent  did  actually  serve  a
    period of imprisonment in the USA, the clear effect of  this  paragraph
    of the policy guidance would be that it would normally  be  appropriate
    for the application to be refused. The way in which the  Tribunal  mis-
    transcribed the words gave them the opposite effect. This  was  clearly
    an error. Ground (i) as set out above is made out.

11. In respect of Ground (ii) this would appear to be a recitation  of  the
    ECO's grounds before the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  Tribunal  clearly
    appreciated that the information had been omitted. The point  was  that
    the Tribunal was pondering the relevance of that omission.  It  clearly
    considered the policy guidance to be relevant to that enquiry and it is
    for that reason that  the  error  in  transcription  has  assumed  such
    significance. I cannot  be  confident  that  the  Tribunal  would  have
    reached the same conclusion  had  the  policy  document  been  properly
    understood. For that reason I  set  the  decision  aside.  The  parties
    agreed that I could proceed directly to re-making the decision.

    The Re-Made Decision

    Legal Framework

12. It is worth revisiting the reasons for refusal.  Paragraph  S-EC.2.2(b)
    forms part of the 'suitability' criteria  in  Appendix  FM.  These  are
    divided into two sections. S-EC.1.2 - 1.9 set  out  the  situations  in
    which applications for entry clearance must be refused.  These  include
    for instance where a deportation order remains in  force,  where  entry
    would be undesirable for medical reasons and  where  refusal  would  be
    conducive to the public good. It must be  assumed  that  the  competent
    decision maker in this case gave consideration  to  whether  to  refuse
    under any of these provisions. The second section, between paragraphs S-
    EC.2.2 and S-EC.2.5 lists the circumstances  in  which  an  application
    would  normally  be  refused.   These   include   the   section   under
    consideration in this appeal, as well as matters such as a  failure  to
    pay outstanding NHS charges or  Home  Office  litigation  costs.     Mr
    Bates pointed out that where applicants fail under one  of  the  latter
    criteria, a remedy could be for a fresh application to be made with the
    offending matter corrected; the outstanding charges could be  paid,  or
    the old conviction declared.   In this way, he submitted, the framework
    of Appendix FM is article 8 compliant: SS (Congo) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ  387.    Respect  is  shown  to
    genuine and subsisting family life by virtue of the fact  that  refusal
    on one of these grounds is not a  'forever'  refusal.   I  accept  that
    analysis, but would add that the  use  of  the  presumptive  "normally"
    rather than the mandatory "must" suggests  a  further  layer  of  human
    rights protection. The decision-maker is  required  to  consider  first
    whether the section is engaged (has information been omitted?) and then
    consider all of the circumstances to  assess  whether  the  application
    should nevertheless be granted.

    Submissions

13. Mr Bates  submitted  that  this  was  a  clear  case  of  refusal.  The
    application form (not produced) had  asked  clear  questions  that  the
    Respondent would reasonably have  been  expected  to  answer.   He  had
    omitted not one fact (the conviction) but three  (the  conviction,  the
    imprisonment, the deportation) and had used a new passport,  an  action
    suggestive of a deliberate attempt to conceal his  past.  Referring  to
    the policy guidance discussed above Mr Bates pointed  to  the  guidance
    that it would normally be appropriate to refuse where  the  person  had
    been imprisoned.

14. Mr Salam concentrated his submissions  on  what  might  be  termed  the
    compassionate reasons why this application should not be  refused.  The
    Respondent made an innocent mistake, there was no intent to deceive and
    the couple have  already  waited  a  long  time  to  have  this  matter
    resolved. [SW] is a vulnerable individual  who  has  suffered  personal
    tragedy in the loss of her son and she is  suffering  from  significant
    anxiety as a result of the ongoing separation from her  husband.    She
    cannot reasonably be expected to live in Jamaica because of her chronic
    health complaints.

    My Findings

15. I have read the written evidence of the Respondent  and  [SW].  I  have
    taken into account the oral evidence given by [SW]  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and its favourable assessment of her credibility as a witness.
    I have had regard to the statement of [SW]'s mother  [JM]  and  to  the
    submission made by both parties. I have read the material in the  ECO's
    explanatory bundle.

16. I find as follows.

17. By his own admission the Respondent  failed  to  declare  the  material
    matters  in  his  application  form.   I  must  assess   whether   this
    application should have been refused. There is a  presumption  that  it
    should be, and that is my starting point. The guidance that I have been
    referred to advises decision-makers that where there has been a  period
    of imprisonment this would be an appropriate case for refusal.  I  also
    bear in mind Mr Bates' well-made submission that one solution would  be
    for a new application to be made.  The  entire  relationship  has  been
    conducted with the parties living in separate countries, and  it  could
    therefore continue in the same manner until a further  application  was
    considered.

18. I now consider whether there are in this case particular  factors  such
    that the presumption is rebutted.

19. I accept,  on  a  balance  of  probabilities,  the  evidence  that  the
    Respondent had not understood his 2005 conviction and the  consequences
    thereof to be relevant  to  this  application.  Having  regard  to  the
    positive credibility assessment made by the First-tier Tribunal  I  see
    no reason to reject the evidence that he had taken legal advice from  a
    US attorney by  telephone  and  that  he  reasonably  believed  he  was
    entitled to rely on that advice.  I am  satisfied  that  there  was  an
    omission such that S-EC.2.2 was engaged,  but  not  that  there  was  a
    deliberate attempt to deceive.

20. There is no dispute that the relationship with [SW] is a  genuine  one,
    but I am further satisfied  as  to  her  emotional  dependence  on  her
    husband. Anyone unwillingly  living  apart  from  a  partner  might  be
    suffering from some  degree  of  stress  and  uncertainty,  and  it  is
    understandable that anyone in that situation would want it resolved  as
    quickly as possible.  In [SW]'s case however there are two  significant
    factors why that stress is exacerbated.

21. First, her health is generally poor and she regularly needs recourse to
    emergency health care. Her diabetes  is  severe  (she  self-administers
    insulin injections five times per day) and it has resulted in  numerous
    admissions to Kings College Hospital, where her  consultant  is  based.
    She suffers 'hypos' (hypogylcemic attacks) where  she  blacks  out  and
    requires  urgent  medical  attention.  These   events   are   obviously
    frightening for someone living on her own. They have on occasion led to
    serious injury: in her written statement she gives the example of  when
    she blacked out and fell down 14 steps, severely injuring her back  and
    legs, injuries which necessitated the use of crutches.  [SW] gives this
    evidence by way of explanation as to why she needs her husband to  join
    her as soon as possible.

22. The other factor which I bear in mind is that [SW] has suffered perhaps
    the worst personal tragedy that anyone can suffer, losing a child.  Her
    son died in a  domestic  fire  in  which  she  was  also  injured.  She
    describes the aftermath of that event as follows:

         "I have lost a part of me and never thought I would be  here  today
         ... losing a child is so heart wrenching. My husband has  given  me
         so much support and  encouragement  that  I  thought  I  would  not
         receive. Losing my son to a house fire at the age of three has been
         hard for me and I really don't want to lose that chance  of  having
         the support I need from my husband. He has stood by me through good
         and bad being so far away he supports me  through  everything  -  I
         really need him here"

    She describes the Respondent has her "rock".  She  wants  nothing  more
    than for him to be with her so that they can start a family together.

23. I have considered all of the relevant factors. Although the application
    form clearly did contain significant omissions I am satisfied that this
    was not as a result of deliberate deception. Whilst there is  a  public
    interest in the refusal of applications that have not been supported by
    all the material information I am  satisfied  that  on  the  particular
    facts  of  this  case  that  public  interest  is  outweighed  by   the
    compassionate factors  advanced  by  Mr  Salam.  There  are  particular
    reasons why [SW] would substantially benefit from the presence  of  her
    husband.   I am satisfied that these  factors  cumulatively  rebut  the
    presumption of refusal in S-EC.2.2. (b) and that entry clearance should
    be granted.

    Decisions

24. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  and
    it is set aside.

25. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:

         "the appeal is allowed under the immigration rules"

26. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity and in the circumstances
    I see no reason to do so.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                            23rd August 2016
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 4th May 2016 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Grant-Hutchinson

