
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01577/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8th November 2013                            |On 25th November 2013      |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                    Claimant

                                     and

                              mina garbuja pun
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Claimant: Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Jaisri of Counsel instructed by Sam Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Adio made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 28th August 2013.



Background

 2. The claimant is a Nepalese citizen  born  on  1st  January  1974.   She
    appealed against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 5th  June
    2012 to refuse to grant her entry clearance as the  dependant  daughter
    of an ex-Gurkha soldier.  Her father was issued with a settlement  visa
    on 4th July 2011 and entered the UK on 7th August 2011.

 3. The claimant has a physical disability arising from her having been the
    victim of a bombing in Nepal in  2004.   The  Secretary  of  State  was
    satisfied that she was disabled as claimed, but she was able to perform
    everyday  tasks  and  not  under  any  medication.   She  refused   the
    application on the grounds that she was not satisfied that the claimant
    was unable to obtain the required level of care in  Nepal  and  in  any
    event she could not meet the accommodation and maintenance requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.

 4. The judge dismissed the appeal in respect of the Rules both in relation
    to the requirements for  entry  clearance  and  under  Article  8  with
    reference to Appendix FM, paragraph E-ECDR.  He was satisfied that  the
    claimant's ability to do everyday tasks was limited but she could go to
    a shopping area near her house and live near a government help post and
    over the years had received medical care from the government.

 5. With respect to the financial requirements  of  the  Rules,  there  was
    accommodation available for her in the UK and  the  sponsor's  benefits
    would not impact on the claimant.  He accepted that the  sponsor  would
    keep to his undertaking and his daughter would  not  ask  for  benefits
    when she came to the UK.

 6. He allowed the appeal on Article 8 grounds, accepting that the claimant
    was being looked after by her parents before they came  to  the  UK  in
    2011 and she was financially, physically and emotionally dependent upon
    them.  She was still financially dependent on  her  parents;  the  fact
    that the sponsor came to the UK was not sufficient to break the  family
    life between them.

 7. He concluded:

         "I therefore find that there is financial and emotional  dependency
         on the sponsor and the fact that family  life  existed  before  the
         sponsor came to the UK and that has not been broken."

 8. The family life which the parties  enjoyed  previously  was  not  being
    enjoyed in the same way at present because they were not  living  under
    the same accommodation but were communicating by phone.   The  ultimate
    question  was  whether  the  interference  with  the  family  life  was
    proportionate.

 9. He wrote as follows:

         "In the present case I  have  taken  into  account  the  historical
         injustice with regards to ex-Gurkhas and their family  members.   I
         have also taken into account the particular circumstances  of  this
         case that the appellant is  disabled  and  she  is  suffering  from
         depression as she herself answered to question 35 stating that  she
         still has bomb particles inside her whole body and unable  to  move
         freely and suffer from depression.

         This in no way negates my earlier  finding  under  the  Immigration
         Rules as the requirement of the Rules were very clear that she  has
         to be able to perform everyday tasks.  The  appellant  is  able  to
         perform everyday tasks but in a very limited way and not in  a  way
         that an able bodied person can do so.  The appellant  I  accept  is
         stuck in a room and living by herself and on the long run this does
         not help her all round family life.  I find that for the  appellant
         to function adequately she would have to be around her parents  who
         have cared for her all these years.  The  appellant  is  unable  to
         marry and is unable to work and the only little joy  she  can  have
         out of life is by living together with her parents who  have  cared
         for her all her life.

         On the basis of the historical injustice which applies to ex-Gurkha
         soldiers  and  their  family  members  and  the   fact   that   the
         circumstances of this case is such that  the  appellant  is  living
         alone and suffering from depression being  away  from  her  parents
         upon whom she is dependent I find that it  is  disproportionate  to
         separate the  appellant  from  her  parents.   It  was  always  the
         intention of the sponsor  to  reunite  his  family  in  the  United
         Kingdom and that is the reason why he came to  the  United  Kingdom
         even if it meant leaving the appellant in Nepal for a short  period
         of time.  I therefore find that the appellant's case succeeds under
         Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention."

The Grounds of Application

10. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on the grounds  that
    the claimant had not demonstrated that the  family  life  enjoyed  goes
    beyond mere emotional ties.  The  claimant  has  some  independence  by
    managing without her sponsor's support since their departure  in  2011.
    There is no interference with family life as it was at the date of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision since the status quo can continue.

11. The judge allowed the appeal on the  basis  of  an  historic  injustice
    suffered by Gurkhas, who were not allowed to  settle  in  the  UK  with
    their families before 1997.  However the judge misdirected  himself  in
    law.  It is  for  the  Gurkha  to  show  that,  but  for  the  historic
    injustice, he would have settled in the UK at a  time  when  his  (now)
    adult child would have been able to accompany him as a dependent  child
    under the age of 18.  Furthermore the Tribunal should  have  considered
    the particular military service of the sponsor - UG Nepal  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 58.  Historic injustice was relevant but not determinative and just
    one of several factors to be weighed against the  need  to  maintain  a
    firm and fair immigration policy.

12. On 1 October 2013 permission to appeal was granted by Judge Saffer  for
    the reasons stated in the grounds.



Submissions

13. Mrs Pettersen relied on her grounds.  The  judge  had  found  that  the
    claimant lived near a government help station and was not in receipt of
    regular treatment.  He had not applied the Kugathas test.  Both parents
    had chosen to leave her behind.  The judge's conclusion did  not  match
    up with the evidence.

14. With respect to the historic injustice point, the sponsor had  enlisted
    in 1959 and had been discharged from the army in 1970.   The  claimant,
    who was born in 1974, was not born at the point  when  her  father  did
    service with the Gurkhas.  By the time the policy had changed  in  1997
    the claimant was already an adult and it was therefore  not  clear  why
    any historic injustice claim made by her could succeed.

15. Mr Jaisri submitted that the judge had considered all of  the  relevant
    facts and reached a conclusion open to him on  the  evidence.   He  was
    aware of the correct test to be applied and was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the dependency which the claimant enjoyed up until  2011  was  not
    broken by her parents coming to the UK.

16. The 1997 change in policy meant that any Gurkha should have  been  able
    to settle in the UK after discharge from the army.  The  relevant  date
    was not 1997 when the  policy  changed  but,  in  the  Sponsor's  case,
    anytime after 1970, the date when he left the army.  There was evidence
    in his statement that he would have made the  application  earlier  had
    the policy existed when the claimant was a child.   In  any  event  the
    judge did not regard the policy  as  determinative  but  took  it  into
    account as a part of the assessment of the  case as a whole.

Findings and Conclusions

17. Ground 1 amounts to a disagreement with the decision.  On the facts  of
    this case, the claimant, although an adult, had always lived  with  her
    parents and had been cared for by them following the injuries which she
    suffered in a bomb blast in 2004.  The judge did  not  express  himself
    particularly clearly but he was aware of the correct test to be applied
    and that adult children could establish family life  depending  on  the
    facts. The lack of the citation of Kugathas does not fatally  undermine
    the determination.  It was open  to  the  judge  to  find  family  life
    existed between father and daughter before the sponsor settled  in  the
    UK, and it had not been broken by his arrival here.  The fact that  the
    claimant could perform basic tasks for herself and was able  to  go  to
    local shops does not undermine that finding.

18. In the sponsor's statement he said that "in Nepalese  culture  we  look
    after our children until they marry".  No challenge has  been  made  by
    the Secretary  of  State  to  the  his  evidence  and  it  is  entirely
    understandable that parents would feel an  obligation  to  care  for  a
    disabled daughter. She continues to be  financially  dependent  on  her
    parents and the family remain in communication with each other.

19. The judge was  entitled  to  conclude  that  there  was  financial  and
    emotional dependency, which is evidence of family life, as at the  date
    of decision in this case.

20.  With  respect  to  the  historic   injustice   argument,   again   the
    determination could be better expressed.  Mr Jaisri is right  to  state
    that the fact that the policy came into existence  after  the  claimant
    gained her majority does not mean that she is not entitled  to  benefit
    from it.  There was evidence before the judge to show that it  was  the
    sponsor's intention to bring his daughter to the UK had he been allowed
    to do so.  In his statement he said:

         "My daughter was not allowed to apply for settlement in the UK with
         her parents before she turned 18.  If she had been allowed I  would
         have brought her with us to settle in the UK."

21. In any event it is absolutely clear from the  determination  that  this
    was not the determining factor.  The judge heard oral evidence from the
    sponsor and his wife and was clearly struck by the  bond  between  this
    family  and  the  extent  of  their  inter-dependence.   That  was   an
    assessment for him to make.

22. The Secretary of State's challenge amounts to a disagreement  with  the
    decision.

Decision

23. The judge's decision stands.  The claimant's appeal is allowed.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

