
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01343/2015
                                                               OA/01348.2015
                                                               OA/01349/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 November 2016                   |On 9 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (ISLAMABAD)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               1) GHULAM ABBAS
                               2) AZIZ KULSOOM
                            3) MALIK ISHRAT ABBAS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Norton, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   None



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondents are citizens  of  Pakistan  who  appealed  against  the
    decisions of the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") to refuse  them  entry
    to the UK.  Their appeals were  allowed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Miller ("the FTTJ") in a decision promulgated on  16  February
    2016.

 2. For ease of reference, I refer to the appellant  as  the  ECO  and  the
    respondents as the claimants in this appeal.

 3. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal and none was
    requested before me; nor is such a direction required.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan on  10
    October 2016 as as follows:

         "2. A full copy of the original application form is  likely  to  be
             needed to clarify under what  provision  the  application  was
             made.  However,  on  the  face  of  the  evidence  before  the
             Tribunal, the form indicated that  the  application  was  made
             under The Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
             2006 ("the EEA Regulations 2006"). The application was treated
             as an application for  a  family  permit  and  the  notice  of
             decision made clear  that  the  right  of  appeal  arose  from
             regulation  29  of  the   EEA   Regulations   2006.   In   the
             circumstances  it  is  arguable  that  the  judge   erred   in
             determining the appeal under the immigration rules instead  of
             the EEA Regulations.

         3.   In the alternative, even if the application was  made  on  the
             wrong form and was intended to be an application for  a  visit
             visa under the UK immigration rules (although there is nothing
             to suggest that I [sic] was) it is  arguable  that  the  judge
             erred in allowing the appeal under the  immigration  rules  in
             circumstances where there would only have  been  a  restricted
             right of appeal on human rights grounds.

         4.   Permission to appeal is granted".

    Thus the appeal came before me today.

 5. Mr Norton, for the ECO, relied on the grounds of appeal and  the  grant
    of permission to appeal. He submitted that there was a lack of  clarity
    as to the nature of the application but that the ECO  had  referred  to
    the EEA Regulations in his decision. If the application had  been  made
    under the Immigration Rules, the appellants had only limited rights  of
    appeal in any event. If the application had been  made  under  the  EEA
    Regulations, the appellants could not  succeed  because  there  was  no
    evidence of dependency between the appellants and the EEA national  and
    her husband. He relied on regulations 7(1)(c), 8(2) and 12.

 6. Mr Abbas, the appellants' sponsor, attended the hearing with  his  wife
    (the EEA national) and made submissions  to  the  effect  that  he  had
    instructed solicitors to make an application for a visit visa on behalf
    of the appellants.  He accepted that the grounds of appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal referred to the EEA Regulations as well as  Article
    8 and the Immigration Rules. He accepted there  had  been  no  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal to demonstrate  any  dependency  by  the
    appellants on himself  or  his  EEA  spouse;  he  confirmed  the  first
    appellant had been working at the date of decision.

 7. Whatever the sponsor believed the application to be  (and  he  was  not
    sure) the decision of the ECO was made under the EEA Regulations, as is
    clear from the notice of decision which refers to an application having
    been made "as the family member of a European  Economic  Area  national
    ..." in the UK.  The decision was made by reference  to  Regulations  7
    and 12 of the EEA Regulations and the appellants  were  notified  of  a
    right of appeal under  the  EEA  Regulations.   The  appellants  issued
    notices of appeal and their grounds clearly refer  inter  alia,  albeit
    not by reference to specific regulations, to the  requirements  of  the
    EEA regulations.

 8. The appellants exercised their rights of appeal pursuant to  Regulation
    26 and thus the issue for the FTTJ to decide was whether the  decisions
    of the respondent were in breach of the EEA Regulations.

 9. The FTTJ's decision makes no reference to the specific requirements  of
    the EEA Regulations or indeed the Immigration Rules.  Whilst it is  not
    stated specifically in the decision, it can be inferred from [14]  that
    the appeals were allowed under paragraph 41 of the  Immigration  Rules.
    However, the appellants have no right of appeal against any decision to
    refuse an application under the Immigration Rules; any right of  appeal
    would be limited to the ground that  the  decision  places  the  United
    Kingdom in breach of the European Convention on Human Rights.  This  is
    because, in respect of all applications submitted after 25 June 2013, a
    person refused entry clearance to visit relatives in the UK  is  unable
    to  appeal  against  that  immigration  decision  except   on   limited
    (including human rights) grounds by virtue of  s52  of  the  Crime  and
    Courts Act 2013, the  commencement  date  and  transitional  provisions
    being set out in the Crime and Courts Act 2013 (Commencement No  1  and
    Transitional Saving Provision) Order (SI 2013/1042).

10.  The  FTTJ  failed  to  consider  the  appeals  pursuant  to  the   EEA
    Regulations; this was an error of law, given that the decision was made
    under those Regulations and the right of appeal was exercised  pursuant
    to those Regulations.

11. The error was material because there was no evidence  before  the  FTTJ
    that the appellants were dependent  on  the  EEA  national  and/or  her
    spouse, Mr Abbas, as required by Regulations 7(1)(c) and 8(2). Nor  was
    there evidence before the FTTJ that the appellants had  health  issues.
    The decision of the FTTJ must therefore be set aside  and  remade.  The
    appellants have failed to demonstrate they fulfil the criteria  in  the
    EEA  Regulations  for  rights  of  admission  to  the  UK  under  those
    Regulations.

12. The grounds of appeal in the First-tier Tribunal make reference to  the
    refusals interfering with the protected rights of the appellants  under
    Article 8. However, I am unable to find that Article 8  is  engaged  by
    the decisions: the consequences are not so  grave  as  to  engage  that
    Article: the appellants have the  option  of  making  applications  for
    visit visas under the Immigration Rules. There is no evidence before me
    that  they  have  been  refused  such  visas  in  the  past  and  their
    applications would be considered on the merits.

13. For these reasons, the decision of the FTTJ must be  set  aside  and  I
    remake it to find that the appeals are dismissed.

Decision

14. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of a material error on a point of law.

15. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

16. I remake the decision and dismiss the appeals.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                      Dated: 8 November 2016

Fee Award

These appeals have been dismissed and there can be no fee award.

A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge                      Dated: 8 November 2016

