
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01704/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 4 August 2014                              |On 07th Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               mr Salmaan Miah

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Dogra, Counsel instructed by Bukhari Chambers


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The respondent, whom I shall refer  to  as  the  appellant  as  he  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal, is a citizen of Pakistan and  his  date
    of birth is 30 December 1994.  The appellant made  an  application  for
    entry clearance to join his mother in the UK.  His mother is a  British
    citizen, Suriya Begum.   The  application  was  refused  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in Islamabad in a decision of 27 November 2012.

2.   The application was refused because it  was  not  clear  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer what the appellant's father's circumstances were  and
    the  appellant  had  not  satisfied   that   the   sponsor   had   sole
    responsibility for him  or  that  the  appellant  was  not  leading  an
    independent life.

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the ECO and  his  appeal
    was  allowed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Scott   in   a
    determination which was promulgated on 9 May 2014 following  a  hearing
    on 3 April 2014.  The appeal was allowed under the  Immigration  Rules.
    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  to  the  Secretary  of  State  by
    Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Coates in a decision of  19
    June 2014.

4.   The Judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor Ms Begum.  Her  evidence
    was that she had left Pakistan in 2006.  She  fled  her  husband  as  a
    result of domestic violence.  She fled taking  her  two  youngest  sons
    with her but leaving the appellant because at the time  she  fled  from
    the family home he was sleeping in a room with his father and  she  did
    not wish to alert her husband to her departure.

5.   Between 2006 and 2012 the sponsor had no contact  with  the  appellant.
    In 2012 friends of Ms Begum told her that the appellant was affected by
    his father's drug taking and that he  was  not  being  properly  looked
    after.   He  was  not  attending  school  and  he  was  mistreated  and
    neglected.

6.   Ms Begum made contact with the  appellant  through  a  third  party,  a
    friend, Mr Mehmood.  She decided that she would bring the appellant  to
    the UK.  Mr Mehmood has been looking after the appellant since 2012 and
    during that time the sponsor has had sole responsibility  for  him  and
    the appellant has had no contact with his father.

7.   The sponsor takes all decisions relating to  the  appellant's  welfare.
    She  sends  money  to  him  and  arranges  his  education  and  medical
    appointments.  They have contact with each other through Skype and  the
    telephone.  The First-tier Tribunal had an affidavit before it from  Mr
    Mehmood and evidence of money transfers.

8.   The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found that  the  sponsor  had  had
    sole responsibility for the appellant since August 2012.  The  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal are contained in paragraphs 15 - 19  of  the
    determination:

         "15. I am satisfied that the sponsor was  an  honest  and  credible
             witness.  I accept her evidence, together with  the  documents
             submitted, all of which I find to be consistent and reliable.


         16.   On  the  evidence  before  me,  I  find  on  a   balance   of
             probabilities that the sponsor has had sole responsibility for
             the appellant's upbringing since August 2012.  Since then  the
             appellant has been looked after on a day to day  basis  by  an
             old family friend, Mr Khalid Mehmood, but I am satisfied  that
             all major decisions  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  life,
             education and well-being have been taken by the  sponsor.   Mr
             Mehmood has at all times been acting under her direction.  The
             sponsor  has  also  been  financially  responsible   for   the
             appellant, sending him regular remittances to cover his  food,
             clothing, school fees and daily living expenses.  In addition,
             I am satisfied that the appellant's father has played no  part
             in his life since the appellant stopped  living  with  him  in
             August 2012.  Indeed, it appears that he took little  interest
             in the appellant even before then.


         17.  I find also that the appellant is not leading  an  independent
             life and has not formed an independent  family  unit.   He  is
             still at school, his education having been delayed somewhat by
             his  father's  failures  in  parental   responsibility.    The
             appellant is currently living with Mr Mehmood and  his  family
             and remains under the direction of the sponsor who  speaks  to
             him daily and exercises control over him through  Mr  Mehmood,
             even telling him when to come home.


         18.  I find therefore that the appellant meets the requirements  of
             paragraph 297(i)(e) and (iii) of the Immigration Rules.


         19.  No other issues are raised in the refusal notice.  I find that
             the appellant satisfies the requirements of paragraph 297  and
             that he is entitled to the entry clearance sought."

9.   The grounds seeking leave to appeal argue  that  the  Judge  failed  to
    consider whether the three month period of claimed sole  responsibility
    was sufficient to satisfy the Rules  and  refer  to  the  cases  of  TD
    (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006]  UKAIT  00049
    and Nmaju [2000] EWCA Civ 505.

10.  It is also argued in the grounds  seeking  leave  to  appeal  that  the
    Judge had not addressed the fact that the appellant's  father  had  not
    made any attempts to locate him or seek contact with him and it was not
    open to the Judge to find that the sponsor was a  credible  witness  in
    the light of her previous immigration history.

11.  Both parties made oral submissions.  Mr Tufan  argued  that  the  Judge
    should not have found that the sponsor was credible because her  asylum
    appeal had been dismissed on appeal.  It was the duty of the  Judge  to
    make enquiries about the sponsor's previous immigration history and  it
    was incumbent on the sponsor to make this clear to the Tribunal and  to
    explain the grounds on which she was granted British citizenship.

12.  The Judge took into account postdecision evidence and  did  not  follow
    the guidance in DC (Morocco).  There was no evidence  from  the  Social
    Services in Pakistan and the whole chronology of the  case  was  in  Mr
    Tufan's submission suspect.

13.  Ms Dogra made submissions in  the  context  of  her  detailed  skeleton
    argument.  She submitted that the Secretary of  State  had  not  raised
    credibility issues in the reasons for refusal  decision.   The  sponsor
    was cross-examined by the Presenting Officer but not about  her  status
    here, rather about conflicts in the evidence.  The Secretary  of  State
    did not adduce evidence relating to the sponsor's immigration history.

14.  In my view this is a generous decision and another Judge may  not  have
    allowed this appeal but the grounds do not disclose a material error of
    law and on this basis the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is lawful
    and sustainable.  The Secretary of  State  did  not  raise  credibility
    issues in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  It was entirely open to them
    to do so or to amend the original refusal letter but they  did  not  do
    so.

15.  There was no suggestion that the appellant did not submit a  bundle  in
    accordance with the directions of the Tribunal and again the  Secretary
    of State missed the opportunity to raise issues of  credibility  or  to
    submit evidence relating to the sponsor's immigration history.   It  is
    not incumbent on the Judge to raise issues of credibility  on  his  own
    initiative and this could  result  in  a  procedural  irregularity  and
    unfairness and the Judge being seen to enter the arena.

16.  It was open to the Judge who heard evidence to find  that  the  sponsor
    was credible.  He gave reasons for doing so finding that the  sponsor's
    evidence was consistent and reliable.

17.  In relation to the duration of sole responsibility this  is  a  factor,
    however, it is in no way a conclusive matter and it was not  raised  by
    the Secretary of State at the hearing or in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter.   The  Secretary  of  State's  case  that  there  was  no  sole
    responsibility.  It is a fact that the Judge found that the sponsor had
    sole responsibility for the appellant from August onwards.

18.  The application was made in October 2012 and  refused  on  27  November
    2012.  It is a fact that the appellant turned 18 on 30 December 2012.

19.  Time in this case was a relevant factor but the Judge did  not  make  a
    material error of law by not referring to it in his determination.   In
    my view he was mindful of the short duration of sole responsibility and
    the appellant's age.  On  the  facts  as  accepted  by  the  Judge  the
    appellant is able to establish sole responsibility in  the  context  of
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.  He was still at school at  the
    date of the application and indeed the hearing and he was  not  leading
    an independent life.

20.  The Judge found that the evidence  established  that  the  sponsor  had
    contact with the school and that there  were  Skype  records  and  that
    money transfers had taken place.  Some of this evidence  was  post  the
    date of the decision but it  is  clear  that  it  casts  light  on  the
    circumstances at the date of the decision and the Judge was entitled to
    take it into account.

21.  The grounds are an attempt to reargue the case and a disagreement  with
    the findings of the First-tier Tribunal and do not disclose a  material
    error of law and the decision to allow the appeal under the Immigration
    Rules is maintained.

22.  Paragraph 297 contains the requirements for indefinite leave  to  enter
    the United Kingdom as the child of  a  parent  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The relevant limbs at paragraph 297 in issue in this case are
    (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried (and  is  not  a
    civil partner), and has not formed  an  independent  family  unit;  and
    (i)(e) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or being
    admitted  on  the  same  occasion  for  settlement  and  has  had  sole
    responsibility for the child's upbringing.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

