







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01736/2014
      OA/01742/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                     |        Decision and Reasons     |
|on 5 October 2015                         |Promulgated                      |
|                                          |on 30 December 2015              |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                             Mrs Tij Maya Gurung
                              Mr Prakash Gurung
                        (no anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, counsel (instructed by Howe and Co)
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellants are both nationals of Nepal, born on 26 August 1967 and
      17 August 1989 respectively. They appeal with permission to the  Upper
      Tribunal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  promulgated
      on 9 April 2015 dismissing their appeal on human  rights  grounds.  It
      was accepted before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  appellants'
      applications could not satisfy the  requirements  of  the  immigration
      rules. The applications had not been made under the rules.


   2. In granting the appellants permission to appeal,  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Colyer found with regard to the  first  appellant  that  it  was
      arguable that the Judge's interpretation and application of the  facts
      resulted in his proceeding on a wrong factual footing. With regard  to
      the second appellant, it was arguable that  the  Judge  was  bound  to
      follow the approach to historic injustice cases laid down  in  Ghising
      and Others  (Gurkhas/BOCs/Historical  Wrong/Weight)  [2013]  UKUT  567
      (IAC).






             Jurisdiction


   3. The First-tier Immigration Judge found at [20] that the appellants  do
      not have a limited right of appeal under s.84(1)(c) of  the  2002  Act
      "...but can deploy the full gambit of appeal grounds set out in s.84".




   4. Before the Upper Tribunal  Ms  Savage  on  behalf  of  the  respondent
      initially contended that the appellants' right of appeal was  confined
      to grounds referred to in s.84(1)(b)(c) and (g)  of  the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. Accordingly, the First-tier  Tribunal
      did not have  jurisdiction  to  consider  a  ground  of  appeal  under
      s.84(1)(e) and, therefore, ground 1  of  the  appellants'  grounds  of
      appeal did not identify any relevant error of law.


   5. On behalf of the appellants,  Mr  Jesurum  submitted  that  there  was
      jurisdiction to entertain a s.84(1)(e) ground of appeal. The  decision
      in respect of the first appellant is  accordingly  'otherwise  not  in
      accordance with the law'. Moreover in respect of both  appellants,  he
      contended that there is an error of law  relating  to  the  Article  8
      appeal.


   6. Ms Savage eventually conceded that  the  Tribunal  did  in  fact  have
      jurisdiction to consider a claim under s.84(1)(e) of theb2002 Act, but
      contended that having regard to  the  merits  of  their  appeals,  the
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  disclose  any  material
      error of law.


     The background facts and assertions before the First-tier Tribunal


   7. It was accepted that the sponsor is the husband of the first appellant
      and father of the second. The sponsor served in  the  Gurkhas  Brigade
      for over 15 years. He was discharged in  1996.  He  had  an  exemplary
      record of conduct.


   8. It was contended that he had been unjustly denied any  opportunity  to
      apply to settle in the UK, which injustice was only fully corrected in
      2009.  At that stage, the second appellant was already 18 years old.


   9. The sponsor was granted settlement in 2013 under the policy for Gurkha
      veterans promulgated in 2009. It was contended that had the  injustice
      not occurred, the sponsor would have been granted settlement  in  1996
      resulting in the first appellant's entitlement to accompany him as his
      spouse and the second as his minor dependant. The respondent's  unjust
      act was the only reason why they were not already in the UK.


  10. The appellants applied  for  indefinite  leave  to  enter  the  UK  to
      accompany the sponsor in order to settle as a family. The  application
      was made outside the rules under the policy set out in the Immigration
      Directorate Instructions at Chapter  15,  section  2A,  annex  A.  The
      application was refused on 3 December 2013.


     The First-tier tribunal's findings


  11. The First-tier Immigration Judge found  at  [59]  and  [60]  that  the
      appellants could not meet the requirements of paragraph 276R(i) of the
      Immigration Rules.


  12. In a detailed decision, the Judge found at [65]  that  the  appellants
      live together in Nepal with the  mother  of  the  sponsor.  There  are
      "issues of financial dependency" in relation to both appellants, whose
      livelihoods depend upon income sent by  the  sponsor/father  from  his
      work in the Gurkha  reserve  unit  in  Brunei.  Taking  those  matters
      together, he found that there was an Article 8 claim  to  family  life
      and that there was an interference of such gravity as  to  engage  the
      application of Article 8 [65 and 66].


  13. He sought to distinguish R (Gurung) and others v  SSHD  [2013]  1  WLR
      2546,  on the basis that in Gurung the dependent child  applicant  was
      settled in the UK [69].  The two appellants in this appeal are not  in
      the UK and have never visited the UK.


  14. He was satisfied, taking account of various matters  set  out  in  his
      decision, that the interference involved in refusing entry to  the  UK
      would be proportionate to the legitimate  public  ends  sought  to  be
      achieved by the public authority in maintaining a fair  and  efficient
      immigration policy [75].


  15. He accordingly dismissed their appeals "under human rights."


      Submissions


  16. As already noted it is now accepted that the first appellant can raise
      a ground of appeal under section 85(1)(e)  of the 2002 Act.


  17. Mr Jesurun submitted that the policy in the IDI, Chapter  15,  section
      2A, Annex A is in presumptive terms, so that discretion will  normally
      be exercised and settlement granted in line with  the  main  applicant
      for spouses. The first appellant was entitled  to  benefit  under  the
      policy. That issue was however not examined.


  18. Further, the Judge misdirected himself as to the terms of the  policy,
      finding at [61] that it required exceptionality,  whereas  the  policy
      applicable to the first appellant does not. Nor did the policy require
      anyone to be physically present in the UK.  The  clear  words  of  the
      policy are that settlement will be "normally" granted "in line"[1].


  19. That policy, he  submitted,  creates  a  presumption  (AG  and  others
      (policies - executive discretions - Tribunal's powers)  Kosovo  [2007]
      UKAIT 00082 at [50]) and entitles the Tribunal to substitute its  view
      if the precise terms are proved, and  there  is   nothing  at  all  to
      displace the presumption, or nothing that,  under  the  terms  of  the
      policy falls for consideration.  If these  factors  apply  the  appeal
      should be allowed.


  20. The fact that the sponsor has not taken up settlement is not a  matter
      that under the terms of the policy displaces the presumption.  Nor  is
      it a matter that would allow a rational decision maker  in  possession
      of the information  and  evidence  submitted,  to  conclude  that  the
      "normal" course should not be followed. Mr Jesurum submitted that  the
      sponsor is a man of good character who was regarded by his  commanding
      officer as trustworthy.  His  evidence  as  set  out  in  his  witness
      statement that he intended to resign his position in order to take  up
      settlement and travel to the UK with  his  wife  and  son,  should  be
      treated as credible. That was a point also made in the covering letter
      of  his  solicitors   which   accompanied   the   second   appellant's
      application.


  21. He also  submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to  apply  the  historic
      injustice case law. He contended that the Judge wrongly  distinguished
      R (Gurung), supra, on the basis that 'the child applicant'  in  Gurung
      was settled in the UK.  That  however  is  inaccurate:   Some  of  the
      appellants were, and several who succeeded (KR, CR and YR) were not so
      settled. The reason given was  thus  factually  incorrect  and  cannot
      therefore be sustained. In any event, it was irrelevant to  the  ratio
      of Gurung at [40-43], and is based on  causation,  historic  injustice
      and a "but for" test, and not on ties to the UK. The Judge  was  bound
      by Gurung and failed to apply it.


  22. He further submitted  at  paragraph  11  of  his  grounds  that  Judge
      approached proportionality on the wrong factual basis: had he properly
      considered the first appellant's case, he should have examined  it  on
      the basis of the sponsor and the first appellant being admitted to the
      UK, causing the separation between cohabiting mother and son;  and  if
      not, he should have examined the proportionality of interference  with
      the family life of the husband and wife '....whom  the  refusal  would
      separate.'


  23. The Judge was bound by Ghising and others (Ghurkas)  BOCs  -  historic
      wrong - weight) [2013] UKUT 567 (IAC) at [60] .  This was a case where
      the only matter relied on by the respondent was the ordinary interests
      of immigration control


  24. In Ghising, the Tribunal stated at [60] -


      "...in  other  words,  the  historic  injustice   issue   will   carry
      significant weight, on the appellant's side of  the  balance,  and  is
      likely to outweigh the matters relied  on  by  the  respondent,  where
      these consist solely of the public interest just described.


      Once this point is grasped, it can  immediately  be  appreciated  that
      there may be cases where appellants in Gurkha cases will not  succeed,
      even though their family life engages Article 8(1)  and  the  evidence
      shows that they would have come to the UK with their father,  but  for
      the  injustice  that  prevented  the  latter  from  settling  here  on
      completion of his military service. If the  respondent  can  point  to
      matters over and above the 'public interest'  in  maintaining  a  firm
      immigration policy, which argue in favour of removal or the refusal of
      leave to enter, these must be given appropriate weight in the  balance
      in the respondent's favour. Thus, a  bad  immigration  history  and/or
      criminal behaviour may still be sufficient to  outweigh  the  powerful
      factors bearing on the appellant's side. Being an adult child of a  UK
      settled Gurkha ex serviceman is therefore not a 'trump card',  in  the
      sense that not every application by  such  a  person  will  inevitably
      succeed. But, if the  respondent  is  relying  only  upon  the  public
      interest described by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 41  in  Gurung,
      then the weight to be given to the historic  injustice  will  normally
      require a decision in the appellant's favour."


  25. The Judge failed to follow  that  approach  applicable  to  historical
      injustice cases and accordingly erred.


  26. Mr Jesurum submitted that the Judge erred in relation  to  Article  8.
      He made a clear finding of family life at [65], also finding that  the
      interference proposed would have such gravity to engage the  operation
      of Article 8 [66]. There  has  been  no  cross  appeal  against  those
      findings and they accordingly stand.


  27. He referred to the Judge's observations at [71] and [73]. At [71]  the
      Judge stated that it was the case that the sponsor has not lived  with
      the two appellants in Nepal apart from annual vacation visits.  Having
      made the decision to seek work to provide a higher standard of living,
      it is nevertheless a consequence that he spent less time with his wife
      and two children and mother. The Judge found the appellant's claim  to
      family life was accordingly undermined by the considerable  period  of
      time they spent apart from the sponsor.


  28. At [73] the Judge stated that there is also the issue that the  second
      appellant is an adult. He was born in August 1989 and was aged  24  at
      the date of the decision. He regarded the test  of  Article  8  family
      life in this case to be whether  more  exists  than  normal  emotional
      ties. The other son had lived with his mother in the family  home  but
      there is no evidence that this is dependence rather than convenience.


  29. Mr Jesurum submitted that the observations  in  those  two  paragraphs
      appear to be directed to the  issue  of  proportionality  rather  than
      whether or not Article  8(1)  is  engaged.  Moreover,  paragraph  [73]
      addresses the second appellant alone. The word  "undermined"  used  by
      the Judge is not sufficiently clear to reverse the  clear  finding  at
      [65] and [66] that family life does  exist.  This  suggests  weakening
      rather  than  displacement,  reversal  or  failure.  However,  if  the
      observations at [71] and [73] do constitute  a  reversal  of  findings
      from [65] and [66] that in itself amounts to an error as  there  would
      be an internally contradictory and unclear set of findings.


  30. He also contended that the Judge failed to apply the case law  brought
      to his attention, including R (Gurung), supra,  at  40-43.  The  Judge
      found that the second appellant, who is aged 24 is an adult and  there
      is no evidence that  this  is  dependence  rather  than  a  matter  of
      convenience.   However, family life can  exist  without  dependence  -
      Patel and Others v ECO  (Mumbai)  [2010]  EWCA  Civ  17  at  [14]  and
      Ghising.


  31. At [42] in Gurung, supra, the Court of Appeal stated that if a  Gurkha
      can show that, but for the historic injustice, he would  have  settled
      in the UK at a time when his dependent (now) adult  child  would  have
      been able to accompany him as a dependent child under the age  of  18,
      that is a strong reason for holding that it is proportionate to  admit
      the adult child to join his family now.


  32. The Court of Appeal also rejected the reason given by the Tribunal for
      holding that the weight to be  given  to  the  historic  injustice  is
      limited. The flexibility of the "exceptional circumstances"  criterion
      is such that it does not require the historic injustice  to  be  taken
      into account at all.  The  requirement  to  take  the  injustice  into
      account in striking a fair balance between the Article 8(1) right  and
      the public interest  in  maintaining  a  firm  immigration  policy  is
      inherent in Article 8.2 itself, and it is ultimately for the Court  to
      strike the balance.


  33. Mr Jesurum also relied in this regard on Patel and Others,  supra,  at
      [13]-[15] and Ghising, 2013,  supra,  at  [59]-[60].  I  have  already
      quoted from that judgement where  the  Tribunal  stated  that  if  the
      respondent can point to matters over and above the public interest  in
      maintaining a firm and fair immigration policy, which would include  a
      bad immigration history and/or criminal behaviour, this still might be
      sufficient to outweigh the powerful factors bearing on the appellant's
      side.


  34. Ms Savage on behalf of the respondent produced the  archives  relating
      to the definition of "present and settled" in the  immigration  Rules,
      which means that the person concerned is settled in the UK and at  the
      time that an application under these  rules  is  made,  is  physically
      present here or is coming here with, or  to  join  the  applicant  and
      intends to make  the  UK  their  home  with  the  applicant  if  their
      application is successful. She submitted  that  the  sponsor  has  not
      satisfied the definitional requirements, entitling the  appellants  to
      benefit therefrom.


  35. With regard to the first ground of appeal, Ms  Savage  submitted  that
      any error identified in this ground is immaterial. The  assertion  had
      been that the refusal decision was not in accordance with the  law  as
      being irrational. She submitted that the decision  was  in  accordance
      with the law and cannot be said to be irrational.


  36.  She  submitted  that   the   respondent   properly   considered   the
      discretionary guidance for spouses of ex-Gurkhas in the IDIs,  chapter
      15, section 2A,  annex  A.  The  respondent  was  not  satisfied  that
      discretion should be exercised in the first appellant's  favour.  That
      was on the basis that the sponsor was not present and settled  in  the
      UK.


  37. She submitted that in any event the presumption  in  the  policy  that
      discretion will normally be exercised and settlement granted  in  line
      with the main applicant for spouses, is dependent on any  leave  being
      granted to the spouse being "in line" with leave granted to  the  main
      applicant. Here, however, the  sponsor's  wife  is  not  applying  for
      settlement at the same time as, and in line with, her sponsor. Nor  is
      she joining the sponsor. The sponsor had not activated  his  visa  and
      was not present and settled here.


  38. With regard to the second ground,  she  submitted  that  none  of  the
      points raised disclosed any material error of  law.  Whilst  accepting
      that the First-tier Tribunal Judge wrongly distinguished  Gurung,  she
      submitted that such error is immaterial.


  39. She submitted following the Rule 24 reply, that  in  Article  8  entry
      clearance  appeals,  the  relevant  date  is  the  date  of  decision.
      Accordingly, s.85(5) of the 2002 Act excludes consideration at  appeal
      of matters arising after the decision to refuse entry  clearance.  The
      Judge was accordingly obliged to consider circumstances as at the date
      of decision, namely 3 December 2013.


  40. At that date, the sponsor had not  activated  his  visa  and  was  not
      present and settled  here.  He  was  residing  in  Brunei  whilst  the
      appellants lived in Nepal. Accordingly the refusal of entry  clearance
      would have had no impact, let alone a disproportionate impact, on  the
      appellants' right to family life with the sponsor.  The  decision  did
      not demonstrate any lack of respect for family life. The  sponsor  was
      not present and settled here at the date of decision and the grant  of
      settlement to the appellant  here  would  not  have  resulted  in  the
      reunification of the family unit.


  41. With regard to the "historic wrong" she submitted that  in  accordance
      with Ghising, supra, the appellants have not demonstrated that but for
      that wrong, they would have been settled in the UK long ago.  In  this
      case the sponsor was issued with a visa in February 2013 but  did  not
      arrive in the UK until February 2015. The sponsor has been in  the  UK
      for a short time despite having the option of coming to the  UK  since
      the grant of indefinite leave to enter in  February  2014  [74].  That
      undermines the sponsor's claim that he would have been settled in  the
      UK long ago had it not been for the historic wrong.


  42. Accordingly any error in respect of Article 8 is immaterial.


  43. In reply, Mr Jesurum submitted that even if being settled in the UK is
      part of the requirements under the rules, the policy itself  does  not
      require the person to be present and settled here. Annex A is  enacted
      in order to avoid an injustice.


  44. With regard to dependants, discretion will normally  be  exercised  in
      settlement being granted in line with the main applicant for  spouses.
      The purpose of Annex A is to correct a historical injustice. There  is
      therefore no requirement under  the  policy  for  the  sponsor  to  be
      settled at all. Under the annex, the first appellant was  entitled  to
      settlement granted in line with the  spouse.  There  is  no  condition
      precedent that he must have settled here yet.


  45. The findings by the Judge at [74] namely that he has only been in  the
      UK a short time and that he has the option to resume  family  life  in
      Nepal is a reference to proportionality. However, the  sponsor  stated
      that he would have settled in the UK on discharge.  He  had  no  legal
      basis or opportunity to apply until 2009. In his witness statement  at
      paragraph 50, dated 17 February 2015 he explicitly stated that had  he
      been allowed  to  apply  for  settlement  in  the  UK  upon  his  army
      discharge, he would have applied together with his family. However  he
      has never been given the opportunity until recently.


  46. Accordingly, but for the injustice, the second  appellant  would  have
      been here as a minor.


     Assessment


  47. It was conceded at the outset that the appellant could  not  meet  the
      rules. However, their applications were  made  under  the  policy  and
      pursuant to Article 8. This is evident from the application  form  has
      been completed.  This is referred to as  Appendix  6  (VAF4A  November
      2012) - former Gurkhas and their dependants.


  48. The relevant applicable policy is that contained in  IDI  chapter  15,
      section 2A, Annex A relating to discretionary arrangements for  former
      Gurkhas discharged before 1 July 1997.  It  provides  that  discretion
      will normally be exercised in settlement granted in line with the main
      applicant  or,  amongst  others,  spouses.  There  is  also  provision
      regarding children over the age of 18 and  other  dependant  relatives
      who will not normally qualify for the exercise of discretion  in  line
      with the main applicant, who would be expected to qualify for leave to
      enter or remain in  the  UK  under  the  relevant  provisions  of  the
      Immigration Rules, or under the provisions of Article 8 of  the  Human
      Rights Act (sic). Exceptional circumstances may be considered on on  a
      case by case basis.


  49. It is accepted that the sponsor in this case is  the  husband  of  the
      first appellant and father of the second. He was  discharged  in  1996
      and had an exemplary record of  conduct.  He  served  in  the  Gurkhas
      Brigade for over 15 years.


  50. He was granted settlement in 2013 under the relevant  policy.  He  has
      however not yet taken up settlement. The "historic injustice" was only
      finally corrected in 2009. The second appellant had by then turned 18.




  51. The sponsor contended that had the injustice not  occurred,  he  would
      have been granted settlement in 1996. In that case, his wife  and  son
      (as a minor dependant) would have been entitled to accompany him.


  52. The Judge found that the sponsor had been in the UK for a short  time,
      having arrived as recently as 25 February 2015.


  53. The Judge found that the appeal of the first appellant failed  because
      she could not meet the requirements of  paragraph  276R(i)  [59]  even
      though it was accepted that the application could not meet the rules.


  54.  It  is  now  accepted  by  Ms  Savage  that  the  Tribunal  did  have
      jurisdiction to consider a ground of appeal under  s.84(1)(e)  of  the
      2002 Act.


  55. The Judge found that it  is  the  case  that  the  policy  applies  in
      exceptional  circumstances.   He   described   the   test   as   being
      "......whether there is anything exceptional which  might  warrant  in
      relation to both appellants the exercise  of  discretionary  guidance"
      [61].


  56. However, there was no requirement of "exceptionality"  in  the  policy
      relied on by the first appellant.


  57. It is moreover evident from the first appellant's  submissions  before
      the First-tier Tribunal that her argument was not under Article 8  but
      under s.84(1)(e) of the 2002 Act.


  58. Nor did the policy in its terms require any person  to  be  physically
      present in the UK. It is simply stated in Annex A that discretion will
      normally be exercised and discretionary leave granted in line with the
      main applicant for spouses.


  59. The Judge went on to find at [61] that there was nothing in  the  IDIs
      at chapter 15 that assisted the appellants in seeking to suggest  that
      the exeptionality test had been met.


  60. The Judge went on to state at [63] that the main  thrust  of  the  two
      appeals is the contention that the refusal on Article 8 grounds  would
      be disproportionate to the legitimate aim sought to be achieved by the
      public authority.


  61. The Judge was however required to  consider  the  application  of  the
      correct policy to  the  first  appellant's  case  as  presented  where
      discretion will normally be exercised and settlement granted  in  line
      with the main applicant. There are no other requirements.


  62. The Tribunal has the power in respect  of  the  applicable  policy  to
      substitute its view once the terms are proved on the facts of the case
      - AG and others, supra, at [50]. There is nothing under the  terms  of
      the  policy  that  displaces  the  presumption  that  discretion  will
      normally be exercised in favour of the spouse under the policy.


  63. Ms Savage contended that in this  case  the  first  appellant  is  not
      applying for settlement at the same time and in line with the sponsor.
      Nor can she be considered to be joining him because as at the date  of
      application and the date of decision, he had not  activated  his  visa
      and was not present and settled in the UK.


  64. However, as already noted, there is nothing  in  the  wording  of  the
      policy  that  requires  the  sponsor's  settlement  in  the  UK  as  a
      prerequisite for the successful application by his wife. It is  simply
      provided that  settlement  applications  from  former  member  of  the
      Brigade of Gurkhas who were discharged  before July 1  1997,  and  who
      had served at least 4 years in the Brigade, will normally be approved.
       The sponsor  had  met  the  prerequisites  for  his  application  for
      settlement being granted.


  65. His application for settlement was granted. There  is  no  requirement
      that the first appellant should apply for settlement at the same  time
      as her husband.


  66. I find that the Judge erred in failing to give effect  to  the  policy
      which was in presumptive terms. No  evidence  has  been  adduced  that
      displaces the presumption that settlement should be  granted  in  line
      with the sponsor.


  67. The first appellant's principal argument was not under Article  8  but
      under s.94(1)(e) of the 2002 Act. The Judge did not  consider  whether
      the first appellant was entitled to benefit from the policy  with  the
      result that she was deprived of having her case decided on  the  basis
      of the policy applicable to her, and which does  not  require  her  to
      show exceptional circumstances.


  68. The fact that the sponsor had not taken up settlement did not displace
      the presumption that the  "normal"  course  should  be  followed.  The
      sponsor stated in his witness statement dated 17 February 2015 that it
      is his intention to settle in the UK as  soon  as  possible  with  his
      family. Once they have been granted visas he  intends  to  resign  his
      post at the GRU in order to settle in the UK with his family.


  69. He also stated that had he been allowed to apply for settlement in the
      UK on discharge from the army, he would have applied together with his
      family. He thus claimed to have been denied the opportunity to  settle
      as he would have wished. He was 24 years old when he  was  discharged.
      He would at that stage have sought work as a driver or electrician  or
      security guard, enabling him to work for a further 20 to 30 years.  As
      it is, he is currently working in Brunei  and  often  travels  to  his
      family when he gets leave or holidays.


  70. With regard to the Article 8 claim, the First-tier Tribunal Judge made
      a clear finding that there is family life and  that  the  decision  to
      refuse the two appellants' leave to enter the UK would  amount  to  an
      interference with their right to family life. Moreover, he found  that
      the interference would have such gravity so as to engage the operation
      of Article 8. He stated that the issue to  be  considered  is  whether
      such interference would be proportionate to the legitimate public ends
      sought to be achieved by the public authority [66].  He had regard  to
      the authorities he had been referred to [67].


  71. He went on to find at [71] that the sponsor made a  decision  to  seek
      work to provide a higher standard of living with the consequence  that
      he spent less time with his wife and  two  children  and  mother.  The
      appellants' claims to family life were accordingly 'undermined' by the
      considerable period of time that they spent apart from him.


  72. I do not however find that the Judge sought to reverse his findings at
      [65] and [66]. I accept Mr Jesurun's submission that the  observations
      in the later paragraphs were directed towards the  proportionality  of
      the proposed interference rather than the engagement of  Article  8(1)
      where the Judge found that there was family life that existed.


  73. I have also had regard to the issue raised by the Judge at  [73]  with
      regard to the second appellant's being an adult. He was 24  years  old
      at the date of decision.


  74. The Judge stated that the test for Article 8 family  life  is  whether
      between adults "something more exists  than  normal  emotional  ties."
      Such ties might exist if dependence can  be  established  and  matters
      such as links, age, place and length of residence and contact need  to
      be considered [73].


  75. The Judge found that as he reached the end of his studies, and in  the
      absence of information about unemployment, it is reasonable to  expect
      him to obtain employment and to enter into other living  arrangements.
      He would then be able to sever his dependence on his parents  for  his
      living arrangements and for his funding.


  76. It is thus evident that  the  Judge  did  not  find  that  the  second
      appellant was living an independent life, but  confirmed  that  family
      life existed.


  77. Although the Judge was referred to the case law, which he  considered,
      it is accepted that his attempt to distinguish R(Gurung),  supra,  was
      incorrect. Some of the appellants in that case  were  in  the  UK  but
      several who succeeded were not. Moreover, Gurung was not based on ties
      to the UK but on questions such as causation, historic injustice and a
      "but for" test.


  78. Having found that there was family life in the appellants'  case,  the
      Judge was bound  to  follow  the  approach  with  regard  to  historic
      injustice cases referred to in Ghising as set out  at  paragraph  [24]
      above.


  79. It appears that the respondent was only relying on the usual interests
      relating to immigration control. She did not consider the weight to be
      given to the historic injustice referred to in Ghising.


  80. The respondent's reasons for refusal in regard to the second appellant
      do not appear to accept that Article 8 was engaged and the  respondent
      was not satisfied that he had established family life with his parents
      over and above that between adult child and parents. Nevertheless, the
      respondent considered that even if it were engaged,  the  decision  is
      proportionate in the exercise of immigration control.


  81. The Tribunal in Ghising found that Kugathas had been  interpreted  too
      restrictively  in  the  past  [56].  The  judgment  in  Kugathas  must
      accordingly be read in  the  light  of  subsequent  decisions  of  the
      domestic and Strasbourg courts. The Tribunal  in  Ghising  viewed  the
      jurisprudence which disclosed that there  is  no  general  proposition
      that Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention can never be engaged  in
      a family life that is sought to be established between adult  siblings
      living together. Rather than applying a blanket rule  with  regard  to
      adult children, each case must be analysed on its own facts to  decide
      whether or not family life exists within Article 8(1).


  82. There were other authorities referred to, the effect of which is  that
      voluntary separation does not end family  life  -  Sen  v  Netherlands
      [2003] EHRR 7. Moreover, the attainment of the age  of  majority  does
      not end family life as already noted


  83. The Tribunal referred to R (Zimbabwe) and Another v SSHD  [2008]  EWCA
      Civ 826 at [6] where Sedley LJ stated that it  would  be  "unreal"  to
      dispute that the 23 year old appellant enjoyed family  life  with  her
      parents when she "had lived pretty well continuously with her  parents
      and siblings all her life." The Court of Appeal also  found  that  the
      second appellant, a 25 year old, enjoyed family life with his  parents
      since he was economically and emotionally a member  of  his  immediate
      family, all of whom, that is his parents  and  two  sisters,  are  now
      lawfully resident in the UK.


  84. Family life can exist without  dependence:  Patel  and  Others  v  ECO
      (Mumbai) [14]. What may constitute an extant family  life  falls  well
      short of dependency:  Sedley  LJ  stated  that  you  can  set  out  to
      compensate for a historical wrong, but you do not reverse the  passage
      of time. Many of these children have now  grown  up  and  embarked  on
      lives  of  their  own.  Where  this  has  happened,  the  bonds  which
      constitute family life will no longer be there,  and  Article  8  will
      have no purchase. What may constitute an extant family life falls well
      short of what constitutes dependency, and a good many adult  children,
      including children on whom the parents themselves are now reliant, may
      still have a family life with parents who are now settled here not  by
      leave or by force of circumstances, but by long-delayed right.


  85. That is what gives the  historical  wrong  a  potential  relevance  to
      Article 8 claims such as these. It does  not  make  the  Convention  a
      mechanism for turning the clock  back,  but  it  does  make  both  the
      history and  its  admitted  injustices  potentially  relevant  to  the
      application of Article 8(2).


  86. In the present appeal the First-tier Tribunal Judge did have regard to
      the statement of Lord Dyson in Gurung at  [68].  It  referred  to  the
      importance of historic injustice  and  the  facts  to  be  taken  into
      account in the balancing exercise.


  87. The Judge found that  the  threshold  of  Article  8(1)  afforded  the
      appellant the protection of Article 8(1). Accordingly, he should  have
      considered that the balance of factors determining proportionality for
      the purpose of Article 8 (2) will be influenced by the fact that,  but
      for the historical wrong, the family would or might have settled  here
      long ago [15].


  88. I find that the approach of  the  Judge  with  regard  to  the  second
      appellant as set out  at [73] is not consistent with  the  authorities
      that applied in this case. Nor is it evident that the Judge sought  to
      give proper effect to them.


  89. I have had regard to Ms Savage's submissions in relation to the second
      appellant that although the Judge  wrongly  distinguished  R  (Gurung)
      this was not material  in  the  circumstances.  This  is  moreover  an
      Article 8 entry clearance appeal and the relevant date is the date  of
      decision, namely 3 December 2013. The sponsor had  not  activated  his
      visa by then. Accordingly, the refusal of entry clearance  would  have
      had no impact on the appellants' rights to enjoy family life with  the
      sponsor. The sponsor only arrived in the UK on 25 February 2015.  That
      was considered by the Judge as having been a quite short time.


  90. That, she submitted, undermined the sponsor's claim that he would have
      been settled in the UK long ago had  it  not  been  for  the  historic
      wrong. In the circumstances, she submitted that any error  in  respect
      of Article 8 is immaterial. There was no disproportionate interference
      with their Article 8 rights.


  91. However, the sponsor had clearly asserted  in  his  witness  statement
      that but for the historic injustice, he would have been in the UK  for
      a period of more than 20 years. He would have exercised his  right  to
      come here at that stage. It is  accordingly  at  best  speculative  on
      behalf of the respondent to contend that the historic wrong would  not
      have resulted in his coming to settle here long ago.


  92. The sponsor has explained in his witness statement that his  wife  and
      children remain dependent on him as he is the sole  income  earner  of
      his family. It was as a result of his inability to settle  in  the  UK
      after discharge that he obtained work as a security guard  in  several
      countries, finally ending in Brunei since 1997.


  93. In all the circumstances I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal involved the making of an error on a point of law. I thus set
      it aside and re-make it.


  94. In re-making the decision I preserve the Judge's  findings  on  family
      life which have not been affected by error.


  95. In any event, as submitted by Mr Jesurun,  the  evidence  reveals  the
      existence of the marriage between the first appellant and the sponsor,
      which has remained a subsisting marriage. His wife and  children  have
      remained dependent on him. He is the sole income earner in his family.
      The second appellant continues living with his mother  in  the  family
      home and has not established independence. He is currently  unmarried,
      unemployed and is studying.


  96. I have referred to the authorities establishing that family life  with
      adult children can exist in  cases  where  there  are  more  than  the
      ordinary emotional ties.  In  this  case,  the  second  appellant  has
      remained dependent on his father and has relied on him  for  financial
      support in his day to day living as well as his continued education.


  97. In any event, from the authorities, including AA v UK [2012] Imm AR  1
      the Human Rights Court stated at  [49]  that  an  examination  of  the
      Court's case law would tend to suggest that  the  applicant,  a  young
      adult of 24, who resides with his mother and has  not  yet  founded  a
      family of his own, can be regarded as having family life.


  98. This approach was approved in Ghising and by the Court  of  Appeal  in
      Singh v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 630 at [25].


  99. I accordingly find that the appellants have  shown  that  family  life
      persists in this case.


 100. I have set out the policy as it applies to the first appellant. I find
      that there is nothing in its terms requiring the sponsor to have taken
      up settlement before his wife was  entitled  to  the  benefit  of  the
      policy. The policy is presumptive. No evidence has been  adduced  that
      displaces the presumption that settlement should be  granted  in  line
      with the sponsor.


 101. I accept the sponsor's evidence that it is his intention to settle  in
      the UK as soon as possible together with his family.  Once  they  have
      been granted visas, he intends to resign his post in order  to  settle
      with them in the UK.


 102. Having found that family life exists, I also answer the the next three
      questions set out by Lord Bingham in Razgar in the affirmative.


 103. I accordingly turn to consider  whether  the  decision  constitutes  a
      disproportionate interference in the appellants' rights to respect for
      their family life.


 104. In assessing the proportionality of the decision, I take into  account
      that if a Gurkha can show that but  for  the  historic  injustice,  he
      would have settled in the UK at a time when his dependent child  under
      the age of 18 would have been able to accompany  him  as  a  dependent
      child, that is  a  strong  reason  for  holding  that  it  is  in  the
      circumstances proportionate to permit that adult  child  to  join  the
      family now - R(Gurung), supra, at [42].


 105. The sponsor has stated at paragraph 15 of his witness  statement  that
      had he been allowed to apply for settlement in  the  UK  on  his  army
      discharge, he would have applied together with his family. He  was  34
      years old at the time. He would therefore have been able to work  here
      for a further 20-30 years. In Patel, supra, at  [15]  the  Court  held
      that if they come within the protection of Article 8(1),  the  balance
      of factors determining proportionality for  the  purposes  of  Article
      8(2) will be influenced, perhaps decisively, by the fact (if it  is  a
      fact) that but for the history recounted in NH  (India)  [2006]  UKAIT
      00085, the family would or might have settled here long ago.


 106. I have considered the unchallenged evidence of the sponsor.  He  is  a
      man  of  previous  positive  good  character  and   is   regarded   as
      trustworthy. His assertion therefore that  he  would  have  wanted  to
      settle on discharge, and most recently in 2006, had he learned of  the
      policy then in force, is  plausible  and  credible.  However,  he  was
      prevented by the policy that then applied from settling in the  UK  as
      he would not have been able to meet the requirement  of  three  years'
      service in the UK.


 107. There is no record of  a  bad  immigration  history  or  any  criminal
      behaviour affecting the balance against the sponsor.


 108. Lord Dyson in R(Gurung [2013] 1 WLR at 2566 at  [41]  found  that  the
      historic  injustice  issue  will  carry  significant  weight  on   the
      appellant's side of the balance, and is likely to outweigh the matters
      relied on  by the respondent, where these consist solely of the public
      interest in maintaining a firm immgration control.


 109. The respondent has not  relied  on  any  matter  beyond  the  ordinary
      interests of immigration control.  The  weight  to  be  given  to  the
      historic injustice  will  in  the  circumstances  normally  require  a
      decision in the appellants' favour (Ghising, supra, at [60]).


 110. The cases of Gurung and Ghising concerned adult children. However,  as
      submitted by Mr Jesurun, there is no reason why that  approach  should
      not apply with equal force to the first  appellant.  Accordingly,  but
      for the injustice she too would have settled in the UK since 1996.


 111. I have also had regard in remaking the decision under Article 8 to the
      public interest considerations referred to in sections 117A  and  117B
      of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.  As  noted  the
      ordinary interests of imigration control are  normally  outweighed  by
      the historic injustice referred to in Ghising.


 112. The second appellant has studied some English at school. But  for  the
      injustice to his father, he would have settled in the UK when he was 7
      years old. His lack  of  fluency  is  referable  to  the  respondent's
      injustice.


 113. As far as financial independence is concerned, the policy with  regard
      to the first  appellant  contains  no  maintenance  and  accommodation
      requirements. Moreover the evidence from the sponsor is that he enjoys
      sufficient means to ensure that the appellants do not become a  burden
      on public funds and will be properly accommodated.


 114.  Again,  his  financial  circumstances  are  the  consequence  of  the
      injustice done to him. Had he been settled on discharge, he would most
      likely have found profitable employment. Moreover, his son would  have
      been entitled to accompany him.


 115. The provisions of s.117B(4) and (5) do not apply.


 116. I have also had regard to the fact that the sponsor was separated from
      his family when serving the Crown. Moreover, he served well in  excess
      of the four year minimum  required  to  obtain  settlement.  His  wife
      sacrificed her family life and his son grew up without  a  father  for
      the  first  few  years  of  his  life.  I  find  that  there  are   no
      countervailing considerations from the respondent's side.


 117. Having regard to the circumstances as a whole, I find the contemplated
      interference is  disproportionate.  That  is  particularly  so  having
      regard to the historic injustice prevalent in this case.






      Notice of Decisions


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of  errors
      of law and is set aside.


      Having set it aside, I re-make the decision allowing  the  appellants'
      appeals.


      No anonymity direction is made.






      Signed                             Date 16 December 2015


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer





      -----------------------
[1]  'Discretion will normally be exercised and settlement granted in line
with the main applicant for spouses.....'.

