
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01509/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 31 July 2015                      |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                          MR LEO LIVINGSTONE DAVIS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                             (KINGSTON, JAMAICA)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Kansal of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, a Home Office Presenting Officer


          DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING NO MATERIAL ERROR OF LAW

Introduction

      1. This is an appeal by the Appellant.

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica and his date of birth  is  19
         February 1977.

      3. The appellant applied for entry clearance  as  an  adult  dependant
         relative.  On  11  November  2014  the   respondent   refused   his
         application having considered paragraph EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix FM of
         the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)  ('the  Immigration
         Rules'). The reason  for  refusal  was  because  the  appellant  is
         subject to a deportation order.

      4. The appellant appealed against the  respondent's  decision  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge's Decision

      5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul ('the judge') dismissed  the  appeal
         in a decision promulgated on 4 March 2015. There was no  appearance
         by  the  sponsor,   his   representative,   or   the   respondent's
         representative at the hearing. The judge proceeded to determine the
         appeal on the papers, recording that the notice of hearing had been
         sent on 8 July to the appellant's solicitors  at  an  old  address,
         namely, 1 Olympic Way, Wembley Park, London ('the old address').

Permission to Appeal

      6. The appellant applied  (out  of  time)  for  permission  to  appeal
         against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the  basis  that
         notice of the hearing was not received and that  by  proceeding  in
         the absence of the sponsor and representative the appellant has not
         had a  fair  hearing.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Grant-Hutchison
         extended time, admitting the application and granted permission  to
         appeal.

      7. The respondent  filed  a  Rule  24  response  opposing  the  appeal
         submitting that  the  judge  directed  himself  appropriately.  The
         respondent also requested that the Upper Tribunal check whether the
         notice of hearing was served on the appellant.

      8. At the hearing we heard submissions from Ms Kansal on behalf of the
         Appellant and Mr Tarlow on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer.

Legal Framework

      9. Section EC-DR of the Immigration Rules states:

             'Section EC-DR: Entry clearance as an adult dependent relative

             EC-DR.1.1. The requirements to be met for entry  clearance  as
             an adult dependent relative are that-

             ....

             (c) the applicant must not fall for refusal under any  of  the
             grounds in Section S-EC: Suitability for entry clearance; and

             ...'

     10. Section S-EC of appendix FM states:

             'Section S-EC: Suitability-entry clearance

             S-EC.1.1. The applicant will be  refused  entry  clearance  on
             grounds of suitability if any of paragraphs S-EC.1.2. to  1.8.
             apply

             ...

             S-EC.1.3.  The  applicant  is  currently  the  subject  of   a
             deportation order.'

     11. Article 8 of the ECHR states that:

             (i)  Everyone has the right to respect  for  his  private  and
             family life, his home and his correspondence.

             (ii) There shall be no interference by a public authority with
             the exercise of this right except such  as  is  in  accordance
             with the law and is necessary in a democratic society  in  the
             interests of national security, public safety or the  economic
             well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
             crime, for the protection of health  or  morals,  or  for  the
             protection of the rights and freedoms of others.

     12. As a result of the amendments which came  into  force  on  28  July
         2014, inserted by virtue of section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014,
         the Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ('the 2002 Act')  now  requires
         the Tribunal to take certain factors into account when  determining
         whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts breaches respect
         for private and family life. The decision in the instant case is  a
         decision made under the Immigration Acts. The  relevant  provisions
         provide:

             117A Application of this Part

             (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal  is  required
             to determine whether a decision  made  under  the  Immigration
             Acts-

                  (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

                  (b)  as a result would be unlawful under section 6 of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

             (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

                  (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
                  117B, and

                  (b)   in  cases  concerning  the  deportation  of  foreign
                  criminals, to the considerations listed in section 117C.

             (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means
             the question of whether an interference with a person's  right
             to respect for private and  family  life  is  justified  under
             Article 8(2).

             117B Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable  in
             all cases

             (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in
             the public interest.

             ...

             117C Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving
             foreign criminals

             (1)  The deportation of foreign criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

             (2)  The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
             criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of
             the criminal.

             (3)  In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

             ...

             (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
             to a period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

             (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6)  are  to  be
             taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.

     13. The Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 provides:

             S.11 Right to appeal to Upper Tribunal

             (1)  For the purposes of subsection (2), the  reference  to  a
             right of appeal is to a right to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
             on any point of law arising from a decision made by the First-
             tier Tribunal other than an excluded decision.

             (2)  Any party to a case has a right  of  appeal,  subject  to
             subsection (8).

             (3)  That right may be exercised only with permission (or,  in
             Northern Ireland, leave).

             (4)  Permission (or leave) may be given by-

                  (a)  the First-tier Tribunal, or

                  (b)  the Upper Tribunal, on an application by the party.

             12 Proceedings on appeal to Upper Tribunal

             (1)  Subsection (2) applies if the Upper Tribunal, in deciding
             an appeal under section 11,  finds  that  the  making  of  the
             decision concerned involved the making of an error on a  point
             of law.

             (2)  The Upper Tribunal-

                  (a)  may (but need not) set  aside  the  decision  of  the
                  First-tier Tribunal, and

                  (b)  if it does, must either-

                      (i)  remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  with
                      directions for its reconsideration, or

                      (ii) re-make the decision.

             (3)  In acting under subsection (2)(b)(i), the Upper  Tribunal
             may also-

                  (a)  direct that the members of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  who are chosen to reconsider the case are not  to  be  the
                  same as those who made the  decision  that  has  been  set
                  aside;

                  (b)  give procedural directions  in  connection  with  the
                  reconsideration of the case by the First-tier Tribunal.

             (4)  In acting under subsection (2)(b)(ii), the Upper Tribunal-



                  (a)  may make any decision which the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  could make if the First-tier Tribunal were  re-making  the
                  decision, and

                  (b)  may make  such  findings  of  fact  as  it  considers
                  appropriate.

Error of Law

     14. Generally speaking the Upper Tribunal will only  interfere  with  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal, it finds an error of  law,  if
         that decision was material to the outcome of the appeal.

     15. Rule 28 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)(Immigration
         and Asylum chamber) Rules 2014 provide that if a party to an appeal
         fails to attend the hearing of the appeal the Tribunal may  proceed
         in the party's absence if satisfied that the party was notified  of
         the hearing and if it considers it is in the interest of justice to
         proceed  with the hearing.

     16. The relevant chronology, as ascertained  from  the  Tribunal  file,
         appears to be that:

           . On 10  March  2014  the  appellant's  representative,  Grayson
             Solicitors, wrote to the Tribunal chasing for an update on the
             appeal. The address for Graysons was 1 Olympic Way -  the  old
             address.

           . On  1  May  2014  a  further  letter  was  sent  by  the  same
             representative again chasing for an  update.  The  address  on
             this letter was 1 Ballards Lane, Finchley Central, London- the
             new address.

           . On 8 July 2014 the notice of hearing was served. It  was  sent
             to the old address.

           . On 15 July 2014 an email was sent by the representative to the
             Tribunal following a conversation with Tribunal staff in which
             the Tribunal indicated that it had not  received  notification
             of the change of address. The email asked that the  system  be
             updated and specifically asked for any correspondence that had
             been sent after 19 February 2014 to be re-sent.

           . On 13 August 2014 a further email was received  in  which  the
             representative acknowledged receipt of the Respondent's bundle
             and that they hoped to hear soon about the appeal.  Mr  Tarlow
             was unable to inform us of the address that this was sent to.

     17. The judge, at paragraph 4 of the decision, records that the  notice
         of hearing had  been  sent  to  the  solicitor's  old  address.  At
         paragraph 5 the judge queries why there was no  follow  up  to  the
         letter of 15 July 2014 chasing the hearing date but notes that  the
         letter  had  specifically  requested  that  all  letters  after  19
         February 2014 were re-sent. At paragraph 6 the judge noted that the
         letter dated 13 August 2014 indicates that the representatives  had
         received the respondent's bundle and found from this that there was
         no evidence to  indicate  that  the  representative  had  not  been
         properly informed of the appeal.

     18. In our view the judge ought not to have been satisfied that  notice
         of the hearing had been received by the representative.  The  judge
         appears to have relied on the fact that the respondent's bundle had
         been received as evidence that  the  change  of  address  had  been
         recorded. However, the respondent's bundle was received in  August,
         the notice of hearing was served over a month earlier  and  was  in
         fact served on the old address.

     19. The representative's request for any correspondence sent after  the
         move to be re-sent does not  appear  to  have  been  actioned.  The
         representatives were actively pursuing the appeal as  evident  from
         the further correspondence.

     20. We find that proceeding in  the  absence  of  the  party  in  these
         circumstances was an error of law.

     21. We heard submissions from Ms Kansal. In essence Ms Kansal submitted
         that the error was material as representations,  which  would  have
         been made, might have made a material difference to the outcome  of
         the case. Ms Kansal submitted that the  application  to  the  Entry
         Clearance  Officer,  although  for  entry  as  a  dependant   adult
         relative, was implicitly  an  application  for  revocation  of  the
         deportation order. There is  no  definition  of  how  a  revocation
         request must be served. Paragraph  390  of  the  Immigration  Rules
         merely sets out representations must be made to an ECO or  the  HO.
         The Secretary of State for the Home Department  must  consider  the
         case in hand. Ms Kansal referred us to  the  case  of  Latif  (s120
         -revocation of deportation order) [2012] UKUT 00078 (IAC) which she
         acknowledged was against her. However, she submitted  that  if  the
         First-tier Tribunal judge had decided against the appellant on this
         issue then they could have  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and
         eventually appealed to the Court of Appeal where it could have been
         argued that Latif was wrongly decided.

     22. In reply Mr Tarlow argued that  there  was  no  indication  that  a
         revocation of the deportation  order  had  been  applied  for  even
         implicitly. The chance of a deportation order being revoked in this
         case was very low but it remains open to the appellant to make such
         an application. He submitted that even if proceeding in the absence
         of the appellant was an error it was not material to the outcome of
         this case which could not succeed.

Discussion/ consideration of the merits

     23. There is nothing in the application before the ECO  that  could  be
         considered to have been an implicit application for  revocation  of
         the deportation order. Further, no suggestion has been made at  any
         stage of these proceedings, prior to Ms Kansal's submission at  the
         hearing, that a revocation was being  applied  for.  In  any  event
         there appears to be no merit in these  arguments  for  the  reasons
         given below. The case of  Latif,  as  Ms  Kansal  pointed  out,  is
         against her.

     24. The appellant was deported after serving 5 years of what,  we  were
         told by Mr Tarlow, was a 9  year  sentence.  We  do  not  have  the
         details of the offence committed but clearly it must  have  been  a
         very serious offence. We understand that the offence was  committed
         in 2000 when the appellant was  23  years  of  age.  The  sponsor's
         witness statement indicates that the appellant left the UK in  2005
         and has therefore been outside  of  the  UK  for  approximately  10
         years. It is established that family life will not  normally  exist
         between parents and adult children within the meaning of article  8
         at all in the absence of further elements of  dependency  which  go
         beyond normal emotional ties: see Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali
         v. United Kingdom [1985] 7 EHRR 471, and JB (India) v.  ECO  [2009]
         EWCA Civ 234.

     25. There is some medical evidence that the appellant is suffering from
         depression and relies on the emotional support of  his  mother  and
         brother in the UK. This appears to have been ongoing  for  over  20
         years. He asserts that he is financially dependent  on  his  mother
         who sends �50 per month to him. Financial dependence  on  a  parent
         does not demonstrate the existence of strong  family  ties  between
         adult children and the parent nor are visits and regular  telephone
         calls evidence of anything more than the normal ties  of  affection
         between a parent and her adult children. In any event there  is  no
         reason that we have been shown as to why this  support  should  not
         continue.

     26. The appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules.   Section
         S-EC1 provides that an application  for  entry  clearance  will  be
         refused if the applicant is currently the subject of a  deportation
         order. The appellant is currently subject to a  deportation  order.
         The Rule permits of no discretion.

     27. The appellant  can  make  an  application  for  revocation  of  the
         deportation order but he has  not  done  so.  It  is  difficult  to
         envisage circumstances in which it would be proportionate to  allow
         a mandatory requirement such as this in the Immigration Rules to be
         circumvented by relying on Article 8. We do not consider that there
         is any compelling reason to consider  this  claim  outside  of  the
         Immigration Rules.

     28.  When  considering  the  statutory  requirements   in   s117C   the
         appellant's  case  appears  hopeless.  117C   provides   additional
         considerations  in   cases   involving   foreign   criminals.   The
         deportation of foreign criminals is treated as being in the  public
         interest. The more serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
         criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of  the
         criminal. In the case of a foreign criminal who has been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
         interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances over and above the exceptions for family and  private
         life. By analogy these requirements must be even stronger where the
         appellant is not currently enjoying any family life in the UK.

     29.  No  compelling  circumstances  exist  in  this  case  to   require
         consideration under Article 8 of the ECHR outside the  requirements
         of the Rules. The error of law was therefore not material as it  is
         unlikely that if  the  judge  had  heard  oral  representations  or
         evidence by the appellant's witnesses or representatives  it  would
         have reached any different conclusion from that which  it  reached.
         Thus in our view the failure of the appellant's representatives  to
         attend the hearing has not made any difference to  the  outcome  of
         this appeal which was bound to fail.

Conclusions

     30. There was no material error of law - the decision of the First-tier
         Tribunal stands.

     31. We have considered whether any parties require the protection of an
         anonymity direction. No anonymity direction  was  made  previously.
         Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  we  do  not
         consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Notice of Decision

     32. The appeal is dismissed. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         and the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse leave  to
         enter as an adult dependant relative stands.


Signed

P M Ramshaw   Date 5 August 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
