
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01326/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 20 January 2016                   |On 11 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                          MRS SABA Estifanos Mesfun
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, Solicitor, Sultan Lloyds Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  (First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Birk   sitting   at
    Birmingham on 5th September 2014) dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    decision of an Entry Clearance Officer to refuse her entry clearance as
    the spouse of a refugee.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an
    anonymity direction, and I do not consider that the appellant  requires
    to be accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The background to this case is that the  appellant  is  a  national  of
    Eritrea, whose date is birth is 12 August 1986.   She  applied  at  the
    Nairobi post for entry clearance as the spouse of an  Eritrean  refugee
    who named Saba Estifanos Mesfun as his pre-flight spouse when  claiming
    asylum.

 3. On 21 November  2013  an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  Nairobi  (post
    reference  Nairobi\438959)  refused  the  application  as  he  was  not
    satisfied that she and her  sponsor  had  married  before  the  sponsor
    departed his country of habitual residence.  One of the  reasons  given
    by the Entry Clearance Officer was that the appellant had not  provided
    satisfactory evidence that she was Saba Estifanos Mesfun.  As  evidence
    of  her  identity,  she  had  provided  a  photocopy  of   a   National
    Intelligence  and  Security  Service  document.   But  applicants   are
    required to provide  original  documents  as  copies  could  easily  be
    tampered with.  The document issued on 14 June 2013 was simply a record
    of what the authorities in the camp in Ethiopia had been told, and  she
    had not shown what evidence she had produced to obtain the  certificate
    or if any checks were conducted to verify the information.  He was  not
    satisfied based on the evidence provided that the  appellant  was  Saba
    Estifanos Mesfun.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 4.  At  the  hearing  before  Judge  Birk,  both  parties   were   legally
    represented.  The judge received oral evidence from the sponsor  and  a
    supporting witness Mrs Semret Goitom.

 5.  In  her  closing  submissions  on  behalf  of   the   appellant,   the
    representative accepted that a document verification report would  have
    been of assistance to her client.  She submitted that  her  client  was
    the same person who was mentioned in the sponsor's  asylum  claim.  She
    had left the country illegally and so there  were  no  documents.   The
    sponsor had little contact  while  she  was  in  Eritrea,  but  he  had
    supported her since she had been in Ethiopia.

 6. The Presenting Officer submitted that  original  documents  could  have
    been provided earlier, and so there was no  opportunity  to  have  them
    assessed.  It could be seen there was a gap between the stamp  and  the
    photograph.  There could be no satisfaction that the appellant and  the
    lady that the sponsor married was  the  same  person.   The  Presenting
    Officer asked the judge to place no weight on the statement or evidence
    of the supporting witness, as it was questionable whether she was being
    truthful or credible.

 7. The judge set out his findings  at  paragraphs  [10]  to  [15]  of  his
    decision.   At  paragraph  [12]  he  held  there  was   no   reasonable
    explanation for the  sponsor  as  to  why  if  the  appellant  had  the
    original, she did not show it to the Entry Clearance Officer  when  she
    made her application but only provided a photocopy.  It  had  now  been
    provided at the hearing,  but  this  meant  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer had not been able to verify its contents with the  agency  that
    issued it and to confirm the checks and  information  that  would  have
    been provided by the appellant to satisfy them sufficiently for them to
    issue her with the document.  He noted that the document had  not  been
    verified by a member state, but by a refugee organisation.   There  was
    no evidence from the organisation as  to  the  process  by  which  they
    verified a person's identity, and whether this concurred with what  the
    sponsor had said.

 8. The judge accepted that the  sponsor  had  been  in  contact  with  the
    appellant in  Ethiopia,  but  found  that  this  did  not  confirm  her
    identity.

The Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 9. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    taking issue with the reasoning of the judge in  paragraph  [12].   The
    judge had failed to take any account of submissions made on  behalf  of
    the appellant that perhaps the reason why the appellant  chose  not  to
    part with the original when submitting her application was  the  length
    of time that she would have to manage  without  the  same.   Also,  the
    Entry Clearance Officer did not  require  the  original  to  carry  out
    enquiries with the issuing body  if  he  was  not  satisfied  with  the
    veracity of the document.  Finally, the judge had failed  to  make  her
    own findings about the veracity of the original documents  produced  to
    her at the hearing, despite submissions from both representatives  that
    she should do so.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

10. On 21 April 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson  granted  permission
    to appeal for the following reasons:

         "Given that the appellant had to  leave  Eritrea  illegally  it  is
         arguable that she would thus be unable to provide  satisfactory  ID
         documentation.  In any event, the original  documentation  has  now
         been provided and there is no reason why a DVR could not have  been
         obtained, even  if  it  required  an  adjournment.   Moreover,  the
         decision is silent as to the judge's view of the  submissions  made
         on the appellant's behalf."

The Rule 24 Response

11. On 1 May 2015 Ian Jarvis of the Specialist Appeals Team settled a  Rule
    24 response opposing the appeal.  The appellant could not  make  out  a
    meritorious  challenge  by  referring  to   submissions   made   by   a
    representative who was plainly wildly speculating, caused by the  clear
    fact that the appellant had woefully failed  to  provide  any  evidence
    about crucial elements of her case relating to her identity.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

12. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Reza, who did  not  appear  below,  drew  my  attention  to  an
    original letter  issued  by  the  National  Intelligence  and  Security
    Service Administration for Refugee - Returnee Affairs which was in  the
    bundle of documents prepared for the  Upper  Tribunal.   This  original
    document was dated December 2013, whereas the photocopy relied  on  for
    the purposes of the application was dated 14/06/13.

13. The appellant had gone in person to make her application.  He submitted
    that the Entry Clearance Officer could have  asked  her  to  submit  an
    original,  not  a  photocopy.   Alternatively,  she  should  have  been
    interviewed by the Entry Clearance Officer about her asserted identity.
     Furthermore, he could not see the logic of the Entry Clearance Officer
    not verifying  the  photocopy  by  contacting  the  organisation  which
    purportedly issued it.  The supporting witness was a  childhood  friend
    of the appellant, and the judge  did  not  give  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting her corroborative evidence.

14. Mr Richards submitted that it was clearly open to the appellant to have
    submitted an original document earlier, and it was open to the judge to
    place little weight on a document which had been produced at  the  last
    minute.  Also, it was open to the appellant to seek an  adjournment  of
    the appeal  to  have  the  document  verified.   The  judge  identified
    difficulties with the evidence of Mrs Goitom, and overall the judge had
    given adequate reasons for dismissing the appeal.

15. In reply, Mr Reza submitted if that the Entry Clearance Officer was  in
    doubt about the appellant's identity, the burden rested with the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to verify the photocopied ID document which  she  had
    provided.  Alternatively, the Presenting Officer  should  have  applied
    for an adjournment in order to obtain a document verification report in
    respect of the original ID document provided at the hearing.

Discussion

16. No evidence has been brought forward by way of appeal to show that  the
    Record of Proceedings inherent in the judge's  decision  is  materially
    inaccurate.  So it is not satisfactorily demonstrated  that  the  judge
    failed to engage with a submission that the explanation  for  the  non-
    production of the original was that the appellant  could  not  function
    without it.  In any  event,  this  explanation  is  undermined  by  the
    position that was taken in the grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  There it was said that the appellant had provided a copy  of
    the letter of 14 June 2013 as she had  no  other  document  to  confirm
    either her identity or her status in Ethiopia.  It was then  said  that
    she would provide her original letter in support of her appeal.  If she
    could provide her original letter in support of her appeal,  she  could
    function in Ethiopia without original ID.

17. The procedural difficulty is that the  appellant  did  not  provide  an
    original ID document either with her application or with her grounds of
    appeal.  So when the matter was assessed by an Entry Clearance  Manager
    on 19 March 2014, he justifiably maintained the refusal decision on the
    ground that no new evidence had been presented to address  the  grounds
    of refusal.

18. The burden rests with the appellant to prove her identity.  If she  had
    provided an original with  her  application,  it  could  reasonably  be
    contended that the evidential burden would have shifted  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to  commission  a  document  verification  report  to
    verify its authenticity and reliability.  But as the appellant had only
    provided a poor photocopy, it was reasonable for  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer to refuse the application on that ground.  As submitted by  the
    Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal, there is a clear gap
    between the edge of the  photograph  and  the  rest  of  the  purported
    authentication stamp.  Indeed, not only is there a gap, but the part of
    the stamp  which  appears  in  the  bottom  left  hand  corner  of  the
    photograph appears darker than the remaining part of the stamp which is
    outside the photograph.  In short, it was entirely reasonable  for  the
    Entry Clearance Officer not to be satisfied that he was looking  at  an
    authentically issued document.

19. I accept Mr Reza's submission that the features which I have  discussed
    above are probably a product of the photocopying process, as  indicated
    by an inspection of the original ID document which he showed  me.   But
    the Entry Clearance Officer and the Entry  Clearance  Manager  did  not
    have an original ID document to  compare  against  the  photocopied  ID
    document.

20. As an original ID document was not produced until the hearing,  it  was
    not procedurally unfair for the judge to give it little weight  because
    of its late production which meant that the Entry Clearance Officer had
    not  had  an  opportunity  to  make  local  enquiries  to   check   its
    authenticity and reliability.  In her submissions to the  judge  below,
    the appellant's representative recognised that  if  the  appellant  had
    obtained a document verification report, this would have  assisted  the
    appellant's case.  It cannot  now  be  reasonably  contended  that  the
    Presenting Officer should have sought an adjournment to obtain  a  DVR,
    rather than the  appellant.   Since  the  appellant,  who  was  legally
    represented, was content to proceed on the evidence  as  it  stood  and
    there was no request for an adjournment, it cannot  be  said  that  the
    appellant has been the victim of procedural unfairness.

21. The judge addressed the evidence  of  Mrs  Goitom  in  some  detail  at
    paragraph [5], and returned to the  topic  at  paragraph  [11].   These
    passages disclose adequate reasons for not finding Mrs Goitom to  be  a
    reliable witness.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

