


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01623/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 21 July 2016                     |On: 25 July 2016                     |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 mrs nasrin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Aslam instructed by Malik Law Chambers
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department
   (SSHD). However, for the purposes of this decision, I shall refer to  the
   SSHD as the respondent and Mrs Nasrin as the appellant, reflecting  their
   positions as they were in the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan,  born  on  1  April  1961.  She
   applied for entry clearance to the United  Kingdom  as  a  partner  under
   paragraph  EC-P.1.1  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  immigration  rules.   Her
   application was refused on 18 December 2014 on the grounds that she could
   not meet the financial requirements in paragraph E-ECP.3.3 since she  had
   not provided the specified evidence required under Appendix FM-SE of  the
   immigration rules to demonstrate that her sponsor's gross  annual  income
   met the level required under the rules.


3. There were three main  bases  upon  which  the  respondent  reached  that
   conclusion: firstly that the wage slips produced for the sponsor for  his
   employment at Thai Express Restaurant Ltd did not  cover  the  six  month
   period prior to the application as required  and  that  the  most  recent
   salary slip for August 2014 was a  photocopy  rather  than  an  original;
   secondly that the letter from the sponsor's employer did not contain  all
   the specified information and was dated more  than  28  days  before  the
   application; and thirdly that the wage slips produced for  the  sponsor's
   employment were not reflected  in  the  bank  statements  submitted.  The
   respondent was accordingly not satisfied that the sponsor was employed as
   claimed. The respondent did not consider that the decision was in  breach
   of the appellant's Article 8 rights.

4. The appellant lodged an appeal against that  decision.  Her  appeal  came
   before the First-tier Tribunal on 22 October  2015  and  was  allowed  by
   Judge A W Khan in a decision promulgated on 13 November 2015.  The  judge
   heard from the sponsor. He found that the appellant had not complied with
   the strict evidential requirements as set out under Appendix FM-SE but he
   noted that the requirements had been  met  post-decision  at  the  appeal
   hearing in relation to  the  original  August  2014  wage  slip  and  the
   employer's letter and that the sponsor's annual gross income exceeded the
   threshold  under  the  rules.  The  judge  relied  upon  the   evidential
   flexibility requirements in Appendix FM-SE  D  and  considered  that  the
   respondent could easily have contacted the appellant to  request  further
   information or documents under Appendix FM-SE D(f).  He  considered  that
   evidential flexibility could  and  should  have  been  exercised  in  the
   appellant's favour and he allowed the appeal under the immigration rules.

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  respondent
   on the basis that the judge had erred by going on to exercise  discretion
   and apply  some  form  of  evidential  flexibility  to  post  application
   evidence which he was not entitled to do.

6. Permission to appeal was granted on 25 May 2016.

Appeal hearing and submissions

7. At the hearing Mr Melvin relied on the grounds of appeal.

8. Mr Aslam relied on Appendix FM-SE D(f) in submitting that the  respondent
   ought, under the evidential flexibility provisions, to have requested the
   correct version of the documents from the appellant. Under Appendix FM-SE
   D(b)(1)(aa) and (cc) the respondent ought  to  have  requested  from  the
   appellant the original  August  2014  payslip  which  was  the  only  one
   missing. There was no  requirement  in  the  immigration  rules  for  the
   employer's letter to be dated within 28 days of the application and, with
   regard to the two points upon which it was accepted that the  letter  was
   deficient, the relevant specified information  was  verifiable  from  the
   other  documentary  evidence,  for  the  purposes   of   Appendix   FM-SE
   D(d)(iii)(1). With regard to the third basis of  refusal,  the  sponsor's
   income was not all reflected in his bank statements because he  was  paid
   in cash and only paid part of his earnings into  his  account.  Mr  Aslam
   submitted that Appendix FM-SE A1.1(m)  allowed  for  cash  income  to  be
   counted as income under Appendix FM-SE and Appendix FM-SE  2(c)  did  not
   require that all the salary be paid into the bank. It was sufficient  for
   the appellant to demonstrate only some of the money  going  into  a  bank
   account. Finally, Mr Aslam relied on the decision  in  Ukus  (discretion:
   when reviewable) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 307 in submitting that it  was  open
   to the judge to exercise discretion and allow the appeal  outright  under
   the immigration rules.


Consideration and findings

Error of Law


9. As I advised the parties, the judge had, in my  view,  clearly  erred  in
   law in his decision under the immigration rules and in  relation  to  the
   evidential  flexibility  provisions.   He   had   plainly   treated   the
   requirements of Appendix FM-SE as little more than a technicality and had
   in effect considered the fact that the appellant was  able  to  meet  the
   substantive financial  requirements  in  Appendix  FM  as  sufficient  to
   justify the conclusion he reached.

10. There was no dispute that the appellant could not  meet  the  evidential
   requirements of the immigration rules under Appendix FM-SE on  the  three
   bases relied upon by the respondent and that was accepted by the judge at
   [8] and [9] of his decision. As the  respondent's  grounds  assert,  that
   ought to have been the end of the matter as far as the decision under the
   immigration rules was  concerned  and  the  appeal  ought  to  have  been
   dismissed on that basis. The judge was not entitled to allow  the  appeal
   on the basis of a discretion under the evidential flexibility provisions.
   Any discretion to be exercised in that regard was  the  respondent's.  If
   the judge concluded that the evidential flexibility provisions  ought  to
   have been, but had not been, exercised properly by  the  respondent,  the
   only outcome for the appeal in such circumstances was to allow the appeal
   to the extent that respondent's decision was not in accordance  with  the
   law and to remit the matter to the respondent. It was  not  open  to  the
   judge to allow the appeal outright on that basis.


11.  In  any  event  the  judge  was  wrong  to  find  that  the  evidential
   flexibility provisions in Appendix FM-SE D assisted the appellant in this
   case. Whilst the provisions may have applied if there had been  only  one
   of the various problems with the evidence, such as the  missing  original
   payslip, the fact was that there were several other bases upon which  the
   evidence did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  rules,  including  the
   defective employer's letter and the sponsor's income not being  reflected
   in his bank statements. Accordingly, Appendix FM-SE D(c) applied, so that
   the respondent was not expected to request the  relevant  documents  from
   the appellant to rectify the various omissions.


12.  Furthermore, with regard to the latter defect,  namely  the  fact  that
   the sponsor's salary slips were not reflected  in  the  bank  statements,
   that  was  not  a  matter  falling  under  the   evidential   flexibility
   provisions. I do not accept Mr Aslam's submission that the rules did  not
   require that all of the salary be paid into  the  bank  account.  On  the
   contrary, it is clear that that was precisely  what  was  required  under
   Appendix FM-SE 2(c). The appellant simply could not meet the requirements
   of the immigration rules in that regard and it  was  not  a  defect  that
   could have been rectified by further enquiries or  requests  for  further
   documentation by the respondent. Neither was the respondent  expected  to
   consider that further evidence was available to rectify the defect.


13. Accordingly, the judge erred in law, not only  by  allowing  the  appeal
   outright under the immigration rules  by  exercising  discretion  himself
   under the evidential flexibility provisions in Appendix FM-SE D, but also
   by finding that the evidential  flexibility  provisions  applied  in  the
   appellant's  circumstances.  Since  the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
   requirements of the immigration rules in Appendix FM-SE, and since  there
   had been no error on the respondent's part in relation to the  evidential
   flexibility  provisions,  the  appellant's  appeal  ought  to  have  been
   dismissed. I therefore set aside the judge's decision.


Re-making the Decision

14. Having set aside the appellant's appeal on that basis I  turned  to  the
   grounds of appeal in relation to Article  8  which  Judge  Khan  had  not
   considered, clearly because he had otherwise allowed the appeal under the
   immigration rules.


15. Mr Aslam made submissions in regard to Article 8  and  relied  upon  the
   evidence which was before Judge Khan and which included  statements  from
   the appellant's husband, the sponsor, and their two children, all of whom
   were British citizens and resided together in the UK. He  submitted  that
   although the sponsor had lived in the UK for 25 years his marriage to the
   appellant had subsisted for many years and they had two children together
   who had been living in the UK for the past ten years. It was not possible
   for the appellant to make a fresh application for entry clearance at  the
   moment, because the sponsor had changed his employment and was now  self-
   employed as a taxi driver. It would take at  least  a  year  for  him  to
   accumulate the necessary evidence of tax returns  and  earnings  for  the
   purposes of the immigration rules. The sponsor could not afford  to  keep
   traveling to Pakistan to be with the appellant. The respondent's decision
   was in breach of the appellant's human rights.


16. Mr Melvin submitted that the decision simply maintained the  status  quo
   and family life would continue as previously. There were  no  exceptional
   circumstances.


17. I advised the parties that I would  dismiss  the  appeal  on  Article  8
   grounds. My reasons are as follows.


18. The appellant, at the time of the respondent's decision, could not  meet
   the requirements of the immigration rules. She therefore has to show that
   there was something compelling about her circumstances to justify a grant
   of entry clearance outside the rules. However I do not consider that  she
   has been able to do so. Whilst she and the sponsor had been  married  for
   over 26 years at the date of the decision, since 1988,  the  sponsor  had
   been living in the UK for 24 of those years, having  left  the  appellant
   behind in Pakistan after only two years of marriage. Their children, born
   in 1990 and 1995, and at the time of the decision adults  of  24  and  19
   years of age, also remained in the UK without the appellant from 2006. As
   adults who had lived apart from their mother  for  almost  a  decade,  it
   cannot be said that family life still existed between them, but  even  if
   it did it was the choice of the appellant and sponsor  to  conduct  their
   family life in the manner that they did. Whilst I accept that family life
   existed between the appellant and the sponsor  and  Article  8  was  thus
   engaged,  there  was   clearly   nothing   disproportionate   about   the
   respondent's decision to refuse entry clearance. The weight of the public
   interest is not in the appellant's favour.

19. There was no evidence before the ECO, and neither is there any  evidence
   before me, to show that the sponsor's and appellant's circumstances were,
   or are, such as to justify a departure  from  the  requirement  that  the
   sponsor be able  to  support  the  appellant  financially  to  the  level
   required under the rules. No satisfactory reason has been given as to why
   the appellant could not simply have made a  fresh  application  with  the
   specified evidence after the refusal  of  her  application,  or  why  she
   cannot now do so once the sponsor is settled in his  self-employment  and
   producing sufficient income to support them.


20. Accordingly I find that the  appellant  has  failed  to  show  that  the
   respondent's decision was in any way disproportionate or that it amounted
   to a breach of her right to respect for her family life under  Article  8
   of the ECHR. In re-making the decision, I therefore dismiss the appeal on
   human rights grounds as well as under the immigration rules.

DECISION

21. The making of the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside and
   the SSHD's appeal is allowed. I re-make the  decision  and  substitute  a
   decision dismissing Mrs Nasrin's appeal on all grounds.









                                   Signed



                                    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
                                    25 July 2016
