

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/01537/2014
      OA/01538/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reason Promulgated         |
|On December 17, 2014                  |On December 23, 2014                  |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MS LATIFA HUSSEIN
                       MASTER ZEINAB ABDULHAMED AHMED
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Slater, Counsel, instructed by MA solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellants, born March 7, 1980 and August 24, 2007 respectively are
    citizens of Kenya. The first named appellant submitted  an  application
    on December 4, 2013 for entry clearance as a spouse. The  second  named
    appellant is the  first-named  appellant's  daughter  from  a  previous
    relationship and she applied for admission as her dependant.

 3. The first-named appellant married the  sponsor,  Abdul  Rahman  Mohamed
    Juma, in Mombasa on October 18, 2013 having last seen him on  September
    15, 2013. The marriage is said to be a proxy marriage.  The  respondent
    refused their applications on December 23, 2013.

 4. The respondent refused the first-named appellant's application  because
    she was not satisfied that proxy marriage are legal in  Kenya  and  her
    application was refused under Section EC-P.1.1(d) of Appendix FM of the
    Immigration Rules. The  second-named  appellant's  appeal  was  refused
    because his mother's appeal had been refused and his was refused  under
    Section EC-C.1.1(d) of Appendix FM.

 5. The respondent also refused the applications under article 8 ECHR.

 6. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal under Section  82(1)
    of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  on  January  21,
    2014. The respondent reviewed the grounds of appeal on  April  7,  2014
    but maintained her decision. On September 22, 2014 Judge of  the  First
    Tier Tribunal Pacey (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") heard their
    appeals and in determination promulgated on October 2, 2014 she allowed
    their claims under the Immigration Rules.

 7. The respondent appealed those decisions on October 9,  2014.  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Hodgkinson granted permission to appeal on  the
    grounds the decision under  the  Rules  and  article  8  were  arguably
    flawed.

 8. The matter came before me on the  above  date  and  on  that  date  the
    sponsor was in attendance.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

 9. Mr Duffy submitted that whilst there may be  some  circumstances  where
    proxy marriages are valid this was not one of those occasions. The FtTJ
    had erred by relying on the evidence presented because  the  Mohammedan
    Marriage and Divorce Registration Act did not cover absent bridegrooms.
    The evidence produced did not  demonstrate  that  proxy  marriages  are
    valid. He further submitted the FtTJ's assessment on family and private
    life was  defective  because  she  had  based  her  assessment  on  the
    children's interests only and had not had regard to the fact the  Rules
    were not met.

10. Mr Slater submitted the FtTJ had  had  full  regard  to  the  available
    evidence. She had listened to the respondent's submissions but  decided
    that the evidence adduced by the  appellant  showed  the  marriage  was
    valid. The  FtTJ  pointed  to  the  various  documents  that  she  said
    addressed the respondent's concerns and that there was no error in law.
    As regards the family and private life issue he submitted that the FtTJ
    was entitled to make the findings she did.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

11. The key issue in this appeal is whether the FtTJ was entitled  to  make
    the finding she did on the validity of the marriage. This  finding  has
    to be right otherwise the whole decision is defective. If the  decision
    is correct then there  clearly  would  be  no  error  in  law  and  the
    arguments about article 8 would be immaterial.


12. The background to  the  marriage  is  the  first  named  appellant  was
    previously married and she was divorced  from  her  first  husband,  by
    consent, on December 16, 2008. The second appellant is in  the  custody
    of the first-named appellant. According to the sponsor's declaration he
    also was previously married but his first  marriage  was  dissolved  on
    October 7, 2013. He had  found  the  first-named  appellant  through  a
    website and they first met in July 2012. The sponsor last saw the first-
    named appellant on September 15, 2013. They married on October 18, 2013
    by  proxy  in  Kenya  and  the  marriage  was  registered.  A  marriage
    certificate was provided indicating that the first-named appellant  had
    signed  the  certificate  and  the  two  witnesses  also   signed   the
    certificate, as did the deputy registrar. An agent signed on behalf  of
    the sponsor.

13. The refusal letter questioned the validity of the marriage  because  it
    was a proxy marriage. The respondent raised the issue  of  validity  in
    the refusal letter and submissions  and  the  appellant  addressed  the
    issue by providing various documents including an order of the  Kadhi's
    court dated January 8, 2014, a letter dated January 8,  2014  from  the
    Registrar General, a copy of CAP155 and CAP156.

14. These documents, Mr Slater  submits,  persuaded  the  FtTJ  that  proxy
    marriages are valid.

15. This is not an EEA case but paragraph [64] of Kareem (Proxy  marriages-
    EU Law) [2014] UKUT 24 states,

         "The relevant law of the United Kingdom that would  apply  to  this
         appeal were it not a matter of EU law would be the law  of  England
         and Wales (the  laws  of  marriage  in  the  United  Kingdom  being
         different in its constituent jurisdictions).  The  proper  approach
         under the law of England and Wales has been set out by the Tribunal
         in CB (Validity of marriage: proxy marriage)  Brazil  [2008]  UKAIT
         00080 and there is no need for us to repeat it. In summary, a proxy
         marriage would be regarded as valid under English and Welsh law  if
         it was valid according the law of the place where  it  took  place,
         recognising that the marriage took place where it was celebrated."


16. For a proxy marriage conducted abroad to be valid in the United Kingdom
    a number of conditions have to be met including the fact  the  marriage
    ceremony must be recognised as a form of valid marriage by the  law  of
    the place of  celebration.  In  short,  if  the  country  allows  proxy
    marriages and other legal requirements are met then the United  Kingdom
    would recognise the marriage as well.

17. The FtTJ was satisfied the marriage was legal and nothing submitted  by
    Mr Duffy alters the situation. Despite Mr Duffy's  submissions  he  has
    not produced anything to suggest the FtTJ has erred in  law.  Mr  Duffy
    accepted proxy marriages can take place and the CAP155 point raised  by
    Mr Duffy does not invalidate the marriage itself for the reasons  given
    by the FtTJ.

    DECISION


18. There is no material error in  law  and  the  original  decision  shall
    stand.


19. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me



Signed:     Dated: December 23, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT

I make no alteration to the fee award decision previously take.



Signed:     Dated: December 23, 2014

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

