
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/01307/2013
     OA/01310/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 April 2014                               |On 8 April 2014              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE JEREMY BAKER
               SITTING AS A DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between
                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              mrs mani sara ale
                              master rayan ale
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Respondents:   Mr H Shoeb of Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   Mani Sara Ale is 48 years of age having been born on 23  May  1965  and
    her son Rayan Ale is 19 years of age having been born on 25 April 1995.
     They are both citizens of Nepal.  Mrs Ale is married to Shiram Ale who
    is the father of Rayan.  Shiram Ale was a member of the Gurkha regiment
    of the British Army for a period of twelve years before  his  discharge
    in 1996.  On 25 October 2006 he was granted  a  settlement  visa.   The
    visa was granted outside the Immigration Rules  under  a  discretionary
    policy known as IDI Chapter 15, Section 2A, Annex A.

2.   On 10 September 2012 Mani and Rayan Ale applied for entry clearance  to
    the United Kingdom for the purposes of settlement  as  the  spouse  and
    dependant son respectively of  Shiram  Ale.   Their  applications  were
    refused by the Entry Clearance Officer in a letter  dated  19  November
    2012.  Those decisions were confirmed by the Entry Clearance Manager on
    30 April 2013.  Mani and Rayan Ale appealed against those decisions  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

3.   Those grounds of appeal set out in full the relevant paragraphs of  the
    Immigration Rules, and then appear to concede that neither of the  Ales
    would have been able to succeed under them, as Shiram Ale had not  been
    granted his visa under the Rules.  The grounds properly  refer  to  the
    discretionary policy and the relevant part of Annex A which is in these
    terms:

         "Discretion


         Discretion will normally be exercised  and  settlement  granted  in
         line with the main applicant for spouses, civil partners, unmarried
         and same sex partners and dependant children under the age of 18".


    Thereafter for reasons which are not  altogether  clear,  reference  is
    made to Article 8 and in particular the "historic injustice"  described
    in R (Limbu) v SSHD [2008] EWCA 2261 (Admin).

4.   In a decision promulgated on 19 November 2013, the First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed  their  appeals.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  appeals  with
    permission against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  We have to
    observe that the grounds of appeal lack clarity.  It is noted that  the
    First-tier Tribunal held that the applications  were  properly  refused
    under the Immigration Rules and asserts that the appeals  were  allowed
    under ECHR.  As such, it is submitted that the appeals should only have
    been  allowed  if  the  Ales  were  able   to   establish   exceptional
    circumstances and that none existed in this case.  In particular, there
    was no evidence that Shiram  Ale  intended  to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The grounds conclude with the  request  that  the  appeal  is
    granted so that a fresh decision can be taken in regards to  the  human
    rights decision.

6.   There is no dispute in this case that as Shiram  Ale  was  not  granted
    his visa within the Immigration Rules, neither his wife nor  son  could
    have succeeded in obtaining entry to the UK under the Rules.  This  was
    appreciated by the First-tier  Tribunal  who  thereafter  proceeded  to
    consider the  matter  under  the  Secretary  of  State's  discretionary
    policy.  The First-tier Tribunal examined the material which  had  been
    before the Entry Clearance Officer and concluded that the  findings  of
    both the Entry Clearance Officer and the Entry Clearance Manager,  that
    they were not satisfied that Shiram Ale intended  to  settle  with  his
    family in the United Kingdom, had no rational basis.   We  respectfully
    concur with that finding by the First-tier Tribunal.

7.    The  material  before  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager comprised the witness statement of Mani Ale  and  the
    notes of a telephone interview  with  her.   In  the  former  of  these
    documents she said in terms that it  was  her  husband's  intention  to
    settle with them in the  United  Kingdom  and  confirmed  this  in  her
    interview.  The fact, as the First-tier Tribunal found, that Shiram Ale
    was currently working in Afghanistan was  entirely  understandable,  as
    the family required his continuing financial support.  Indeed we  might
    add that even if he continues to work in Afghanistan, this would not be
    a bar to his settlement in the United Kingdom.  Moreover, the fact that
    Mani Ale did not know why her husband had not settled  earlier  in  the
    United Kingdom, did not  bear  upon  the  credibility  of  his  present
    intention.  It is correct to note that when the First-tier Tribunal was
    considering this issue it did have before it a witness  statement  from
    Shiram Ale, which had  not  been  considered  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer or the Entry Clearance Manager, and confirmed his intention  to
    settle in the United Kingdom.  However, although this no doubt provided
    some reassurance to the First-tier Tribunal, our interpretation of  its
    decision is that it  made  its  finding  that  the  adverse  conclusion
    reached by the Entry Clearance Officer and Entry Clearance Manager  was
    irrational, on the basis of the evidence which had been  considered  by
    them.  As we have already stated we are quite satisfied that the First-
    tier Tribunal was entitled to reach that conclusion.

8.   The First-tier Tribunal then  considered  the  terms  of  discretionary
    policy and noted that there was a clear presumption that the discretion
    should normally be exercised and settlement granted in accordance  with
    the main applicant who in this case was Shiram Ale.  It concluded that:

         "32. .........I do not consider that any valid reason for  refusing
             the applications has been provided.  I do not agree that it is
             not credible that the sponsor  did  not  intend  to  come  and
             settle in the United Kingdom with his family as  that  appears
             to be the only reason that discretion  was  exercised  against
             the appellants.  I find that there was no rational  basis  not
             to grant the applications under the policy.   Discretion  must
             be exercised lawfully and I do not consider that  the  refusal
             can be justified under  the  policy.   It  was  an  irrational
             exercise of discretion.........  It appears  to  me  that  the
             decision was simply wrong.  A proper  exercise  of  discretion
             would have resulted in both  appellants  receiving  the  entry
             clearance they sought.


         33.  I  agree  with  the  appellants  that  the  refusal  to  grant
             settlement to both appellants was not in accordance  with  the
             law and I allow both appeals on that ground."

9.   It is apparent  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  having  reached  this
    conclusion, proceeded in the alternative to consider  the  position  of
    the Ales under Article 8.  We anticipate that it did  so  because  this
    was a matter which had been raised on  behalf  of  the  Ales  in  their
    grounds of appeal and we make no further observation about the  matter,
    save to note that the First-tier Tribunal considered that the  decision
    to refuse settlement to the Ales  was  disproportionate  under  Article
    8(2).

10.  Having found that the First-tier  Tribunal  was  entitled  to  conclude
    that there was no rational basis for doubting Shiram Ale's intention to
    settle in the United Kingdom, we are also of the  opinion  that  having
    regard to the favourable terms in which the guidance upon the  exercise
    of the discretion is expressed,  that  in  the  absence  of  any  other
    adverse factors, of which there were none in this case, the  First-tier
    Tribunal was also entitled to conclude that there would be no  rational
    basis  for  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  not  to  grant  the   Ales'
    applications.  In those circumstances there can be  no  useful  purpose
    served by remitting this  matter  for  re-determination  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.

10.  There is no error of law and accordingly the  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal is confirmed and  this  appeal  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


The Honourable Mr Justice Jeremy Baker
Sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


