
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01766/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 July 2014                               |On 7 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                 junhui lin

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Carrington, Counsel instructed by Martin Burr
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Junhui Lin who sought  entry  clearance  to  join
    his mother who is settled in the UK.  The application was refused on 21
    November 2012 at which time he was aged 15.  His appeal  was  heard  in
    the First-tier Tribunal on 10 February 2014  and  dismissed  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.   Permission  to  appeal
    was granted on all grounds.  Five grounds were put forward although the
    fifth ground is in effect a summary of the previous ones.

2.   Ground 1 is that the judge has failed to  determine  the  case  to  the
    correct standard of proof, failed to  give  sufficient  weight  to  the
    appellant's birth certificate and has given  insufficient  reasons  for
    rejecting that evidence.

3.   Ground 2 is that the judge failed to deal with whether the sponsor  had
    sole responsibility in determining there was a  conflict  of  evidence.
    The Immigration Judge found that this was material and it  was  unclear
    why it was  material  as  to  whether  the  father  had  abandoned  the
    appellant at or before his birth, whether that was material.

4.   Ground 3 says that the judge's findings in relation to the Civil  Court
    judgment are unclear, and ground 4 that the issues around the household
    register  do  not  negate  the  fact  that   the   sponsor   has   sole
    responsibility as of the date of decision which is the main issue to be
    decided.

5.   Judge Devittie sets out paragraph 297  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and
    although the initial decision taken  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    referred to maintenance this was a matter that was conceded  on  review
    by the Entry Clearance Officer so the only issue before the  First-tier
    Tribunal was the issue of sole responsibility.

6.   The judge in paragraph 3 set out the terms of the refusal in  full  and
    then in paragraph 4 set out the appellant's mother's evidence.  In that
    evidence she refers to the production  of  a  notarial  certificate  of
    birth, that the original birth certificate is  retained  when  that  is
    applied for, that she had not intended to  hide  the  identity  of  her
    son's father, she had applied for a replacement birth certificate which
    had been produced which clearly stated  that  she  was  the  biological
    mother and that Lin was the appellant's  father.   She  said  that  the
    father had disappeared and that he had maintained the appellant through
    her family members.  She also gave oral evidence about  the  production
    of the notarial certificate.  She said she had last seen  him  when  he
    was expecting a baby and she had had no contact with him.  She produced
    a document from the police indicating that he was  wanted  for  murder.
    She had applied for custody which she eventually received and  that  it
    was only after she had got the custody order on 17 March 2011 that  she
    was able to change the  appellant's  household  registration  from  the
    father's parents' home to her parents' home.

7.   The judge correctly identifies the tests that he has got  to  consider.
    In paragraph 8 of the judgment he sets out the findings that he reaches
    on the basis of the documentary and oral evidence.  He  refers  to  the
    birth certificate and although in paragraph 8(i) he refers to  a  birth
    certificate it is clear that he is referring to the  replacement  birth
    certificate that has been produced because that is the evidence that he
    has recorded earlier  in  the  determination.   He  sets  out  in  that
    paragraph his concerns about the birth certificate and  refers  to  the
    comprehensive document verification report produced by the  respondent.
    He says that the statement of practice in China has not been challenged
    by the appellant's legal representatives (there is an error -  he  says
    the respondent's legal rep but clearly he means the  appellant's  legal
    representatives) and he makes findings that in the light of the various
    unsatisfactory features regarding the  failure  to  produce  the  birth
    certificate in the first instance, he is not able to attach  weight  to
    the document that has now been presented.  It has to be remembered that
    the document has been presented  as  a  replacement  birth  certificate
    produced from the hospital  and  not  the  original  birth  certificate
    which, according to the DVR, is and was available to the appellant  and
    the sponsor.

8.   The next issue is the evidence  in  connection  with  the  child  being
    abandoned whether before he was born or after he was born.  There is  a
    conflict in evidence in terms of the statement by the appellant's  aunt
    and the Civil Court judgment.  The appellant's representative says that
    this is in fact immaterial whether or not they broke up before the baby
    was born or after.  In terms of sole responsibility per se it may  well
    be irrelevant but it is a  material  matter  because  it  goes  to  the
    credibility of the sponsor's account which is a matter that  the  judge
    has to assess in determining whether there is sole responsibility.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge then  goes  on  in  paragraph  8(iii)  to
    consider the Civil Court judgment.  He has difficulties  giving  weight
    to the translation first of all, he says, because he is not  sure  what
    efforts were made to serve notice of the proceedings and secondly, what
    documentary evidence the court relied on in finding that the father had
    gone missing.  The Civil Court judgment from China does not, so far  as
    I can see, actually say that the father went missing, it just says that
    he did not attend court.  There could be a whole manner of reasons  why
    he does not attend court, it does not mean that he  has  actually  gone
    missing or has not existed in the child's life.

10.  Paragraph 89 in fact refers to the  appellant  having  lived  with  the
    sponsor for a long time and again on page 90 of the document says  that
    the appellant has lived with the claimant for a  long  time.   In  fact
    this is March 2011.  She left the child when he was aged 2.  He is  now
    15.  At that time he was about 11 or 12.  She had made three visits and
    by any stretch of the imagination two years out of a 12 year old's life
    is not a long time.

11.  The judge then in paragraph  8(iv)  looks  at  the  household  register
    which shows that until 2012 the appellant was registered  at  the  same
    address as his father.  The sponsor gives an explanation for that which
    the judge records but the judge also says that that is not supported by
    any independent expert opinion.

12.  These are all matters that the judge was entitled to take into  account
    in deciding whether or not he accepted the appellant's account that she
    now had sole responsibility.  Although since March 2011 the  child  may
    well have been living at her parent's address, that does not of  itself
    mean that she has had either before that or more  to  the  point  since
    then, had sole responsibility.

13.   In  paragraph  9  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judgment  the   judge
    summarises the evidence before him.  The burden of proof  is  upon  the
    appellant.   Although  each  individual  element  that  the  judge  has
    referred to in paragraph 8 is not of itself directly  relevant  to  the
    issue of sole responsibility it is directly relevant in  terms  of  the
    extent to which  the  judge  is  prepared  to  find  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that the sponsor has had  sole  responsibility  for  this
    appellant.

14.  In paragraph 9 the judge sets out the factors in favour of this  child.
     He accepts that the appellant has been brought up by  his  grandmother
    and he accepts that the sponsor has visited him, that  she  contributes
    to his maintenance and that she maintains regular contact with him.  As
    against that, the judge  finds  that  her  evidence  is  tainted  quite
    significantly because of the conflicts in  her  earlier  evidence.   He
    makes the sustainable finding that she has  deliberately  not  produced
    his original birth certificate and, as a result of those issues, in the
    round the judge makes a finding that he does not accept the evidence of
    the sponsor and of the appellant's aunt and grandmother  regarding  the
    father's role  in  the  upbringing.   He  accepts  that  the  aunt  and
    grandmother have played a role and that he  may  have  lived  with  his
    grandmother but he is not satisfied that the evidence shows the sponsor
    has had sole responsibility for the  appellant's  upbringing.   On  the
    basis of the evidence that was produced to the judge that was a finding
    that he was entitled to reach.  It may well  be  that  there  is  other
    evidence available, it may  well  be  that  another  judge  might  have
    reached a different decision but my role is not to  reach  a  different
    decision, it is to find whether or not the judge has erred  in  law  in
    reaching the decision that he has.  On the basis of the evidence before
    the judge the findings that he reached  and  the  manner  in  which  he
    applied those findings to reach his conclusion there is no error of law
    such that the decision should be set aside to  be  remade  so  on  that
    basis I dismiss the appellant's appeal.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

