
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01249/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 October 2014                          |On 15 October 2014         |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                                MR UMAR EJAZ
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mrs H Price of Counsel
           instructed by Mayfair Solicitors
          For the Respondent: Mr T Melvin a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 23 January
      1988. He was given permission to appeal the determination of First-
      Tier Tribunal Judge Fox ("the FTTJ") who dismissed his appeal against
      the respondent's decision of 15 November 2012 to refuse him entry
      clearance for settlement in the United Kingdom as the husband of Mrs
      Iram Pervez ("the sponsor") under the provisions of paragraph 281 of
      the Immigration Rules.


   2. The appeal against the decision of the FTTJ came before me and I found
      that there were errors of law. I set aside the decision  and  directed
      that it should be  remade  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  No  findings  of
      credibility or fact were preserved. My Decision and Directions are set
      out in the Appendix to this determination.


   3.  The appellant's solicitors have provided a 191 page bundle  which,  I
      am told, contains all the material which was before  the  FTTJ  and  a
      number of new witness statements (items 1  and  3  to  8).  I  have  a
      skeleton argument from Mr Melvin.


   4. I heard oral evidence from the sponsor and  her  two  sisters,  Nighat
      Parveez and Hina Parveez. They were examined,  adopted  their  witness
      statements and were cross examined. I asked  some  questions  for  the
      purpose of clarification. Their evidence is set out in  my  record  of
      proceedings. There are witness statements from other relatives who,  I
      am told, were unable to attend.


   5. Mr Melvin relied on the refusal letter and his skeleton  argument.  He
      submitted that much of the evidence in the appellant's bundle was post
      decision but, in reply to my question, he accepted that this could  be
      considered if it fell within DR (ECO: post-decision evidence)  Morocco
      * [2005] UKIAT 00038 principles. He argued that  the  absence  of  any
      witness statement from the appellant or  members  of  his  family  was
      startling. The case was one sided with all the  evidence  coming  from
      the sponsor and her family. The appellant and the sponsor only started
      communicating on the telephone using Lyca Mobile in order  to  provide
      documentary evidence of contact between them. They had met only  twice
      since the wedding and it was surprisingly that the sponsor  would  not
      have visited the appellant  more  often.  If,  as  she  said,  it  was
      expensive to travel to Pakistan they could have met in a third country
      which was cheaper to travel to.


   6. Mr Melvin submitted that the whole process was designed to do no  more
      than enable the appellant, who is the sponsor's cousin, to come to the
      UK to work rather than to live with and be  married  to  her.  Perhaps
      surprisingly in the light of this submission he said that he  took  no
      point on the credibility of the  three  witnesses  except  that  their
      witness statements looked similar and, in the case  of  the  sponsor's
      two sisters, showed no direct contact with the  appellant.  He  argued
      that there was no clear evidence that the  sponsor  always  telephoned
      the appellant on  one  telephone  number.  However,  in  reply  to  my
      question, Mr Melvin accepted that he had not put this to the  sponsor.
      I was asked to dismiss the appeal.


   7. Mrs Price accepted that the burden of proof fell on the  appellant  to
      the standard of the balance of probabilities. The sponsor had provided
      an explanation for the lack of statements from the appellant  and  his
      family. She said that she did not think these  were  needed.  She  had
      explained the length of time it had taken from  their  marriage  until
      now during which  she  had  spent  time  with  the  appellant  on  two
      occasions. Firstly before making the application she needed to find  a
      job which took approximately a year. Then all the material had  to  be
      assembled to support his application. It was expensive to go and visit
      him in Pakistan and it had never crossed anyone's mind that they could
      meet in a third country. She submitted that  the  persistence  of  the
      appellant and the  sponsor  throughout  the  application  and  appeals
      process was strong evidence of their devotion and that they wanted  to
      live together.


   8. As to any suggestion that the appellant was coming here  for  economic
      reasons the evidence was  that  he  had  a  job  and  was  working  in
      Pakistan, in a shoe shop owned  by  his  father.  16  members  of  the
      sponsor's family attended the wedding in  Pakistan  where  there  were
      more than 500 guests.


   9. Mrs Price relied on Goudey  (subsisting  marriage  -  evidence)  Sudan
      [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC) in particular at paragraphs 5, 10  and  14.  I
      was asked to find that the three witnesses were credible and to  apply
      common sense; it would be incredible if so many members of the  family
      travelled to Pakistan to attend a false marriage. I was asked to  find
      that the marriage was genuine and subsisting and to allow the appeal.


  10. I reserved my determination.


  11. The respondent refused the application for one reason only; "therefore
      I am not satisfied that your relationship is subsisting  or  that  you
      intend living permanently with your sponsor in the UK.  Paragraph  281
      (iii)." The respondent did not suggest that the other requirements  of
      paragraph 281 had not been met.


  12. Mr Melvin did not directly challenge the evidence of  the  sponsor  or
      her two sisters or suggest that they were not credible. However, it is
      difficult to see how this can be reconciled with his  submission  that
      the marriage is not genuine  and  was  entered  into  purely  for  the
      purpose of getting the appellant to the UK where he could work without
      being in a subsisting marriage with the sponsor.


  13. Mr Melvin's main submissions  as  to  why  the  relationship  was  not
      subsisting and the appellant and the sponsor did not  intend  to  live
      permanently with each other were the lack of witness  statements  from
      the appellant and any member of his family, the absence of  visits  by
      the  sponsor  to  the  appellant  since  the  marriage,  the  lack  of
      documentary evidence of contact between them and the fact that it  was
      an arranged marriage between cousins.


  14. The sponsor's explanation for the lack of witness statements from  the
      appellant or any member of his family was  simply  that  she  did  not
      think that these were necessary. I find the absence of  any  statement
      from the appellant to be surprising. I must assess  this  factor  with
      the rest of the evidence. There  was  more  than  one  strand  to  the
      sponsor's explanations for the lack of meetings between  her  and  the
      appellant since the wedding which took place on 5 February  2011.  She
      said that she was in Pakistan for three months before the wedding  and
      that they lived  together  for  two  months  after  the  wedding.  She
      returned to the UK on 6 April 2011. She had resigned her job in the UK
      to go to Pakistan because she knew that she would  be  away  for  some
      time and was only able to take a maximum of two  weeks  holiday.  When
      she returned to the UK she started searching for a job.  It  took  her
      approximately a year to find one after which it took her some time  to
      put together the documentary evidence which would be needed to support
      the application. Since the refusal of the application she has  had  to
      devote a large part of her time to her job and  the  appeals  process.
      She seemed genuinely surprised at the  suggestion  that  she  and  the
      appellant could meet in a third country. I find that  this  was  never
      considered and there is no reason why it should have been. The sponsor
      considered that it would be expensive to travel to Pakistan for just a
      short visit which the holiday entitlement in  her  job  would  permit.
      However, she did manage to get time off and lived with  the  appellant
      in Pakistan for approximately 2 months from 14 June 2014. The entry to
      Pakistan stamp in her passport is dated 14  June  2014  and  the  exit
      stamp 4 August 2014.


  15. Mr Melvin did not cross examine  the  sponsor  about  the  documentary
      evidence relating to mainly telephone communications between  her  and
      the appellant. I find her explanation persuasive, that she changed  to
      using Lyca Mobile after she discovered that  documentary  evidence  of
      communication between them would assist  and  that  this  organisation
      provided it which her previous provider did not. I find that the  fact
      that the marriage was arranged between cousins is  not  an  indication
      that it was not a genuine  marriage.  Indeed,  as  arranged  marriages
      between cousins frequently take place it  is  more  likely  to  be  an
      indication that it was a genuine marriage. I  now  have  more  wedding
      photographs  than  were  previously  available  and  the  sponsor  has
      identified many members both of her family and the appellant's family.
      Mr Melvin submitted that there was no evidence of contact between  the
      sponsor's sisters and  the  appellant.  That  is  not  correct.  Their
      evidence was that they had met him both at the wedding and on previous
      family visits. Hina Parveez also said that she sometimes spoke to  the
      appellant during telephone calls between him and the sponsor.


  16. As against these factors which Mr Melvin argues militate  against  the
      existence of a genuine  marriage  I  take  into  account  the  witness
      statement of other members of the sponsor's  family  although  I  give
      these less weight than I might have done had  they  attended  to  give
      evidence and be cross examined. I found the evidence  of  the  sponsor
      and her two sisters to be entirely consistent and  unshaken  in  cross
      examination.


  17. One of the sponsor's sisters is married and lives  elsewhere  but  the
      other lives in the same house as the sponsor and her evidence was that
      she observes the  usually  daily  frequency  with  which  the  sponsor
      communicates with the appellant. From time to time she also speaks  to
      the appellant during phone calls  between  him  and  her  sister.  She
      confirmed that the appellant and  the  sponsor  communicate  by  Skype
      (less  frequently  because  difficulties   can   be   encountered   in
      establishing  contact),  telephone  and  WhatsApp.  Communications  by
      WhatsApp can  be  printed  out  and  some  have  been  produced.  This
      corroborates the evidence of the sponsor as does the evidence  of  the
      other sister although, because she lives elsewhere, she only  observes
      the sponsor communicating with  the  appellant  when  she  visits  the
      family  home  where  the  sponsor  lives.  I  accept   the   sponsor's
      explanation  that  she  only  started  using  Lyca  Mobile  cards  for
      communicating with the appellant after she discovered that these would
      enable her to obtain documentary confirmation of the calls.  Whilst  I
      note that these records show calls to more than one  telephone  number
      and the documentation does not of itself prove that  the  sponsor  has
      been speaking to the appellant I find, in line with  Goudey,  that  it
      does give some corroborative support for her evidence that she  is  in
      regular contact with the appellant  in  this  way.  I  find  that  the
      WhatsApp printouts, although in  a  mixture  of  English  and  another
      language, are couched in terms which support  the  sponsor's  evidence
      that they record communications between her and the  appellant.  There
      are Eid and other special occasion cards passing between the appellant
      and the sponsor. I do not consider that their numbers  are  indicative
      of any lack of affection or commitment where it is clear that the main
      communications are by telephone and WhatsApp.


  18. The three sisters  gave  consistent  evidence  that  approximately  16
      members of the family went to Pakistan for the  sponsor's  wedding  to
      the appellant and that there were more than 500 guests at the wedding.
      All three sisters  confirmed  that  they  had  met  the  appellant  on
      previous family visits to Pakistan and that he was their cousin.


  19. The sponsor said that when she went to Pakistan with her mother before
      the wedding it was to consider marriage to possible choices other than
      just the appellant. Although the marriage was arranged  the  appellant
      was her choice. She was emphatic that their marriage was  genuine  and
      that both of them wanted to live together.  She  was  instrumental  in
      pursuing the application and appeal process  and  had  persisted  with
      this over a lengthy period despite refusals and setbacks.


  20. Weighing all the evidence in the round I find that the sponsor and her
      sisters are credible witnesses. To the  standard  of  the  balance  of
      probabilities I find that  the  appellant  has  established  that  his
      relationship with the sponsor  is  subsisting  and  that  they  intend
      living permanently with each other in  the  UK.  The  requirements  of
      Paragraph 281 (iii) are satisfied and it  is  not  disputed  that  the
      other requirements of paragraph 281 are met.


  21. The FTTJ did not make an anonymity direction. I have not been asked to
      do so and can see no reason to make one.


  22. Having set aside the determination of the FTTJ I remake it  and  allow
      the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules










      .............................................
            Signed                                             Date 8
      October 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden



                                  APPENDIX

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 23 January 1988. He has
      been given permission to appeal the determination of First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Fox ("the FTTJ") who dismissed his appeal against the
      respondent's decision of 15 November 2012 to refuse him entry
      clearance for settlement in the United Kingdom as the husband of his
      wife and sponsor Mrs Iram Pervez under the provisions of paragraph 281
      of the Immigration Rules.


   2. The respondent rejected the application on the basis that the
      relationship was not subsisting and that the appellant did not intend
      to live permanently with the sponsor.


   3. The appellant appealed and the FTTJ heard the appeal on 21 January
      2014. Both parties were represented, the appellant by Mr Rehman who
      appears before me. The FTTJ heard evidence from the sponsor and Mr
      Hussain who is the sponsor's uncle. The FTTJ concluded that there was
      no reliable evidence to demonstrate that the appellant was engaged in
      a genuine and subsisting relationship with the sponsor. The appellant
      had relied on inconclusive evidence of telephone contact. The sponsor
      had said that they had exchanged lots of greeting cards but only two
      had been submitted. There was a lack of evidence of meaningful contact
      between them and corroborative evidence of communications which should
      have been available had not been provided. The evidence of Mr Hussain
      was self-serving. There was no witness statement from the appellant.
      There was no reliable evidence of Article 8 family life. The appeal
      was dismissed under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.


   4. The appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal to the
      Upper Tribunal. In granting permission to appeal the judge indicated
      that the FTTJ appeared to have ignored significant evidence of
      telephone calls and messages. The telephone cards were dismissed as of
      no probative value arguably without giving reasons. The repeated use
      of the word "meaningful" had not been explained. Permission to appeal
      was granted in respect of all grounds.


   5. There is a Rule 24 response from the respondent. The sponsor attended
      the hearing before me, accompanied by an aunt and her sister. I have
      the 82 page bundle which was before the FTTJ and a further bundle of
      new material running to 99 pages which was only submitted on the day
      of the hearing


   6. Mr Rehman relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted that the
      FTTJ's repeated use of the word meaningful was unclear and
      unexplained. The bundle included cards sent by the appellant and the
      sponsor. Her evidence supported by the evidence contained in the
      documents was that one of the ways in which they communicated was
      initially using telephone cards and subsequently through Lyca Mobile.
      My attention was drawn to paragraphs 10 and 12 of Goudey (subsisting
      marriage - evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC). There was ample
      evidence before the FTTJ of a great deal of communication between the
      appellant and the sponsor by various means. The Immigration Rules did
      not require documentary evidence of written communications, texts or
      cards.


   7. In reply to my question, Mr Rehman told me that the appellant and the
      sponsor are first cousins. He is her mother's brother's son. I
      indicated to both representatives that I would welcome submissions on
      what seemed to me the obvious point: I could detect no findings as to
      the credibility of the sponsor or, except possibly in paragraphs 34,
      Mr Hussain.


   8. Mr Rehman asked me to find that the FTTJ had erred in law, to set
      aside the decision and to remake it.


   9. Mr Tufan submitted that the FTTJ's reference to "consistent" in
      paragraph 27 related only to the sponsor's evidence relating to the
      greetings cards. All the Lyca Mobile entries were post decision. He
      submitted that the conclusions were open to the FTTJ on all the
      evidence. In reply to my question, he accepted that there was a lack
      of any clear finding as to the credibility of the sponsor and possibly
      also Mr Hussain.


  10. There was no reply and I reserved my determination.


  11. The summary in Goudey prepared by the author of the determination
      states;


   i) GA ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana * [2006] UKAIT 00046  means that the
      matrimonial relationship must continue at  the  relevant  time  rather
      than just the formality of a marriage, but it does  not  require   the
      production of particular evidence of   mutual  devotion  before  entry
      clearance can be granted.


  ii) Evidence of telephone cards is capable of being corroborative  of  the
      contention of the parties that they communicate by telephone, even  if
      such data cannot confirm the particular number the sponsor was calling
      in the country in question. It is not a requirement that  the  parties
      also write or text each other.


 iii) Where there are no countervailing factors generating suspicion  as  to
      the intentions of the parties, such  evidence  may  be  sufficient  to
      discharge the burden of proof on the claimant.


  12. I find that the FTTJ erred in law. Whilst not raised in the grounds of
      appeal it is obvious from the determination that there are no findings
      of credibility in relation to the evidence of  the  sponsor  or  clear
      findings in relation to the evidence of her uncle Mr Hussain. Both  of
      them gave oral evidence and both of them provided witness  statements.
      If, by "self-serving"  the  FTTJ  meant  that  Mr  Hussain's  evidence
      assisted the appellant and the sponsor then I cannot see that this is,
      on its own, a valid criticism. The conclusion that his evidence was of
      "no probative value" is not explained. I would have thought  that,  if
      believed, his evidence which is said  to  corroborate  the  claims  of
      marital relationship was "meaningful evidence". I  note  that  in  his
      witness statement he said that the appellant and the sponsor  were  in
      regular contact with each other.


  13. The evidence of the sponsor given orally and in her witness  statement
      was of vital importance to the question of  whether  the  relationship
      was subsisting and whether she and  the  appellant  intended  to  live
      permanently with each other.  The  lack  of  any  finding  as  to  her
      credibility or findings of  fact  in  relation  to  her  evidence  are
      serious errors of law.


  14. The determination gives the impression that every effort is being made
      to reject the documentary evidence as to contact between the appellant
      and the sponsor without addressing any of the evidence in the  witness
      statements or given orally. It is apparent from Goudey  that  evidence
      such as telephone cards are capable of corroborating  evidence  as  to
      telephone communication even if, as is often the case  with  telephone
      cards, they do not show the telephone number called. In this case  the
      Lyca Mobile documentation does show many telephone calls to  the  same
      number with a Pakistan prefix. In the circumstances, where  there  was
      no evidence that it was possible to produce  details  of  call  times,
      dates and durations for Skype communications it was not  open  to  the
      FTTJ to  rely  on  what  she  concluded  was  a  lack  of  independent
      corroborative evidence. The  phone  cards  and  Lyca  Mobile  evidence
      should have been considered not in isolation but in  conjunction  with
      the sponsor's evidence. It is not clear what the  FTTJ  meant  by  the
      references to "meaningful contact", "meaningful messages", "meaningful
      detail", "meaningful evidence" or "meaningful ties".


  15. Having found that the FTTJ erred in law  I  set  aside  the  decision.
      Remaking the decision will  involve  hearing  oral  evidence  and,  if
      admitted in evidence, considering the further  evidence  submitted  on
      the day of the hearing in a 99 page  bundle.  This  should  have  been
      submitted earlier. There was no time to rehear the appeal  which  will
      have to be adjourned until another day. I direct that this  should  be
      done in the Upper Tribunal.




   DIRECTIONS


   1) To be listed for first available date after 1 August 2014.


   2) Time estimate - two hours


   3) The hearing is to be with all issues at large.


   4) No findings of fact made by the FTTJ are preserved.


   5) No interpreter required.



   Date:  5 June 2014
   Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden
