
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01057/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 July 2016                              |On 22 July 2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                              SALEHA BEGUM + 2
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)


                                                                 Appellant
                                        -and-

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA



                                 Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Karim, of counsel, instructed by  SG Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. Norton , Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The 1st Appellant, who was born on 29 January 1975, is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh. The 2nd  and  3rd  Appellants  are  her  daughters;  Fatema
    Jannath Rumi, who was born on 20 March 1997, and Saddika Jannath  Asha,
    who was born on 21 April 1998. They are also nationals  of  Bangladesh.



2.   On 5 May 1995, the 1st Appellant married Hafizur  Rahman  and  the  2nd
    and 3rd Appellants  were  subsequently  born  in  Bangladesh.  The  1st
    Appellant's husband and sponsor came to the United Kingdom in 2006 on a
    work permit and he returned to Bangladesh to visit  the  Appellants  in
    December 2009. He was granted indefinite leave to  remain  here  on  25
    March 2011 and visited the  Appellants  in  Bangladesh  in  March/April
    2011.

3.   The sponsor became a naturalised British citizen on 12 April  2012  and
    was issued with a British passport on 21 August 2013.

4.   The Appellants applied for entry clearance  as  his  dependents  on  26
    September 2013 but their applications were refused on 15 December 2013.
    They appealed against this decision on 9 January  2014  and  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Lucas  dismissed  their  appeal  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 30 September 2015.  The Appellants appealed against this
    decision on 19 October 2015 and they were granted  them  permission  to
    appeal by the First-tier Tribunal on 22 March 2016. The Respondent then
    filed a Rule 24 response on 21 April 2016.

Error of Law Hearing

5.   Counsel for the  Appellant  submitted  that  the  burden  of  proof  in
    relation to the 1st Appellant's ability to speak  English  lay  on  the
    Respondent, as he had made an allegation of deception. He  also  sought
    to distinguish the case of SM and Qadir v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department (ETS - Evidence - Burden of Proof)  [2016]  UKUT  00229
    (IAC) on the basis as these cases related  to  ETS  tests  sat  in  the
    United Kingdom.  He also submitted that the evidence relied on was  not
    relevant to the  application  for  entry  clearance  made  by  the  1st
    Appellant .

6.   Counsel for the Appellant also submitted that there was no evidence  of
    the conversation said to have taken place between the 1st Appellant and
    the Entry Clearance Officer and that First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lucas
    had failed to make the necessary findings in relation to credibility in
    relation to the 1st Appellant and her sponsor.  In addition, he  relied
    on Goudey (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan [2012] 00041 (IAC) and
    GA ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana* [2006] UKAIT 00046.

7.   In response the Home Office Presenting  Officer  submitted  that  there
    was sufficient evidence to show that the 1st Appellant had obtained her
    English language certificate by deception. He also submitted  that  the
    Immigration  Rules  had  changed  since  Goudey  was  determined.    In
    addition, he said that, even though First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lucas'
    decision was not the most detailed he  had  seen,  it  dealt  with  the
    salient points. He also relied on the section  in  the  refusal  letter
    which dealt with financial requirements to be fulfilled  as  a  spouse.
    He added that there was no reason to doubt  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer had tried to speak with the 1st Appellant over the telephone.

Error of Law

8.   The findings made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas were brief.

9.   In paragraph 27 of his decision First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lucas  found
    that he was satisfied that the 1st Appellant can or does not  meet  the
    English language requirement set out in E-ECP.4.2.  This was  that  she
    had passed an English language test in  speaking  and  listening  at  a
    minimum of level A1 of the Common European Framework of Reference.  The
    1st Appellant had submitted certificates in speaking and listening  for
    ETS tests taken in Dhaka.  On the speaking test it  is  explained  that
    "most of the time, test takers at Level 6 can answer questions and give
    basic information. However, sometimes their responses are difficult  to
    understand or interpret". The  listening  certificate  notes  that  she
    scored  under  200  and  that  those  doing  so  may  not  consistently
    understand  short  (single  sentence)  descriptions  of  a  photograph.
    Clearly those at A1 level are not proficient in the English language.

10.  The Entry Clearance Officer  asserted  that  when  telephoned  the  1st
    Appellant was unable to answer basic questions regarding her  test  and
    eventually disconnected the call  and  would  not  answer  any  further
    calls. He did not give any details of who made the calls or  when  they
    were made and no records of the calls have been  submitted.  Therefore,
    it remains a bare assertion and First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas  should
    have noted this when coming to any decision about  the  1st  Appellants
    ability to speak English at the required level.

 11.  In  her  witness  statement  the  1st  Appellant  confirmed  that  she
    "participated in TOEIC test on 08.09.2013 at the test centre in  Dhaka,
    Bangladesh".  First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas did not take her evidence
    into account and,  in  the  alternative,  did  not  reach  any  adverse
    findings in relation to her credibility. Instead, he relied on  generic
    evidence provided by the Respondent at the appeal hearing  before  him.
    There was a witness statement by Mona Shah, s senior caseworker at  the
    Home Office.  However, at paragraph 6 of  her  witness  statements  she
    states that "the decision [for] leave to remain  was  refused  in  this
    case  in  light  of  the  cancellation  of  an  English  language  test
    certificate by ETS". The 1st Appellant had not made an application  for
    leave  to  remain.  She  then  relies  on  Rebecca  Collings'   witness
    statement. This is turn deals with the  revelations  made  by  the  BBC
    about Eden  College  and  Universal  Training  College  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

12.  At paragraph 20 of her witness statement, Rebecca Collings  also  noted
    that "testing outside the UK...was allowed to continue" and it was  ETS
    centres in the UK which were suspended.  The witness statement by  John
    Millington also only refers to tests taken within the  United  Kingdom.
    Therefore, there was no basis for the apparent finding in paragraph  15
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas' decision that the  effect  of  Mona
    Shah's "witness statement is that the English test certificate provided
    by the Appellant is invalid because it had "been obtained via  the  use
    of proxy tester".

13.  At paragraph 28 First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas also found that it  was
    "the responsibility of the Appellant to provide evidence to show"  that
    her test was valid. This would only have been the case in the light  of
    SM and Qadir if the Respondent  had discharged  the  evidential  burden
    which he has not done in this case.  As  a  consequence,  I  find  that
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas erred in law when finding that the  1st
    Appellant had not submitted genuine English language certificates.

14.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lucas  also  found  that  the  relationship
    between the 1st Appellant and her sponsor was no longer subsisting.  In
    particular, he submitted in paragraph 33 that  "calling  cards  do  not
    prove a subsisting relationship in themselves". I accept that  this  is
    the case but in Goudey the  Upper  Tribunal  found  that  "evidence  of
    telephone cards is capable of being corroborative of the contention  of
    the parties that they communicate  by  telephone,  even  if  such  data
    cannot confirm the particular number the sponsor  was  calling  in  the
    country in question." The Upper Tribunal also found that "it is  not  a
    requirement  that  the  parties  also  write  or  text   each   other".
    Therefore, some weight should have been given to these cards.

15.  In Goudey the Upper Tribunal also confirmed that  finding  in  GA  that
    although "the matrimonial relationship must continue  at  the  relevant
    time rather than just the formality of marriage.....it does not require
    the production of particular evidence of mutual devotion  before  entry
    clearance can be granted". In the current case the  sponsor's  evidence
    in his witness  statement  was  that  according  to  his  "culture  and
    religion, marriage is a pure bondage between the husband and wife"  and
    that the main reason for him coming to the UK was "to give his family a
    better and happy family life". This is consistent with him coming  here
    on his own on a work permit and working here until he  was  naturalised
    as a British citizen. In this context it was not unreasonable  for  him
    to only pay two visits back to Bangladesh and also for him only  to  be
    able to send remittances once he was more established here.

16.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lucas  made  no   adverse   findings   of
    credibility in relation to the sponsor and, therefore, he  should  have
    taken these cultural factors into account when considering whether  the
    relationship between the 1st  Respondent  and  her  sponsor  was  still
    subsisting.  This approach is consistent with Goudey  where  the  Upper
    Tribunal also found that "where there  are  no  countervailing  factors
    generating suspicion as to the intentions  of  the  parties,  [evidence
    such as calling cards] may be sufficient to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof on the claimant".  As  a  consequence,  I  find  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lucas erred in law in relation to the subsistence of the
    relationship between the 1st Appellant and her sponsor.

17.  Neither the Entry  Clearance  Officer  nor  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lucas reached findings in relation to whether or not the Appellants met
    the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules.

Decision

    1. I allow the Appellants' appeals.
    2. The appeals are remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  de
       novo before a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,  other  than  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Lucas.



Signed                                  Date: 21 July 2016

Nadine Finch

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


