

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
oa/01623/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 March 2016                         |On 20 May 2016                      |
|                                         |                                    |



Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                           LOVELY BEGUM CHOWDHURY
                                             (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And


               THE Secretary of State for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Hafiz, of Counsel, of A1 Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mrs N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fletcher-Hill (hereafter "the Judge"). On 26 August 2015
    the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal against a  decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") dated 19  December  2013  refusing  her
    application for a Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of  Abode  in
    the UK as a child of a deceased person who had become a British citizen
    prior to the Appellant's birth.

2.    There is some history behind this application. It is not necessary  to
    refer to that history in  detail.  It  is  germane  that  this  is  the
    Appellant's third application for a  Certificate  of  Entitlement.  The
    first two applications were refused on 6 May 2009 and 9  February  2010
    respectively. The refusals were the subject of appeals before the First-
    Tier Tribunal before Judge Sharp and then Judge Clayton. Evidently, the
    appeals were dismissed. In this  application  the  Appellant  submitted
    additional evidence not hitherto considered by the ECO  or  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

3.    The appeal first came before  the  Judge  on  10  February  2015.  The
    Tribunal was  unable  to  conclude  the  hearing  and  the  appeal  was
    adjourned  to  31  March  2015.  At  both  hearings  the  parties  were
    represented and, Mr Hafiz - who appears before  me  -  represented  the
    Appellant  below.  It  is  apparent  that  a  considerable  amount   of
    documentary evidence  was  placed  before  the  Judge  [14]-[15].  This
    included inter alia copies of two previous appeal decisions promulgated
    by Judge Sharp and Judge Clayton and the statements of four  witnesses,
    three of  which  had  given  evidence  before  Judge  Sharp.  All  four
    witnesses gave evidence before the Judge. The Judge made  reference  to
    the evidence given by the witnesses who all purported  to  confirm  the
    relationship between the Appellant  and  her  alleged  father  and  the
    submissions of the representatives.

4.     The  Judge  found  that  whilst  DNA  evidence  showed   a   familial
    relationship between the Appellant and her claimed mother  it  was  not
    conclusive. She observed that there was no  evidence  of  the  father's
    presence in Bangladesh at the time of the Appellant's  conception,  and
    that, his passports for the relevant  period  were  not  available  for
    inspection. The Judge found that there were no reliable or satisfactory
    documents or photographs that  linked  the  Appellant  to  her  alleged
    father [68]. The  Judge  attached  little  weight  to  the  documentary
    evidence as many of the documents relied on came  into  existence  many
    decades after the period to which they  relate  [70].  The  Judge  thus
    concluded that the Appellant had failed to prove that she qualified for
    a Certificate of Entitlement. The Judge finally  concluded  that  there
    was no evidence to  substantiate  a  human  rights  claim  contrary  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR. Accordingly she dismissed the appeal.

5.    The Appellant lodged an appeal. Her pleaded case sets out a litany  of
    grounds of error of law and procedure on the part of the Judge.  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Colyer found those  grounds  arguable  and  granted
    permission on 25 January 2016.

6.    Following the grant of permission, the Respondent lodged  a  reply  of
    16 February 2016 pursuant to Rule 24 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008, opposing the appeal on the basis that  there  was
    no error of law and that the grounds amounted to  a  disagreement  with
    the Judge's findings that were otherwise open to her on the evidence.

7.    Directions were issued that there  should  be  a  hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred
    in law such that the decision should be set aside.





Decision on Error of Law

8.    I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved
    the making of errors of law such that it must be set aside.

9.    There are difficulties in the Judge's approach to the issues  in  this
    case, the most significant of which I set out below.

10.   Whilst the Appellant has a history before the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    relation to her claim that she is entitled to a right of abode  as  the
    daughter of her alleged late father,  neither  the  decision  of  Judge
    Sharp or Judge Clayton was determinative of this application or appeal.
    Their respective decisions were promulgated some time hence,  following
    which a considerable amount of further evidence was procured including,
    DNA evidence, dealing with previous shortcomings  in  the  evidence  to
    support this third application. It was incumbent on the Judge to assess
    that evidence and to reach a reasoned  decision.  I  am  satisfied  the
    Judge failed in that duty. The Judge had before  her  the  written  and
    oral testimony  of  four  witnesses.  The  first  three  witnesses  had
    previously given evidence before Judge Sharp in 2010,  but  the  fourth
    witness - the Appellant's paternal first cousin - did not.  Whilst  the
    Judge set out in some detail the evidence given by each witness at [19]-
    [43], she failed to make any findings in respect of it.  Indeed  during
    the course of the Judge's deliberations at [61] to  [75]  there  is  no
    reference to the witness evidence and nor  is  there  any  analysis  or
    findings as to the credibility of that evidence. That  was  a  manifest
    error particularly in respect of the fourth witness who was a  material
    witness of fact and whose evidence had not been the subject of previous
    judicial scrutiny.

11.   There is a further troubling feature of the  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. A significant amount of documentary evidence was  placed
    before the Judge of which her predecessors did not have the benefit  of
    considering. That evidence included numerous  letters  written  by  the
    Appellant's father since 1991 with reference to the  Appellant;  family
    photographs; land documents; remittance receipts; the Appellant's birth
    and school certificates; witness statements of the  Appellant  and  her
    mother and the affidavit evidence of  three  witnesses.  The  following
    passages  of  the  Judge's  decision  illuminate  the  extent  of   her
    consideration of this evidence:

      "62.  The  respondent  was  concerned  as  to  the  lack  of  relevant
    supporting documents. I find that nothing in the  documents  lodged  or
    the evidence relied on indicates on a balance of probabilities that the
    documents are sufficient to establish the appellant's case."

      Next, the Judge stated:

       "68.  .......Furthermore,  there  are  no  reliable  or  satisfactory
    photographs or documents of any kind to link him to the appellant."

      In a later passage the Judge said:

      "70. I find that many of the documents relied on came  into  existence
    many decades after the period to which they relate and I  find  that  I
    can give little weight to this evidence."

      The Judge's omnibus conclusion is expressed at [72] in these terms:

      "I find that there is no credible  relevant  documentary  evidence  to
    support the appellant's claim to  be  eligible  for  a  certificate  of
    entitlement of the right of abode."

12.   These passages are  the  sum  of  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
    documentary evidence. In my judgement they amount to conclusions  about
    the evidence that are not adequately supported by reasons. As Mr  Hafiz
    pointed out, some of the documents were not  dated  decades  after  the
    period to which they related and, that in itself, was not sufficient to
    reject the reliability of all  the  documentary  evidence.  Whilst  the
    Judge is not required to go through each and every item of  documentary
    evidence in a piecemeal fashion, I  am  satisfied  that  Mr  Hafiz  has
    identified a number of documents that were central to the issue  before
    the Judge, which did not receive  the  consideration  required  or  the
    rejection of which was not sufficiently reasoned. I am  satisfied  that
    this is a further fundamental error on the part of the Judge.

13.   Whilst I have taken into account  the  submissions  of  Mrs  Willocks-
    Briscoe in reaching my conclusions, I find that it matters not that the
    Judge had others reasons for reaching her conclusion. A manifest  error
    of law is demonstrated in consequence of the above errors. I have  thus
    not found it necessary to make findings in relation  to  the  remaining
    grounds of appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a  point  of  law.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is set aside. Having considered the submissions of the  parties,  I
find that the appropriate course in this  case  is  for  the  matter  to  be
remitted for hearing de novo by the First-tier Tribunal  by  a  judge  other
than Judge Fletcher-Hill, Judge Sharp and Judge Clayton.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed:                                            Date: 20 May 2016







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral



