
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/01884/2013
                                                               OA/20749/2012
                                                               OA/20750/2012
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 May 2014                                |On 1 July 2014               |
|Prepared 27 May 2014                          |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    S I M
                                    A A Q
                                   A A Qm
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr J Chipperfield, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellants, nationals of Somalia whose stated dates  of  birth  are
    respectively 5 July 1999, 15 March  2004  and  12  May  2005,  appealed
    against the Respondent's decisions in November and  September  2012  to
    refuse entry clearance for the purposes of settlement.   Their  appeals
    came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Scott-Baker (the judge)  who,  on
    20 January 2014, dismissed their appeals under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and Article 8 of the ECHR.  Permission to appeal  their  decisions  was
    given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lambert on 7 April 2014.

2.   From reading the papers  and  hearing  the  submissions  I  was  wholly
    satisfied that the grounds  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  included  an
    extensive claim with reference to both Article 8 of the ECHR and to the
    application of the  spirit of  Section  55  BCIA  2009.   The  evidence
    before the judge made brief, but some reference, to the  statements  of
    the Sponsors, that is Mr M A and Miss H F M A, and their concerns  over
    the current wellbeing of the children.  It is clear  from  the  judge's
    determination and the reasoning that she concluded that the  mother  of
    the Appellants had voluntarily left them behind  in  the  circumstances
    that then arose for as she said in paragraph 38,:

         "... I do not find these decisions amount  to  an  interference  of
         rights protected by Article 8 as it has been  the  parties'  choice
         that the family should be separated whilst the immigration  process
         is undertaken and the decision merely maintains the status quo."

3.   As Mr Whitwell points out  there  is  a  particular  reference  to  the
    second Appellant's diabetic  health  issues  being  considered  by  the
    judge: The judge made reference to the refusal of  entry  clearance  of
    that Appellant not amounting to a violation of rights protected by  the
    ECHR or as she put it "the  doctrine  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    child".

4.   In those circumstances it was said by  the  judge  that  there  was  no
    evidence before  her  to  establish  the  children's  circumstances  in
    Ethiopia had changed.  The difficulty with that reasoning, even  if  it
    was to be accepted, were the references by the Sponsor and her  husband
    concerns about the children's present circumstances  and  the  lack  of
    adequate reasons for rejecting the same.

5.   I find that there is an error of law by the judge in  failing  to  give
    proper reasons which were sufficient and  adequate  for  rejecting  the
    concerns about the well-being of the children.   See  R  (Iran)  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 982 and E and R [2004] QB 1044 CA.

6.   Mr Chipperfield  sought  at  the  outset  of  the  hearing  to  add  an
    additional  ground  of  refusal  by  reference  to  an  error  in   the
    calculations made by the judge on the issue of maintenance  upon  which
    she reached an adverse conclusion, with reference to  paragraph  297(v)
    of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).  It is  also  clear  that
    the judge did not ultimately make any finding on the  adequacy  of  the
    accommodation to be provided for the three child Appellants.

7.     It  is  at  least  arguable  that  there  may  be  an  issue  on  the
    calculations about the maintenance.  However, for the  purposes  of  Mr
    Chipperfield's application I rejected the same because I did  not  find
    the evidence in the light of the  submissions  made,  was  sufficiently
    clear to show that there was an arguable an error of fact made  by  the
    judge; which would amount to an  error  of  law.   For  that  reason  I
    rejected his application to amend the grounds.

8.     However, in the light of the above findings the  Original  Tribunal's
    decision cannot stand and will have to be remade.

9.     Given the President's amended statement on  returning  cases  to  the
    First-tier to be remade this is a good example of the need to do so  by
    reason of fairness  and  the  inconclusive  nature  of  the  case  file
    provided: Which does not include any Record of Proceedings.

10   I have considered whether or not it could be that the Article  8  claim
    with reference to Section 55 claim was in fact not pursued  before  the
    judge but it does not seem to me that in the light of the way the judge
    has dealt with the matter that she regarded those claims as having been
    abandoned. However the relevant date for the Article  8  ECHR  decision
    was the date of the Respondent's decision not as claimed  the  date  of
    hearing by the judge.

11.     The Original Tribunal's decision can not stand.    Accordingly,  the
    appeal must be remitted to the First-tier to be re made  in  accordance
    with the law.

DIRECTIONS
1)   The only issue of which findings were made to stand is in  relation  to
    the relationships of the Appellants to Miss H F M A.
2. All issues under the rules to be decided, particularly  Article  8  ECHR,
    the Rules and as applicable s.55 BCIA 2009.
2)   Time estimate two hours.
3)   Somali interpreter require.
4)   List before any First-tier Tribunal Judge except Mrs Scott-Baker.
5)   In the light of the circumstances of the case it is necessary  for  the
    anonymity order to be continued.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 45(4)(I) OF THE ASYLUM AND  IMMIGRATION
TRIBUNAL (PROCEDURE) RULES 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Respondent and to the  Appellants.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 24 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

