
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01427/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 February 2014                             |On 12 May 2014             |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTS

                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - islamabad
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               muhammad shahid
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Wardle, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shah, Maz Shah Legal


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The respondent, Muhammad Shahid, was born on 1  March  1982  and  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan.  He had appealed against a decision of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to refuse him entry clearance to the  United  Kingdom
    as a spouse.  His application for entry clearance had been made as long
    ago  as  29  May  2012  and,  following  representations  made  by  the
    appellant, the refusal notice of 5 December 2012 had been withdrawn  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer and a fresh refusal notice was issued on  5
    June 2013.  As Judge Grimshaw sitting in the First-tier Tribunal  noted
    at [4] "the present appeal relates to a decision of the respondent  set
    out in the refusal notice of 5 June 2013".  In that notice,  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  had  refused  the  appellant's  application   under
    paragraph  281(iii)  and  paragraph   320(11)   and   (19).    In   her
    determination promulgated on 17 December 2013, Judge  Grimshaw  allowed
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  Her findings in favour of  the
    appellant in respect of paragraph 281 have not been challenged  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer; the  grounds  refer  only  to  paragraph  320.
    Judge Grimshaw rejected the assertion of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    that the appellant should be refused under paragraph 320  finding  that
    the "appellant was not  a  party  to  the  deception  practice  on  the
    immigration authorities". [17]

 2. At the outset of the hearing in the Upper Tribunal, Mr Wardle  told  us
    that,  whilst  he  was  not  instructed  to  withdraw  the  appeal,  he
    considered it correct to bring to  our  attention  the  fact  that  the
    grounds sought to rely upon a version of the  Immigration  Rules  which
    was not in force at the date of the appellant's application  for  entry
    clearance.  He told us that it followed that  Judge  Grimshaw  had  not
    erred in law because  she  had  not,  as  the  grounds  submit,  failed
    properly to apply the provisions of paragraph 320  as  applied  at  the
    date of the appellant's application for entry clearance.

 3. We are grateful to Mr Wardle for his  assistance  and  agree  with  his
    analysis.  We can identify no error of  law  in  the  determination  of
    Judge Grimshaw and this appeal is dismissed accordingly.

DECISION

 4. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 4 March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

