
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01609/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         | Decision & Reasons           |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 30 July 2015                              | On 14 August 2015            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC

                                   Between

                       ABDELMONEM HAGAG SAYED MOHAMAD
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ABU DHABI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Tait, Taits Immigration Service
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought by the appellant in  respect  of  a  decision
    made by the Entry Clearance Officer in Abu Dhabi.  The  appellant,  who
    was born in April 1974, sought leave  to  be  admitted  to  the  United
    Kingdom by virtue of European Community law as a  family  member  of  a
    European Economic Area national, Miss H Wasiak, on the basis that  they
    were in a genuine  and  subsisting  marriage,  and  not  as  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer found, a marriage of convenience.

2.   The appeal from the  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Quinn  and  led  to  a  determination
    promulgated on 12 January 2015. It was the sponsor Miss  H  Wasiak  who
    appeared  for  the  appellant  on  that   occasion   and   made   clear
    representations on his behalf.  The decision of Judge Quinn deals  with
    the evidence that was before him, the relevant Immigration  Rules,  the
    burden and standard of proof, the case advanced by  the  appellant  and
    the content of the refusal letter from the Entry Clearance Officer.  It
    deals fully with the submissions made on behalf of the Entry  Clearance
    Officer and on behalf of  the  appellant  and  then  proceeds  to  make
    findings based upon that evidence.

3.   Mr Tait who appears today for the appellant very helpfully  produced  a
    written skeleton argument in which he developed four  discrete  grounds
    of appeal which he supplemented by oral submissions today. He maintains
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge fell into error by misconstruing  or
    misinterpreting  the  evidence   and   that   so   clear   were   those
    misconstructions or misinterpretations that  the  conclusions  he  drew
    were flawed and so badly flawed as to undermine  the  determination  in
    its totality.

4.   The first error of law relied upon concerns two  separate  elements  of
    post-decision evidence.  These are recordings of Facebook conversations
    between the appellant and the sponsor between 31 January  2014  and  18
    December 2014 and his complaint seems to be that no reference at all is
    made  to  those  Facebook  conversations   in   the   course   of   the
    determination.

5.   The second matter relied on is a series of Skype conversations  between
    similar dates, in this instance 31 January and 18 September 2014.   The
    judge indicates in the course of his determination at paragraph 48 that



         "I noted the conversations on Skype but these  were  not  submitted
         when the applicant for leave was made and  it  was  not  impossible
         that Mr Mohammad had had help in typing messages to Miss Wasiak."

6.   What is said in relation to that comment by the judge is that there  is
    nothing to support the suggestion that the appellant had had assistance
    in typing those messages and the point  made  is  that  the  volume  of
    Facebook and Skype traffic, its intensity and its length, are such that
    they demonstrate a subsisting relationship between  the  appellant  and
    the sponsor.

7.   A point was taken by Mr Kandola on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State
    that  conceivably  some  or  all  of  this  post-decision  evidence  is
    inadmissible.  It is not the purpose  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  its
    reviewing capacity to consider whether decisions on admissibility  were
    rightly or wrongly made. There is no cross-appeal. For whatever  reason
    the evidence was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge and he considered
    it as part of the material which he took into account in coming to  the
    conclusion which he did.

8.   Mr Tait very fairly accepted when I suggested to him  that  matters  of
    weight are entirely for the First-tier Tribunal Judge to determine. The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge came to the view that  little  or  no  weight
    ought  properly  to  attach  to  these  two  aspects  of  post-decision
    evidence.  That was an entirely lawful exercise of his discretion as  a
    fact finding body and there is nothing in the determination which comes
    anywhere near being an error of law.

9.   The second matter pursued by Mr Tait I can deal with more shortly.   It
    too, I think, is post-decision in  its  provenance  but  relates  to  a
    document by a Dr Fekrya A Salana which indicates that Miss  Wasiak  was
    pregnant and miscarried on or about 2  February  2014.   That  document
    emanates from what appears to be a gynaecological  practice  in  Cairo,
    Egypt.

10.  Mr  Tait  indicates  that  the  guidance  issued  for  Entry  Clearance
    Officers said that they should not consider the  following  matters  as
    being marriages or civil partnerships of convenience: where there is  a
    child of the  relationship  or  where  there  is  evidence  to  suggest
    cohabitation.  This guidance was not breached.   It  is  not  suggested
    that there is a child of this relationship and the  fact  of  pregnancy
    and  unfortunate  miscarriage  is  not   probative   of   cohabitation.
    Furthermore, there is nothing in the evidence at all to link  the  fact
    of a pregnancy and miscarriage to the appellant being the father. I  am
    satisfied that there is no error of law under this head.

11.  The third alleged error of law is a finding on the part of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge that the appellant and sponsor had  no  contingency
    plans in place in the event that the appeal against the decision of the
    Entry Clearance Officer did not  succeed.   This  is  to  be  found  in
    paragraphs 63 and 64 of the determination.

         "63. In her evidence Miss Wasiak said that she could  not  live  in
             Egypt for various reasons.  It seemed to me therefore that  if
             the appeal did not succeed there was not an intention to  live
             together.  There were  no contingency plans in place.


         64.      Despite what was said about her  condition  the  fact  was
             that the medical evidence suggested that Miss Wasiak's thyroid
             level was normal and she had lived in Egypt for  most  of  the
             year but her evidence was that she would not go  to  Egypt  to
             live with  her  husband.   This  in  my  view  undermined  the
             credibility  of  the  whole  case.   She  was   socially   and
             culturally integrated in the United Kingdom and was not in  my
             view likely to relocate to Egypt to live with her husband."

12.  The argument as originally advanced by Mr Tait was that the absence  of
    contingency  plans  in  the  view  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    undermined the credibility of the whole case.  I do not  consider  that
    to be  a  fair  reading  of  the  determination.   What  did  undermine
    credibility, in the judge's view, was that on the one hand Miss  Wasiak
    was saying that she was in a subsisting relationship with the appellant
    and yet on the other she was stating that she would not live in  Egypt.
    What the judge was drawing attention to in paragraphs 63 and 64 was the
    mutual inconsistencies in the various ways in  which  Miss  Wasiak  had
    stated the position at various times.

13.  Mr Tait argued that Miss Wasiak had very rarely been in Egypt and  that
    it was wholly wrong of the judge to conclude "she had  lived  in  Egypt
    for most of a year".

14.  I was taken by Mr Tait to a summary of the case and  in  particular  to
    paragraph 25 which records the time that Miss Wasiak had been with  the
    appellant in Egypt.  Dates were given in April, May, July, October, and
    November  2013  running  into  March  2014  which  cumulatively   shows
    something between eight and nine months were spent by  Miss  Wasiak  in
    the company of the appellant whilst in Egypt.

15.  At this point somewhat opportunistically Mr Tait refined his ground  of
    appeal to state that the judge's decision was not flawed  at  all,  and
    that he was absolutely correct to say that Miss  Wasiak  had  lived  in
    Egypt for  most  of  a  year.  He  prayed  that  assertion  in  aid  as
    demonstrating that there was  a  subsisting  relationship  between  the
    appellant and her, otherwise why would she have chosen to spend so much
    time in Egypt.

16.  In the circumstances in which this submission arose,  mindful  that  it
    was never part of any ground of appeal, I do not consider that it is  a
    matter which I should take into consideration this afternoon. Even if I
    were to do so, I am not satisfied that there is anything wrong  in  the
    way in which the judge approached the case.

17.  That then brings me to the final ground of appeal,  namely  the  manner
    in which Miss Wasiak  corresponded  with  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    relation to her first husband. What is said by the First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge appears at paragraph 52  of  the  determination  which  reads  as
    follows:

         "In respect of the  first  marriage  [in  other  words  an  earlier
         relationship of Miss Wasiak] she had made various allegations about
         her husband and had reported the issue to the Home Office.  She was
         invited to respond within a certain time but did not do so  and  in
         fact did not respond for some considerable time. In  my  view  this
         casts some doubt on her allegations about her  first  husband.   If
         her concerns were genuine I thought it was  more  likely  that  she
         would have reacted and resolved the problem before entering into  a
         second marriage."

18.  Mr Tait has taken me through a chronology of correspondence and I  need
    not read into this determination the dates and content of the  letters.
    What he says is that Miss Wasiak wrote to the Secretary  of  State  and
    sought to bring to her  attention  issues  arising  out  of  the  first
    marriage, in particular that she  had  perceived  herself  as  being  a
    victim, used by her former husband in order to obtain residence in  the
    United Kingdom.

20.  The point made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  in  that  Miss  Wasiak
    did respond and resolve the matter relate to a time after matters  with
    her first husband had concluded, and it is said by Mr Tait that it  was
    no longer incumbent upon her to engage with the Secretary of State.

21.  I am perfectly satisfied that this  was  merely  one  of  a  number  of
    matters which the judge took into account  and  that  he  gave  it  the
    weight that it properly deserved in his consideration of  the  entirety
    of the evidence.  There is nothing to suggest that it was  in  any  way
    determinative of his  decision.   Nor  do  I  consider  the  fact  that
    paragraph 52 is a shorthand or abbreviated version of what  took  place
    between the Home Office and Miss Wasiak suggests that the judge  either
    misinformed himself or misinterpreted such evidence as there  may  have
    been.  I am equally satisfied that this fourth alleged error of law  is
    not made out and that there is nothing to indicate that  there  was  an
    error of law on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

22.  I should add for the sake of completeness that if any  or  all  of  the
    points advanced by Mr Tait this afternoon did have any merit  as  being
    arguable errors of law I do not consider that  they  were  in  any  way
    material.

23.  This determination is in my view exemplary of the  full,  balanced  and
    reasoned determinations which one  expects  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge and cannot be  criticised  in  any  of  the  ways  advanced  this
    afternoon on behalf of the appellant.

24.  For each and all of those reasons this appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed   Mark Hill                               Date     6 August 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


