
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/01648/2013
                                                               OA/01640/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 15 April 2015                     |On 6 May 2015                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                AWAKAS GURUNG
                                PUNAM GURUNG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Gareth Duncan counsel instructed by N C Brothers &
Co
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge M Davies promulgated on 8 November 2013 which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

 3. The Appellants are a brother and sister was born on 16 August 1990  and
    26 October 1985. They were therefore aged 23 and 27 respectively at the
    time of the Judge's decision. They are nationals of Nepal.

 4. The Appellant's father was issued with a settlement  visa  on  25  June
    2009 outside of the Immigration Rules pursuant to Annex A of section 2A
    of Chapter 15 of the Immigration Directorate Instructions.  The  policy
    provides that any Ghurkha with more than four  years  service  who  had
    been discharged from the Brigade of Ghurkhas before  the  1st  of  July
    1997 will be  eligible  for  settlement  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
    Appellants father met these criteria.

 5. On 10 October 2012 the Appellants together with  their  mother  applied
    for entry clearance as Ghurkha dependents.

 6. On 6 December 2012  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellants
    applications. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:

    (a)    The Appellants could not succeed  under  Appendix  FM  as  adult
         dependent  relatives  as  they  did  not   meet   the   suitability
         requirements  as  the  second  Appellant  had  submitted  a   false
         document.

    (b)    They did not meet the  eligibility  requirements  of  the  adult
         dependent route as they did not have special personal care needs.

    (c)    The discretionary adult dependent policy in relation to Ghurkhas
         was considered and  no  exceptional  circumstances  were  found  to
         warrant an exercise of discretion in their favour.

    (d)    The decision did not engage Article 8 but even  if  it  did  the
         decision was proportionate.

The Judge's Decision

 7. The Appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal together with  their
    mother. First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the
    appeals of the two Appellant adult children  against  the  Respondent's
    decision. The Judge found :

      a) The Judge found that the sponsor was a broadly credible witness and
         set out in paragraphs 22 and 23 Mr Gurungs history.

      b) He found that the Appellant's  were  financially  dependent  on  Mr
         Gurung and there was no one else in Nepal on whom they could depend
         financially although they were able to live  with  their  aunt  and
         uncle in a property they owned.

      c) The third Appellant submitted  a  false  document  in  relation  to
         failing her examinations because  she  was  ashamed  that  she  had
         failed and her mother and brother did not know she had done this.

      d) The appeal in respect of the Appellant's mother was allowed as  not
         in  accordance  with  the  law  as  she  met  the  terms   of   the
         discretionary policy and was in breach of Article 8.

      e) The Appellants could not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
         Rules as they did not meet the  requirements  for  adult  dependent
         relatives.

      f) Under the Ghurkha  policy  they  do  not  have  an  entitlement  or
         expectation that they would be granted entry clearance because they
         were both over 18 unless there were exceptional  circumstances  and
         the judge found none.

      g) In relation to Article 8 the Judge was referred to  Ghising  [2012]
         UKUT 00160 and R  (on  the  application  of  Sharmilla  Gurung  and
         others) v SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 8.

      h) The Judge accepted that family life existed between the Appellant s
         and the sponsor Mr Gurung and their mother. He accepted that it was
         more than emotional ties given the degree of  financial  dependency
         in relation to theri continuing education. He accepted the decision
         would interfere with their family life such as to engage article 8.
         He found that there was a legitimate aim.

      i) In considering whether the decision  was  proportionate  (paragraph
         34) he weighed  into  the  decision  the  importance  of  effective
         immigration control. He took into account that the  Ghurkha  policy
         addressed the historic injustice but set out  that  discretion  was
         not to be exercised unless there  were  exceptional  circumstances.
         The Appellants were adults who  had  spent  a  considerable  period
         living apart from their father and would continue to be financially
         supported so that they  could  complete  their  degree  courses  in
         Nepal. He found that the decision was proportionate.

8. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that:

    (a)    The Judges assessment of proportionality  under  Article  8  was
         flawed as he appeared to find that  there  had  to  be  exceptional
         circumstances.

    (b)    He failed to take into account the principles in the case law to
         which  he  was  referred  in  relation   to   the   assessment   of
         proportionality  in  applications   made   by   Ghurkha   dependent
         relatives.

    (c)    The Judge failed to  give  sufficient  weight  to  the  historic
         injustice.

9. On 18 December 2013 First tier Tribunal Judge Cheales gave permission  to
   appeal stating :

         "It is arguable that in his  considerations  under  Article  8  and
         proportionality considerations, the judge focused his attention  on
         exceptional circumstances and failed to give enough weight to other
         factors, such as historic injustice."

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr  Duncan  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants that :

      a) There was a clear error of law in the proportionality assessment.

      b) The Judge applied a test of exceptionality while  it  was  relevant
         only in relation to the discretionary policy.

      c) The case of Gurung was placed before the  Judge  and  the  case  of
         Ghising sheds light on the principles set out in the earlier case.

      d) The Judge found that family life existed between  the  parties  and
         therefore the  case  came  within  the  circumstances  set  out  in
         headnote 4 of Ghising: there were no other countervailing  features
         on the Respondent's side other than the maintenance of  immigration
         control.

      e) The only other factor the Judge had to consider was  whether  there
         had been an intention to settle and taking into account all of  the
         evidence before him in the witness statements.

      f) The clear outcome  should  have  been  allowing  the  appeal  under
         Article 8.

      g) Headnote 5 of Ghising makes clear that being  a  Ghurkha  dependent
         was not a trump card where there was an adverse immigration history
         or criminal behaviour. There was no such evidence  in  relation  to
         the First Appellant and in relation to the second  Appellant  while
         she had produced a false document the Judge placed no weight on  it
         in the proportionality balance.

11. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Broklesby-Weller submitted that :

      a) The Judge had applied the wrong test in relation to proportionality
         in that in referring to the absence of exceptional circumstances in
         his proportionality exercise he was reiterating a factor  that  was
         relevant only to the discretionary policy.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal  made  material  errors  of   law   in   its   assessment   of
    proportionality under Article 8.

13. In May 2009, the Secretary of State announced  that  any  Ghurkha  with
    more than 4 years service who had been discharged from the  Brigade  of
    Ghurkhas before 1 July 1997 would be eligible for settlement in the UK,
    under the terms of a discretionary policy set out in the  IDI,  Chapter
    15. Section 2A, Annex A.  The policy permitted  the  spouse  and  minor
    children of eligible Ghurkhas to  settle  in  the  UK  also,  but  only
    allowed adult  children  to  settle  on  a  discretionary  basis  where
    exceptional circumstances were found.

14. This was an application for entry clearance by the two adult  dependent
    children of a veteran of the Brigade of Ghurkhas, Mr Gurung.

15. It is not in dispute that the Appellants' circumstances  did  not  come
    within the provisions of the Immigration  Rules  or  the  discretionary
    policy but it was accepted that the Judge was nevertheless entitled  to
    consider whether the decision engaged Article 8 of ECHR.

16. The challenge in this case is that the judge had imported that test  of
    exceptionality into the proportionality test that he carried out  under
    Article 8. This is based on the fact that  at  paragraph  5  the  Judge
    stated under the heading 'Issues on appeal' that  he  had  to  consider
    whether the Appellant could benefit from the policy or Article 8:

         "In respect of the second and  third  Appellants  this  essentially
         requires a finding as to whether  exceptional  circumstances  exist
         justifying the exercise of discretion and rendering any  refusal  a
         disproportionate interference with family life." (my bold)

17. I have also considered under the findings at  paragraph  34  where  the
    Judge in his assessment of proportionality opens with the fact that  he
    takes into account the weight to be given for the need for  immigration
    control and taking into account the 'scheme for remedying the  historic
    injustice':

         "The scheme is that adult dependent children would not usually join
         their parents if they are granted settled status unless  there  are
         exceptional circumstances. I have found there  are  no  exceptional
         circumstances."

18. This apparent conflation  of  the  requirements  of  the  discretionary
    policy with the test to be applied under Article 8 is thus repeated  in
    two sections of the decision. This error  I  consider  to  be  material
    since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise the outcome  could  have
    been different.

19. I am also satisfied that the Judge has failed to properly  engage  with
    the caselaw he was provided with and  its  guidance.  While  Mr  Duncan
    suggested that the Judge did not have Ghising before  him  in  fact  at
    paragraph 32 it is plain that the case was before him. Given his  other
    findings about the factual background which underpin the appeal and the
    guidance in Ghising I am satisfied that the failure  of  the  Judge  to
    identify any  countervailing  factors  other  than  the  importance  of
    immigration control which rendered the  decision  proportionate  was  a
    material error of law.

20. I therefore found that errors of law have been established in  relation
    to the Article 8 assessment of proportionality and that  it  should  be
    set aside to be remade.

21. Both Mr Duncan and Ms Brockelsby-Weller were content for me  to  remake
    the decision without further submissions in the event that I found  the
    error of law as I indicated that I did not propose  to  interfere  with
    the factual findings made by the Judge.

Remaking the decision.

22. The factual background that underpins  the  proportionality  assessment
    under Article 8 outside the Rules  is  undisputed  and  indeed  it  was
    conceded that the only issue  for  me  to  determine  was  whether  the
    decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  against  this  background   was
    proportionate.

23. The Appellants are the adult children of  a  15  year  veteran  of  the
    Ghurkhas Brigade.  The  Appellants  were  the  children  of  his  third
    marriage. Following his discharge on the completion of  his  engagement
    in 1978 the Appellants father returned to Nepal and remained until 1989
    and he worked for a period in Saudi Arabia returning to Nepal  for  two
    years in 1995 and then working in Hong Kong.  The Appellants lived with
    their Aunt in Nepal during their  parents  work  abroad  at  all  times
    financially supported by  him.  It  is  accepted  that  the  Appellants
    parents returned on a regular basis to  Nepal  and  they  visited  Hong
    Kong.

24. The Appellants father applied for  settlement  in  the  United  Kingdom
    after the introduction of the  Home  Office  Ghurkhas  Policy  and  his
    application was granted on 25 June 2009. He works in the United Kingdom
    and is in receipt of a pension.

25. It is accepted that the  relationship  of  the  Appellants  with  their
    parents goes beyond the normal ties and  that  they  have  always  been
    financially dependent on him  and  they  are  presently  at  University
    funded by him.

26. I accept that had the Appellants had the opportunity to settle  in  the
    United Kingdom with their father when they were  children,  which  they
    would have but for the historic injustice of the unequal  treatment  of
    Ghurkha soldiers, they would have done  so  and  that  desire  for  the
    family to be reunited persists to this day.

27. I take into account that now not only is the Appellants father  settled
    in the United Kingdom but their mother has also been granted the  right
    to settle.

28. I have considered whether it would be  reasonable  for  the  Appellants
    father and his wife to return to live with them in Nepal. I  take  into
    account that given the valuable  service  that  the  Appellants  father
    rendered to the United Kingdom the Respondent has recognised his  right
    and that of his wife to settle in the United Kingdom.   I  accept  that
    the Appellants father sought to settle in the United Kingdom as soon as
    such a possibility became available to him. At the time of  application
    the Appellants were attending University in Nepal and had accommodation
    in that they were living with their aunt. Since I heard this case there
    has been a catastrophic  earthquake  in  Nepal  so  if  anything  their
    circumstances may well be far worse and because of the general  country
    conditions at the time  of  writing  this  decision  looking  at  their
    circumstances in the round as of today it would not  be  reasonable  to
    suggest they could enjoy family life by all relocating to Nepal.

29. I take into account the requirements  of  s  117  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 in relation  to  the  public  interest.
    Therefore I take into account that immigration control is in the public
    interest. I take into account that they both have some English although
    the exact nature of their skill is unclear from the evidence. They  are
    financially supported by their father who works and is in receipt of  a
    pension.

30. In assessing the final question that I must ask in  applying  Razgar  I
    have considered the two authorities provided to me Ghising  and  Gurung
    in particular the headnotes from Ghising:

         "(4) Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,
         but for the historic wrong, the Appellant would have  been  settled
         in the UK long ago, this will ordinarily determine the  outcome  of
         the Article 8 proportionality assessment in an Appellant's  favour,
         where the matters relied  on  by  the  Secretary  of  State/  entry
         clearance  officer  consist  solely  of  the  public  interest   in
         maintaining a firm immigration policy.

         (5) It can therefore be seen that Appellants in  Gurkha  (and  BOC)
         cases will not necessarily succeed, even though  (i)  their  family
         life engages Article 8(1); and (ii) the evidence shows  they  would
         have come to the United Kingdom with  their  father,  but  for  the
         injustice that prevented the latter from settling here earlier.  If
         the Respondent can point to  matters  over  and  above  the  public
         interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy, which  argue  in
         favour of removal or the refusal of leave to enter,  these  matters
         must be given appropriate weight in the balance in the Respondent's
         favour. Thus, a bad immigration history and/or  criminal  behaviour
         may still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful factors bearing on
         the Appellant's side of the balance."

31. I have considered whether there is any other factor on the Respondent's
    side  of  the  balancing  exercise  other  than  the  requirement   for
    immigration control.  Certainly  none  was  identified  either  in  the
    refusal letter or in  submissions  before  me.  There  was  no  adverse
    immigration history nor was there any criminal behaviour by either  the
    Appellants or  indeed  their  parents.  The  only  issue  that  perhaps
    reflects poorly on the second Appellant is the fact that she  submitted
    false documents which included a School leaving Certificate examination
    mark sheet and Higher Education Board certificate suggesting  that  she
    had passed those examinations. These were false and the Judge who heard
    evidence in relation to this issue from her parents concluded that  she
    was too ashamed to tell her parents of this. I take this  into  account
    but I do not consider that the weight to be attached to this is such as
    to displace the view that in the circumstances  of  this  case  refusal
    would be disproportionate.

CONCLUSION

32. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that the
    Judge's determination should not stand in relation to Article 8.

Decision

33. There was an error on a point of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal with regard to Article 8 such that the decision is set aside

34. I remake the appeal.

35. I allow the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.



Signed      Date 5.5.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
