
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/01284/2014
                                                               OA/01294/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |         Decision & Reasons       |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 10th September 2015                   |         On 22nd September 2015   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          miss Yashoda Burja Thapa
                          miss Sarmila Burja Thapa
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lawrence Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr David Ball, Counsel instructed by How & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT


 1. The Appellant before me was the Respondent in the  First-tier  and  the
    Respondents were the Appellants in the First-tier but for the  sake  of
    convenience I shall refer to the parties as they were before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 2. The Respondent appeals with permission a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mrs R J N B Morris, who in  a  promulgation  dated  19th
    February 2015 allowed the Appellants' appeal  against  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance by an Entry Clearance Officer dated 12th December 2013.

 3. The judge found that the family life enjoyed between  these  Appellants
    and their sponsoring discharged Gurkha  father  and  their  mother  and
    younger siblings met the threshold for engaging Article 8.   The  judge
    further found that there being no issue as to domestic  law  concerning
    the refusals it was right to move to the issue of  proportionality  and
    decided in that context that the decisions were not proportionate.  The
    judge found that  the  fact  of  the  historic  wrong  meant  that  the
    decisions could not be maintained.

 4. The challenge to that decision is directed in the submissions before me
    to the finding that the family life of  the  Appellants  and  their  UK
    relatives is or was as at the date of decision in December  2013  of  a
    character and quality to engage Article 8 and in  the  context  of  the
    assessment of proportionality a family life which should  attract  very
    much weight.

 5. The judge found, and this is set out  at  paragraph  15,  that  because
    these Appellants had always lived in the family home with both  parents
    other than when the father was working abroad that there  was  a  close
    family unit and in that context that the Appellants and the mother  and
    sister had maintained that close family unit up until  the  point  when
    the mother and sister joined the father in the United Kingdom a  little
    over a year before their own applications were made.

 6. The judge addressed the issue as to whether or not the children or  the
    Appellants in this case had actually established an independent  family
    life and found that neither of them had.  The judge took  into  account
    the significant evidence of frequent telephone or other contact through
    other modern means of communication and in particular the  difficulties
    in maintaining that position and was satisfied that the parties were in
    very real contact.

 7. The judge took into account the fact that both of the  Appellants  were
    in full-time  studies  and  both  financially  reliant  upon  their  UK
    relatives for fees, maintenance and accommodation.  The judge also took
    into account cultural considerations in connection with the  fact  that
    neither of these Appellants are married.  The judge was  satisfied  and
    has given cogent reasons as to why he found that  the  Appellants  were
    part of the UK Sponsor's family unit.

 8. In terms of the severity of interference, the second limb of  the  test
    of engagement  with  Article  8,  the  judge  was  satisfied  that  the
    interference arose not because of the mother and sister's  decision  to
    join the father in the United Kingdom  but  from  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision.  The Respondent takes some issue with that  in  the
    grounds but that was not a position that was maintained before  me  and
    on its face I find that the judge has given adequate reasons as to  why
    that interference arose from the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  position
    rather than from the Appellants'.

 9. The judge concluded that had the Sponsor been able  to  settle  in  the
    United Kingdom when he retired from the British Army he would have done
    so and that is set out at 17(ii).  The inference of course is  that  by
    coming to the United Kingdom he was merely obtaining the reward that he
    was entitled to as with his wife and minor  daughter  who  subsequently
    joined him for the service that he had provided.

10. In terms of the assessment of proportionality the judge has taken  into
    account the guidance in Ghising to the point that  where  the  argument
    for exclusion is dependent purely on issues of immigration control that
    is a matter which is going to be outweighed in  an  Appellant's  favour
    where there has been a historic wrong, and in that regard the  historic
    wrong in this case arises from the failure to provide an opportunity to
    the Gurkha Sponsor  to  settle  in  1995  at  the  point  when  he  was
    discharged from the army, and being an opportunity he would have taken.
    In terms of the causal nexus of that wrong to the Appellants'  case  it
    is evident from  the  chronology  that  at  that  time  both  of  these
    Appellants would have been minors  and  would  have  been  entitled  to
    accompany the Sponsor in the  event  that  he  had  been  afforded  the
    opportunity that he deserved at that time.

11. The judge finally concluded that the issues in respect of accommodation
    and maintenance raised in the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  on
    refusal had been resolved in favour of the Appellant and  there  is  no
    issue before me as to that conclusion.

Notice of Decision

Accordingly, for all the reasons that I have set out above it  follows  that
I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  involve  any
material error of law and the decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge



