
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01214/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 July 2016                         |On 12 July 2016                      |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                        master obinna nzeribe bokolo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFO

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Kanu, instructed by League for Human Rights
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant was born in May 1997 and  appeals  the  decision  by  the
    respondent to refuse his application for  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis  of  family  reunion  on  1  December  2014.   The
    sponsor, Mrs I Bokolo was granted indefinite leave to remain  in  2011.
    The sponsor was born on 16 May 1985 and  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    noted that she would have been only 12  when  she  gave  birth  to  the
    appellant and the matter raised concerns about  whether  the  appellant
    was related to her as claimed.   The  respondent  then  considered  the
    issue of sole responsibility.  The Entry Clearance Officer stated:

         "Sole responsibility does not only amount to financial support  but
         also to matters of emotional support and an abiding interest  in  a
         child's upbringing,  welfare  and  wellbeing  over  the  period  of
         separation.  You have not provided any evidence that  your  sponsor
         supports you financially or  has  provided  any  emotional  support
         during your upbringing.  The letter provided with your  application
         states that your sponsor communicates regularly with  you  via  the
         telephone, WhatsApp and viber.  No evidence has  been  provided  to
         confirm contact by any of these methods.   Although  I  note  phone
         bills in your sponsor's name have been provided, no itemised  phone
         records have been provided to demonstrate actual contact with  your
         sponsor....".


2.   The respondent did not consider that the  evidence  provided  confirmed
    that the sponsor  had  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  appellant's
    upbringing and refused the application under paragraph 297(i)(e).

3.   The respondent also found that the  appellant  had  resided  separately
    from the sponsor in Nigeria since 2000.  The appellant  had  then  been
    passed from one relative to another until the sponsor was reunited with
    the appellant when she returned to Nigeria in 2012.  The appellant  was
    then placed in the care of her cousin who  suddenly  died  in  February
    2013.  The Entry Clearance Officer observed:

         "It is stated that you  currently  reside  with  a  friend  of  the
         sponsor, however that the friend is not capable  of  looking  after
         you.  Furthermore you have not confirmed the  whereabouts  of  your
         father.  No evidence has been provided to confirm your current care
         arrangement or your  care  arrangements  since  your  birth,  I  am
         therefore not satisfied that the evidence provided  indicates  your
         current arrangements cannot continue.  I am therefore not satisfied
         that  there  are   serious   and   compelling   family   or   other
         considerations which  make  your  exclusion  undesirable  and  that
         suitable arrangements have been made for your care."


4.   The application was accordingly refused under paragraph 297(i)(f).   In
    relation to Article 8 if a family life did exist there  was  no  reason
    why the sponsor could not travel to Nigeria to care for the  appellant.
    The decision was proportionate and justified by the need to maintain an
    effective immigration and border control.

5.   The decision was reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager who noted  that
    no new, original or independent documentation had been  provided.   The
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer was maintained.

6.   The appellant appealed the decision and his appeal came before a First-
    tier Judge on 2 October 2015.  The judge noted that the case  had  been
    decided under paragraph 297 of the Rules which was  a  harder  test  to
    satisfy than the Refugee Family Reunion route.

7.   The judge summarised the history and reasons for refusal and  confirmed
    that he had taken into account both  the  appellant's  bundle  and  the
    respondent's bundle.

8.   Having correctly addressed himself  on  the  law  and  the  burden  and
    standard of proof and  having  reminded  himself  that  he  could  only
    consider the circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision  to
    refuse entry clearance, he set out the Rules and referred to  the  case
    of TD (paragraph 297: "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049.
    The judge summarised the evidence before him as follows:

         "17. The DNA report was supplied to  the  sponsor  on  23  February
             2015.  It shows a 99.9998% chance of maternity  in  connection
             with Ifeanyichukwu Kyle Bokolo and Bokolo Obinna Nzeribe.  She
             is certainly his mother, asserts the representative.


         18.  The sponsor has produced evidence that she had been working as
             a night time receptionist  in  a  hotel  in  London  since  19
             December 2011.  She has  shown  HMRC  papers  recognising  her
             income is �17,214 per annum.  She can afford  to  support  the
             Appellant.  A tenancy agreement has been produced showing that
             she is a tenant.


         19.  There are receipts showing school fees paid for the college at
             Enugu.  These are  expressed  in  the  terms:  'received  from
             Bokolo Obinna N'.


         20.  The sponsor has signed and adopted the  witness  statement  as
             her evidence in chief.


         21.  The Appellant gave a detailed and distressing account  of  the
             circumstances leading to the  Appellant's  birth.   It  was  a
             stranger who followed  her  up  an  alleyway  one  night,  she
             explained.  Her mother took her to hospital after she  started
             being sick.  The hospital confirmed she was pregnant.


         22.  She did not know Nzeribe, the name of the father as  completed
             on the birth certificate by the lady who took her to hospital.


         23.  She no longer has family residing in Nigeria, other  than  her
             son  the  Appellant.   She  said  she  had  always  wanted  to
             reconnect with her son.  Her  son  went  to  live  with  a  Mr
             Johnson and now he is with her friend.


         24.  She is working and  has  a  two  bedroom  property  where  the
             Appellant would live.


         25.  The school receipts are given to her son.


         26.  She was asked why there are no money transfers in the  bundle.
             She sorted out a large pile of papers and handed them to  Miss
             Ibe.  Miss Ibe looked at them all and declared there were none
             there.


         27.  The sponsor said she usually speaks to her son every day using
             WhatsApp.  Miss Ibe commented that there was no proof of those
             conversations in the bundle.  The sponsor replied that she did
             not know how to print off WhatsApp messages."


     Miss Ibe was the Presenting Officer.   The  appellant  was  represented
    before the judge by Mr Kanu, who represents the appellant before me.

9.   In making his findings the judge commented that the  appellant's  birth
    certificate was "curiously dated" as made  in  2010.   This  seemed  to
    predate the rediscovery of the appellant by the sponsor.   He  accepted
    that as a working single parent the sponsor had the  means  to  support
    and accommodate the appellant.  He found the claim that she sent  money
    every month by money transfer to the appellant  was  problematic.   The
    issue was easily proven and she had failed to come up to proof and that
    was damaging for her credibility.  In relation  to  paragraph  297  the
    judge found as follows:

         "33. There is no evidence of financial  responsibility  as  per  TD
             Yemen.  That is because the school receipts  are  not  in  the
             name of the sponsor and no other transactions of any  material
             kind are proven by evidence.


         34.   She  has  failed  to  produce  evidence  suggesting  she  had
             continual control from abroad over the Appellant's  life.   In
             particular there is no evidence before me of phone calls to or
             from anybody in Nigeria, or of contact between the Appellant's
             school and the sponsor or of payment of  school  fees  by  the
             sponsor.


         35.  There is simply a wide ranging lack of material evidence.   So
             the sponsor has failed to show she exercised sole,  or  indeed
             any, responsibility for the Appellant.


         36.  The next test is under 297(i)(f) and  that  is  also  hard  to
             satisfy.  There is no statement provided by the current  carer
             although that is highly material.  The  death  certificate  of
             the cousin adds little, given the lack of other proof.


         37.  The sponsor has completely failed to show  that  she  had  any
             kind (and there are several) of sole  responsibility  for  the
             Appellant.  There is no relevant information provided.   There
             is no proof of communication shown."

10.   The  judge  then  considered  the  DNA  certificate   and   sought   a
    mathematical evaluation of the certificate which would  rule  out  some
    other close family connection and  he  was  unable  to  reach  a  final
    conclusion as to the claimed relationship.   It  was  likely  that  the
    sponsor and the appellant were mother and son but it  was  also  likely
    they were in the category of siblings or aunt and  nephew.   The  judge
    recorded in paragraphs 40 and 41 of the determination that he  did  not
    accept the representative's assurance that the  sponsor  was  certainly
    the mother of the appellant although the certificate said that she  was
    99% likely to be the mother of the appellant.

11.  In relation to Article 8 the judge  referred  to  relevant  authorities
    including Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  and  concluded  his  determination  as
    follows:

         "47. The right to respect for private and family life has not  been
             damaged by the respondent's decision.  The sponsor visits  her
             son occasionally and she may continue to do so.  If there were
             regional troubles when the sponsor  left  Nigeria  many  years
             ago, they are not  shown  to  have  hindered  the  reunion  in
             Nigeria.  Nigeria is a vast country with many safe areas where
             people may relocate if need be.


         48.  The Appellant may come on a temporary basis;  he  might  visit
             the UK, or study in the UK, subject to obtaining a visa to  do
             so.  What is refused is permanent settlement  at  this  point;
             that is a huge leap into the unknown for him.


         49.  The statutory requirement to consider best interests looks  at
             children within the UK.   So  I  am  asked  to  consider  best
             interests outside the scope of that provision.  Similarly, the
             UN Convention on Rights of the Child or UNCRC is not  directly
             enforceable within the UK, as the UK has a dualist  theory  of
             Treaty Law, of which the paradigm example is the  ECHR,  which
             required the HRA 1998.  The Supreme Court, in March this year,
             (SG & Others v Secretary of State for Work and Pensions [2015]
             UKSC 16) has found by a majority that UNCRC  is  not  directly
             enforceable.


         50.  I accept that on  turning  18  there  is  still  a  degree  of
             vulnerability, which only gradually recedes with growing  life
             experience.   The  mental  development  of  a  male   teenager
             typically continues into their early twenties,  when  judgment
             and self-control typically reach their plateau.


         51.  The best interests of this child are not shown by the evidence
             to  have  been  undermined  by  the  refusal  decision.    The
             Appellant is receiving education and has a home, we are  told.
             The whole of his life has been preparing him for adult life in
             Nigeria.  It has never been aimed at preparing him  for  adult
             life in the UK.  He hardly knows the sponsor.   No  proof  has
             been provided that he has formed any emotional  attachment  to
             the sponsor.  To put it another way, I have not been  able  to
             find  proof  that  the  Appellant  and  sponsor  have   become
             emotionally close to each other.  There is no proof  that  the
             Appellant has acquired any knowledge of the  UK.   We  do  not
             know how his language skills and  so  forth  would  hinder  or
             advantage him here.   I  find  it  not  shown  that  his  best
             interests require removal from the country and culture that he
             has always known.


         52.  There is nothing to consider  outside  the  Rules,  as  actual
             family or private life has not been  shown;  the  sponsor  and
             Appellant lived apart in separate continents since 2000 with a
             long period  of  no  communication,  so  I  gather.   The  DNA
             evidence has not resolved  the  relationship  question  beyond
             proving a family connection exists.  The Appellant is  now  18
             years old and is gradually becoming more able to take care  of
             himself.  At the date of decision he was  still  a  minor  but
             with some maturity.  There is no  evidence  from  the  current
             carer that they cannot continue to be a carer; the  reason  is
             not  supplied,  let  alone  the  proof  of  it,   so   neither
             exceptionally  nor  compassionate  circumstances   have   been
             demonstrated.  I adopt the relevant reasoning of the  ECO  and
             ECM.


         53.  The evidence does not provide any basis for finding an  extant
             family or private life to be infringed.  There is  an  extreme
             poverty of persuasive evidence and so the human  rights  point
             is lacking in any conceivable  merit  for  that  reason.   The
             claim does not come remotely close to meeting  the  provisions
             on family and private life inside the  Immigration  Rules  for
             these reasons.  The case also cannot pass step 1 of Razgar."

12.  Accordingly the judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.   Among  the
    points taken was that the judge had failed to consider  the  fact  that
    the sponsor was in the UK as a refugee.

13.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer refused permission to appeal  although
    he acknowledged that as he puts it:

         "Paragraphs 38 to 41 of the determination  are  complete  nonsense.
         As stated in paragraph 17 of  the  determination,  it  was  99.998%
         certain that  the  Appellant  was  the  sponsor's  child.   Nothing
         further was needed to establish that on balance they  were  related
         as claimed."


    However Judge Saffer continued:


         "The rest of the grounds have  no  merit  at  all.   There  was  no
         documentary evidence before  the  Judge  that  the  sponsor  was  a
         refugee.  Indeed it is apparent from the grounds that she was  not.
         He therefore applied the correct rule.  He was entitled to find the
         issue of dependency had not been made out both in relation to  that
         provided from here and in relation to the care available in Nigeria
         for the very brief period before the Appellant turned 18."


14.  The application was renewed and Upper Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  granted
    permission on the basis  that  it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had erred in its approach to the DNA evidence and  reached  an
    irrational conclusion in paragraphs 40 and  41  of  the  determination.
    She also found that it was arguable that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    failed  to  consider  all  relevant  evidence  regarding  the   claimed
    relationship between the appellant and sponsor.  Mr Kanu relied on  the
    grounds that had been submitted.   He  submitted  that  the  First-tier
    Judge had failed to  have  regard  to  the  material  before  him.   He
    submitted there had  been  an  abundance  of  evidence  in  the  bundle
    concerning dependency.  The judge had taken into account  the  relevant
    matters.

15.  Mr Kanu referred to the bundle that had been submitted for the  current
    hearing dated 24 June 2016.  It was clear  that  the  sponsor  was  the
    mother of the appellant.  She had come as a refugee in  December  2000.
    The child's circumstances had been overlooked.  The  sponsor  had  been
    raped at a young age.  She had discovered the  appellant's  whereabouts
    when she had visited Nigeria in 2011.  She  had  made  three  trips  to
    Nigeria as evidenced by her passport - the  first  in  July  2011,  the
    second in September 2012 and finally on 5 June 2015.  There were  money
    transfer receipts and reference was made to the money transfer receipts
    on pages 133 to 151 of the former bundle before the  First-tier  Judge.
    It had been submitted before  the  First-tier  Judge  in  the  skeleton
    argument that the appellant had been living in the United Kingdom as  a
    refugee and had been granted indefinite leave to remain.

16.  Mr Melvin  submitted  that  the  application  to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer had not been on the footing that the  sponsor  was  a  refugee.
    The sponsor had not been granted indefinite leave  to  remain  on  that
    basis.  She had been a minor at the time and had been granted leave  as
    a minor  and  not  on  the  basis  of  protection  or  refugee  issues.
    Indefinite leave to remain had been under the legacy provisions.  Judge
    Plimmer had not granted permission to appeal on the refugee point.

17.  There had been a response filed by the respondent on the DNA issue.

18.  The judge's findings and conclusions were  sufficiently  reasoned.   At
    the date of decision in 2014 there had only  been  two  visits  in  two
    years.  The judge's  findings  had  been  open  to  him  and  were  not
    irrational.

19.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my  decision.   I  have
    carefully considered the material before me.  I note that  I  can  only
    interfere with the decision of the judge if it was materially flawed in
    law.

20.  The judge  correctly  directed  himself  on  legal  issues  as  I  have
    observed.  He states, and I have  no  reason  to  doubt,  that  he  had
    considered the bundles of evidence that had been  submitted.   Mr  Kanu
    refers to money transfers.  The  appellant  had  every  opportunity  to
    advance her case and as appears from the extract set out above, she was
    asked why there were no money transfers in the bundle.  She handed them
    to the Presenting Officer who confirmed there were none.   In  relation
    to the school receipts it is clear the judge had these in mind.   These
    are referred to at paragraph 19 of the decision.  It is plain the judge
    reached a conclusion on the school receipts as appears  from  paragraph
    33 of his decision.  It was entirely open to the judge  to  find  there
    was "simply a wide-ranging lack of material evidence".

21.  In  the  response  the  respondent  acknowledged  that  while  the  DNA
    evidence would appear to show that the parties were related as  claimed
    the remaining findings  under  paragraph  297  were  well-reasoned  and
    adequate findings had been made.

22.  I have given anxious consideration  to  the  question  of  whether  the
    approach to the DNA issues contaminated the rest of the decision.  I am
    not satisfied that that is the case.  I do not  agree  that  the  judge
    gave inadequate consideration to the bundle before  him.   The  judge's
    assessment of the issues under the Rules and in respect  of  Article  8
    was, when viewed as a whole, satisfactorily reasoned.

Notice of Decision

23.  For the reasons I have given, I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge's
    decision was materially flawed in law.

Anonymity Direction

24.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.

Fee Award

25.  The judge made no fee award and I make none.





Signed                                  Date 11 July 2016


G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
