
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01080/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2016                   |On 2 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                                     P S
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sharma, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  India  born  on  13  August  2010.   He
    appealed against the decision of the respondent dated 4  December  2014
    refusing her entry clearance to the United Kingdom  for  settlement  as
    the adopted daughter of [NM] and [SK].  The appeal was heard  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal C. A. S. O'Garro and dismissed in a decision
    promulgated on 5 November 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was  made  and  permission  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Bruce  on  13  September  2016.   The
    permission states that it is  arguable  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in the imposition of an "insurmountable obstacles" test  and  the
    Tribunal was bound to have regard to the relevant factors  set  out  at
    sections 117A to D of the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response dated  27  September  2016.   The  response
    states that this is a case in which it was conceded at the commencement
    of the First-tier hearing that  the  Immigration  Rules  could  not  be
    satisfied.  It goes on to state that the judge fell foul of  the  Court
    of Appeal case law of Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74 and SS Congo and  Others
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387. The judge does not refer to any compelling factors
    and the response states that it is apparent that there are not  any  as
    the judge then delved into a  proportionality  assessment  outside  the
    Rules.  The response states that the judge dismissed the  appeal  under
    this limb, so his error is not material.  The response goes on to  deal
    with the phrase "insurmountable  obstacles"  at  paragraph  23  of  the
    decision. It states that this has no materiality as the  judge  clearly
    paid regard to T (Jamaica) [2011] UKUT 483 and at paragraph 21 he  paid
    regard to section 117B matters.

The Hearing

 4. The appellant's representative submitted that the appellant's  adoptive
    mother is British and is a nurse in the United Kingdom.   She  earns  a
    good salary and has a property in the  United  Kingdom.   He  submitted
    that it must be in the child's  best  interest  to  be  with  both  her
    parents, (which  she  is  not  at  present).   He  submitted  that  the
    appellant has been validly adopted under Indian  law.   This  has  been
    accepted by the First-tier Judge.  He submitted that at paragraph 17 of
    the decision the judge finds that there is a close relationship between
    the appellant and her adoptive parents and that there is family life.

 5. We asked the representative about compelling circumstances in this case
    and he submitted  that  because  the  appellant's  adoptive  mother  is
    working in the United Kingdom the appellant will not be a burden on the
    state.  At present her parents are apart as her adoptive father  is  in
    India looking after the appellant.

 6. We asked the representative if he accepts that this application  cannot
    meet the terms of the Rules and he accepted this.   He  submitted  that
    the terms of the judge's decision  make  it  clear  that  it  would  be
    unreasonable to keep the child away from her mother and that the  child
    would be better off in the United Kingdom.

 7. We asked the representative about paragraph 23 of  the  decision  which
    refers to "insurmountable obstacles" and suggests that the  appellant's
    mother can relocate to India and the  family  unit  can  live  together
    there.  The representative submitted that the appellant should not live
    separately from one of her parents, especially as her mother is in  the
    United Kingdom lawfully.

 8. The Presenting Officer made his submissions referring to  the  Rule  24
    response.  We were referred to  paragraph  25  of  the  decision  which
    states "I have been provided with no evidence that satisfies me that it
    would be unreasonable to expect the  appellant's  adoptive  parents  to
    proceed to undertake a convention adoption which is recognised  by  the
    United Kingdom."  He submitted that at paragraph 16 the  judge  accepts
    that there has been a valid adoption under Indian law but this  is  not
    recognised in the United Kingdom under  paragraph  310.   He  submitted
    that this is the reason this application cannot meet the terms  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  He submitted that "insurmountable obstacles" is not
    the correct test and he put to us that the only compelling circumstance
    is that it would be unreasonable for the appellant's adoptive mother to
    relocate  and  this  is  not  sufficient   to   meet   the   compelling
    circumstances test.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that the judge has taken into  account
    the said case of T (Jamaica) and we were referred to  paragraph  22  of
    the decision.

10. He submitted that although section 117 of the 2002  Act  has  not  been
    specifically referred to in paragraph 20 of the decision, that is  what
    the judge is dealing with in that paragraph and at paragraph 21 section
    117B is referred to and is dealt with adequately.

11. The Presenting Officer submitted that the appellant's  adoptive  mother
    is working, has a house and is financially independent but he submitted
    that these are not positive factors which can be  taken  into  account.
    These are neutral factors.  He submitted that the judge has  approached
    this claim correctly.

12. At paragraph 26 of the decision the judge  accepts  that  the  adoptive
    parents are separated because the child has  to  live  in  India.   Her
    mother lives and works in the United Kingdom but the appellant is  with
    her adoptive father.  He has been the main  care  giver,  her  adoptive
    mother makes regular visits to see her and they telephone  each  other.
    The Presenting Officer submitted that family life can be  continued  in
    this way and that is the judge's decision.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that although this application  cannot
    meet the terms of the Immigration Rules there is a resolution  to  this
    and that is that the appellant's adoptive parents  should  undertake  a
    convention adoption which is recognised  by  the  United  Kingdom.   He
    submitted that once this is done a new application can  be  made  which
    will meet the terms of the Rules.  He submitted  that  this  is  a  sad
    situation but the judge was entitled to come to the conclusion  he  did
    and there is no error of law in his decision.

14. The appellant's representative submitted that  he  is  relying  on  his
    grounds of appeal.

Decision and Reasons

15. At paragraph 11 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision it is stated that
    the appellant's representative, Mr Sharma, accepted that the  appellant
    cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules for admission  of
    a child to join an adoptive parent who is present and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom.  This goes to the core of this appeal.  What  is  being
    argued by the appellant's representative is that the  claim  should  be
    allowed under Article 8 of ECHR outside the Rules.

16. The situation is that if the appellant's adoptive  parents  proceed  to
    undertake a convention adoption  which  is  recognised  by  the  United
    Kingdom, the terms of the Immigration Rules can be satisfied when  this
    is achieved.  Because the situation can be resolved in  this  way,  the
    claim under Article 8 outside the Rules cannot succeed.

17. We accept that there is  an  error  in  paragraph  23  of  the  judge's
    decision when she refers to "insurmountable obstacles" but this is  not
    a material error.  The judge has dealt properly with section 117A to  D
    of the Nationality, Immigration & Asylum Act 2002 at  paragraph  21  of
    the decision.

18. There are no compelling factors which is why the  judge  dealt  with  a
    proportionality assessment outside the Rules.

19. The judge at paragraphs 25 and 26 of the decision spelled out what  the
    appellant's adoptive parents should do to enable the claim  to  succeed
    under the Rules.  They should undertake a convention adoption and  make
    a new application.



Notice of Decision

20. There is no material error of  law  in  Judge  Cas  O'Garro's  decision
    promulgated on 5 November 2015 and that decision must stand

21. Anonymity has been directed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray

