
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/01026/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 26 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                              MR THAMER SAIHOOD
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - AMMAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh of Counsel, instructed by MTG Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal  against  a  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Charlton-Brown dismissing an appeal  against  the  refusal  of
    entry clearance.  The appellant  was  refused  entry  clearance  on  11
    October 2013 to come to the UK  as  the  spouse  of  Ms  El-Wasety  the
    sponsor in this appeal.

 2) The appellant is a national of Iraq and, according to the appellant, he
    first met the sponsor in 1993 in  Iraq  but  was  unable  to  pursue  a
    relationship with her.  The appellant married someone else but  is  now
    divorced.  The sponsor came to the UK around 1997.  The couple  renewed
    their contact and were married in Sweden on 6 October 2010.

 3) One of the grounds  for  refusing  entry  clearance  was  that  in  his
    application the appellant had failed to disclose that he  had  children
    from his previous marriage.  The judge found that the appellant did not
    disclose in his application giving rise to the  decision  under  appeal
    that he had 3 children, although he had disclosed this  in  a  previous
    application.  The appellant sought to explain that he had already given
    this information to the Entry Clearance Officer.   The  judge  was  not
    satisfied by this explanation.

 4) The Entry Clearance Officer raised concerns about the validity  of  the
    marriage, seemingly because of the  absence  of  satisfactory  evidence
    regarding the appellant's divorce.  At the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal the respondent no longer contested the  validity  of  the
    marriage but maintained that the couple had not established  that  they
    were in a genuine relationship and intended to  live  with  each  other
    permanently as husband and wife.

 5) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal considered this issue.  The  judge
    noted that the couple were married on  6  October  2010  and  that  the
    sponsor last saw the appellant in November 2011.   She  explained  that
    she had not been able to visit the appellant more recently because  her
    health was poor and she was concerned about the security  situation  in
    Iraq.  An issue was raised as to a lack of evidence of contact  between
    June 2011 and August 2013.  The sponsor claimed that she  had  been  in
    contact with the appellant on  a  regular  basis  by  phone  calls  and
    messages.  The judge was referred  to  documentary  evidence  of  these
    phone calls and messages but much of this evidence was  in  Arabic  and
    was not translated.  There were also phone cards but these did not show
    contact between the appellants.

 6) The judge accepted that the marriage was legally valid  but  considered
    that the appellant  had  not  shown  that  he  was  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship  with  the  sponsor.   There  were  photographs
    showing the couple together but it was unclear when these were taken or
    where.  The appellant indicated in his earlier  application  form  that
    this was an arranged marriage and that  he  and  sponsor  were  related
    outside marriage.  Having regard to this the  judge  did  not  consider
    credible claims made by the appellant and the sponsor in their  witness
    statements that there was parental disapproval of the marriage.

 7)  The  judge  further  observed  that  there  was  no  medical  evidence
    indicating that the sponsor could not travel to meet the appellant.  It
    was not necessary for them to meet in Iraq but they  could  meet  in  a
    neighbouring country, such as Jordan.  The sponsor's evidence was  that
    she still has close family members in Iraq, including her father.

 8) At the time of the refusal decision the sponsor had failed  to  give  a
    written undertaking to be responsible for the  appellant's  maintenance
    and accommodation.  This was provided for the  purpose  of  the  appeal
    but, as the judge observed at paragraph 18, this was after the date  of
    the decision appealed against.  This document was not in  existence  at
    the date of the refusal decision and no  satisfactory  explanation  was
    given of why it had not been produced earlier.

 9) The judge also considered the financial requirements of the Immigration
    Rules.  The sponsor is in receipt of  disability  benefits.   The  bank
    statements she produced were, however,  post-decision.   The  appellant
    claimed to be supported by his brother but to have approximately  �9000
    in a savings account.  In his  earlier  application,  however,  he  had
    stated that he  had  no  savings.   He  further  stated  in  his  later
    application that he had always been in full  time  employment  and  had
    skills as a builder or gym teacher.  The judge was not  satisfied  that
    the statements produced in relation to  the  appellant's  savings  were
    reliable.

10) A further issue before the judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that
    the appellant had not produced a  certificate  satisfying  the  English
    language requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   Although  he  had  a
    certificate it was not by an approved English language  test  provider.
    At the hearing it was argued that the only test centre available to the
    appellant was in Erbil and it was  too  dangerous  for  him  to  travel
    there.  It was submitted on behalf  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
    however, that there were other British consulates in Iraq, in  addition
    to Erbil, and that there was also the possibility of taking the test in
    Jordan.  The judge found that it was not  unreasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to have taken the appropriate test had he seriously wished to
    do so.

11) Based on these findings the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant met the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

12) At the end of her determination, at paragraph  35,  the  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal moved on to the issue of Article 8.   She  observed
    that the Immigration Rules were generally to be regarded as a  complete
    code and it was normally only in exceptional circumstances  that  human
    rights issues would be considered outside the Rules.  It was  submitted
    on behalf of  the  appellant  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, which took place in January 2015, that the  decision  of  the
    Court of Appeal in MM  (Lebanon)  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985  went  to  the
    contrary.  The judge found, however, that on the available evidence the
    appellant had not established the relevance of Article 8 issues to  his
    claim.  The judge did not consider that the couple had established what
    would normally be regarded as family life under Article 8.  She did not
    therefore consider whether there would be any interference with family,
    or indeed private, life as a result of the refusal decision.

13) Permission to appeal was sought on a number of grounds  of  which  only
    one was considered arguable.  This was that the judge arguably erred in
    concluding that no family life existed  between  the  sponsor  and  the
    appellant.  On this basis only permission to appeal was granted.

14) In a rule 24 notice dated 24 June 2015 it was argued on behalf  of  the
    respondent that the circumstances surrounding the marriage were recited
    at some length in the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    conclusion reached by the judge with regard to the  marriage  was  more
    than adequately reasoned.

Submissions

15) At the hearing before me Mr Singh submitted that the  underlying  issue
    was whether Article 8 was engaged.  He pointed  out  that  this  was  a
    valid marriage and he relied on the 1985 decision of the European Court
    of Human Rights in Abdulaziz.  Family life  existed  on  the  basis  of
    marriage even if the couple had not yet begun to  cohabit.   The  judge
    wrongly described the Immigration Rules as a complete code and  wrongly
    said that exceptional circumstances were required to look at Article  8
    outside the Rules.  This was contrary to  MM  (Lebanon),  at  paragraph
    128.  The judge should have found Article 8 was engaged and gone on  to
    look at the second stage balancing exercise.

16) It was pointed out that after MM (Lebanon) the Court of Appeal had gone
    on to make a further decision in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA  Civ  387.   Mr
    Singh responded that it was MM (Lebanon) that had been relied  upon  at
    the hearing before the Tribunal.  The couple were lawfully married  and
    Article 8 was engaged.  They had met on  three  occasions.    They  had
    been together for a month in Sweden, then a further three months  later
    in 2010, and then they had met again in Jordan in 2011.

17) Mr Singh acknowledged that even though the marriage was valid there was
    still an issue as to  whether  it  was  genuine.   In  this  regard  he
    referred to the application for permission to appeal  at  paragraph  13
    and onwards.  He relied on the case of Goudey  (subsisting  marriage  -
    evidence) Sudan [2012]  UKUT  41  as  to  the  test  for  a  subsisting
    marriage.  This did not require the production of  particular  evidence
    of mutual devotion before entry clearance could be granted.  The  judge
    had voluminous evidence before  her  including  thousands  of  messages
    between four telephones.  Not all of these had been translated but  she
    could see the quantity of messages.  In terms of Goudey  there  was  no
    requirement that the parties wrote or texted to each other.  The  judge
    had dismissed the evidence without proper scrutiny.

18) For the respondent Mr Melvin relied on the rule 24 notice.   The  judge
    had found that the  marriage  was  not  genuine  and  subsisting.   The
    position in relation to Article 8 was set out in SS  (Congo).   If  the
    appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules then compelling
    circumstances had to be shown to succeed under Article 8.

19) In response Mr Singh referred again to the 1985 case of Abdulaziz.   He
    referred also to the cases of Nagre and Gulshan and invited me to  have
    regard to other decisions of the Upper Tribunal, although  unspecified.
    He pointed out that this was not an appeal against deportation.

20) Mr Singh was asked, assuming the appeal was considered under Article 8,
    on what basis it would succeed.  Again Mr Singh referred  to  the  case
    law.  He further submitted that the  sponsor  required  care  from  the
    appellant for medical reasons and pointed out that she is in receipt of
    Disability Living Allowance.

21) Reference was made to section 117B of the  2002  Act  as  amended.   Mr
    Singh responded that a full assessment should have been carried out  in
    relation to the issue of whether it  was  proportionate  to  allow  the
    appellant to join the sponsor in the UK.   It  was  a  disproportionate
    interference  with  their  Article  8  rights  for  the  couple  to  be
    separated.  They had known each other for 20 years.  Mr  Singh  further
    submitted that the sponsor's health was a compelling  circumstance  and
    this was demonstrated by a receipt of Disability Living Allowance at  a
    higher rate.  The couple could not continue their relationship  outside
    the UK.

Discussion

22) It is clear that the judge misdirected herself in relation to Article 8
    at paragraph 35 of the decision.  She said that the  Immigration  Rules
    were to be regarded as a complete code but this proposition relates  to
    deportation appeals, in accordance with MF (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1192.  It was not maintained  in  SS  (Congo)  that  the  rules  are  a
    complete code in relation to matters other than deportation.  Similarly
    there is no test of  exceptionality  for  consideration  of  Article  8
    outside the Rules.  In this regard Mr Singh correctly  referred  to  MM
    (Lebanon) and, although this case was drawn to  the  attention  of  the
    judge, she does not appear to have followed  it  on  this  issue.   The
    judge made her decision two months before judgment was handed  down  in
    SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  This  decision  makes  it  clear  that
    there is no test of exceptionality to be satisfied  before  considering
    Article 8 but if a claim is to succeed  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules then compelling circumstances have to be established.

23) Mr Singh argued that the judge was wrong to say that the appellant  and
    the sponsor did not have family life together and therefore  Article  8
    was not  engaged.   Mr  Singh's  argument  was  that  family  life  was
    established  on  the  basis  of  marriage.   It  was  argued  for   the
    respondent, however, that because the judge was not satisfied that  the
    marriage was genuine and subsisting, it did  not  provide  an  adequate
    foundation for a finding that family life existed.

24) At the hearing before me Mr Singh sought to re-open the  findings  made
    by the judge in relation  to  whether  the  marriage  was  genuine  and
    subsisting and argued that the judge had not  properly  considered  the
    evidence.  This argument goes beyond the argument on  which  permission
    to appeal was granted, although I accept that  if  there  was  evidence
    which the judge had disregarded or  misconstrued  then  that  would  be
    capable in itself of amounting to an error of law.

25) The respondent's position appears to be  that  even  though  the  judge
    misdirected herself about  various  matters  at  paragraph  35  of  her
    decision, this would not be material if  (1)  the  judge's  finding  in
    relation to the marriage not  having  been  shown  to  be  genuine  and
    subsisting  remained  in  place;  and  (2)  there  were  no  compelling
    circumstances outside the Rules on the basis  of  which  the  appellant
    could succeed under Article 8.

26) In relation to whether the marriage  was  genuine  and  subsisting,  Mr
    Singh sought to rely on the case of Goudey.  He submitted that in terms
    of this case there was no particular evidence which must be produced to
    establish mutual devotion.  He further submitted that  telephone  cards
    were capable of corroborating a contention by  the  parties  that  they
    communicated by telephone, even if such  data  could  not  confirm  the
    particular numbers the sponsor was calling in the country in  question.
    It was not required that the parties had also written to or texted each
    other.

27) These points are not in  dispute.   In  relation  to  the  question  of
    whether a marriage is genuine or subsisting, however,  each  case  will
    depend upon  its  own  particular  facts.   Much  will  depend  on  the
    credibility and reliability of the evidence that is presented.  If  the
    parties to a marriage present  evidence  of  their  relationship  which
    appears on the face of it to be credible and reliable and, as  part  of
    that evidence, produce telephone cards to  show  the  extent  of  their
    communication, it is clear from Goudey that these telephone  cards  may
    be taken  into  account  as  supporting  the  evidence  of  the  couple
    concerned.  If on the other hand the  parties  produce  evidence  which
    contains a  number  of  discrepancies  affecting  the  credibility  and
    reliability of the couple's stated  intentions,  then  no  quantity  of
    telephone cards will necessarily satisfy the judge that notwithstanding
    the other discrepancies in the evidence the marriage should be accepted
    as genuine and subsisting.  Essentially the argument that Mr Singh  put
    to me was that whatever discrepancies the judge found in the  evidence,
    she should have found that the  marriage  was  genuine  and  subsisting
    because   of   the   voluminous   evidence   of   telephone    contact,
    notwithstanding the lack of detail in that evidence about  the  numbers
    dialled and, indeed, the lack of translations of much of the  evidence.
    Such an argument is not supported by any proposition drawn from Goudey,
    which refers to  reliance  on  telephone  cards  "where  there  are  no
    countervailing factors generating suspicion as to the intentions of the
    parties".  It is for the judge to assess the evidence as a whole and to
    give reasons for accepting or rejecting the evidence.  In doing so  the
    judge is not required to  look  at  every  item  of  evidence  and,  in
    particular, is not required to  have  regard  to  documentary  evidence
    which has not been translated.

28) At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal the appellant's bundle in  the
    Tribunal's appeal file was incomplete.  Mr Singh helpfully provided  me
    with his own bundle so that I had a complete copy of  the  evidence  in
    front of me.  The appellant's bundle runs to some 403 pages,  of  which
    the last 43 pages are described as "evidence  of  correspondence".   On
    looking at this evidence, I admit to sharing some of  the  difficulties
    of the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  Much of the text, where it is
    legible, is in Arabic and has not been  translated.   I  can  see,  for
    example, on page 379, that on 22 and 23 October 2013 the appellant  and
    the sponsor appear to have had a  number  of  telephone  conversations.
    The longest of these conversations seems to have lasted over 44 minutes
    but on the record of this call, although the name  of  the  sponsor  is
    given, the name of the appellant is not.  The name of the appellant  is
    given on the record of earlier calls,  as  well  as  the  name  of  the
    sponsor, and it is not clear why both  names  do  not  appear  for  the
    longest call.  Indeed, it is not at all clear how this record has  been
    generated and how it came to be presented  as  evidence.   The  judge's
    comments on this evidence, at paragraph 20 of the decision, seem to  be
    an accurate reflection on the quality of  the  evidence.   The  judge's
    assessment was that this evidence  did  not  assist  her  in  making  a
    finding that the marriage was genuine and subsisting, having regard  to
    the discrepancies she had already  identified  in  other  evidence.   I
    consider that this was a finding which the judge was entitled to  make.
    I am not satisfied there is a basis for finding that the judge did  not
    give proper scrutiny to the evidence presented to her.

29) The same bundle of evidence contains  a  number  of  photographs.   The
    judge commented on these at paragraph 22 of the decision.  She  pointed
    out that the appellant and the sponsor were well known  to  each  other
    and, according to the appellant's earlier application form,  they  were
    related  prior  to  marriage.   The  judge  accepted  that  there   was
    photographic evidence showing the couple  together  but  she  commented
    that it was unclear as to when or where these photographs  were  taken.
    The judge was not satisfied that the relationship between the appellant
    and the sponsor was anything more than a relationship between  cousins.



30) The position is that notwithstanding all of  the  documentary  evidence
    which was presented and the oral evidence of the sponsor, the appellant
    was unable to satisfy the judge  that  the  marriage  was  genuine  and
    subsisting.  Once the judge had  made  this  finding,  based  upon  the
    evidence and for the reasons she gave, it would be extremely  difficult
    for the appellant to succeed outside the Rules under Article 8  on  the
    basis of  his  supposed  private  or  family  life  with  the  sponsor.
    Regardless of the misdirections made by the judge in  paragraph  35  of
    the decision, the appellant has failed to identify any disproportionate
    interference with private or family life which would lead to the appeal
    being allowed.

31) On this  issue  Mr  Singh  argued  that  the  sponsor's  health  was  a
    compelling circumstance.  The appellant, however, did not seek to  come
    to the UK in order to care for the  appellant  but  in  order  to  live
    permanently with her as her husband.   If,  as  the  judge  found,  the
    relationship between the couple was not genuine  and  subsisting,  then
    the  sponsor's  disability  needs  would  not  amount   to   compelling
    circumstances justifying the appellant succeeding under Article 8.

32) The position is that the judge  found  that  the  appellant  would  not
    succeed under the  Immigration  Rules  and,  in  particular,  that  the
    appellant had not shown that  the  relationship  between  him  and  the
    sponsor was genuine and subsisting.   Having  made  this  finding,  the
    judge was entitled to find that Article 8 was not engaged, albeit  that
    her self directions in relation to Article  8  contained  a  number  of
    errors.  The essential point, however, is that  without  a  finding  in
    favour of the appellant on  the  issue  of  whether  the  marriage  was
    genuine and subsisting, then the Article  8  claim  would  not  succeed
    outside the Rules.

33) Despite Mr Singh's not inconsiderable efforts to show that the Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal did not properly scrutinise the evidence before
    her in relation to the marriage, for the reasons set out above I am not
    satisfied by Mr Singh's submissions on this point.  The  judge  made  a
    number of findings in respect of the relationship  between  the  couple
    and these are supported by adequate reasons.  It was for the  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal to  assess  the  quality  of  the  relationship
    between the couple and the appellant has not been able to show that the
    judge erred in law in making her findings on this matter.

Conclusions

34) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

35) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

36) The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity order.   I  have  not
    been asked to make such an order and I see no reason of  substance  for
    doing so.


Signed      Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

