
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/01321/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th January 2015                 |On 21st January 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis


                                   Between

                            Mr Emmanuel Osei Poku
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dixon, Counsel instructed by IMK Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


REASONS FOR FINDING THAT TRIBUNAL MADE AN ERROR OF LAW, SUCH THAT ITS
DECISION FALLS TO BE SET ASIDE

The History of the Appeal

1.    The Appellant, Mr Emmanuel Osei Poku, a  citizen  of  Ghana,  appealed
    against a decision of the Respondent of 16 December 2013  refusing  his
    application for entry  clearance  as  the  child  of  his  mother,  the
    Sponsor, Cecilia Boakye, who is settled in  the  UK.   His  appeal  was
    heard  by  Immigration  Judge  Gurung-Thapa   sitting   at   Nottingham
    Magistrates' Court on 28 August 2014.  Both parties were represented by
    Counsel,  the  Appellant  by  Mr  Dixon.   In  a   full   and   careful
    determination of 24 September 2014, promulgated the following day,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8
    human rights grounds.

2.    Subsequently supplemented  by  procedural  directions,  permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge Andrew on 2 December 2014 in the  following
    terms:

         "1.      The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time, against
             a decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Gurung-Thapa)
             promulgated on 25th September 2014 whereby  it  dismissed  the
             Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision
             to refuse to grant entry clearance.


         2. It is arguable that because of the identified difficulties  with
             the interpreter the Judge should have  asked  for  a  de  novo
             hearing of this appeal.


         3. I find there is an arguable error of law."

3.    The Sponsor attended the error of law hearing, which took the form  of
    submissions.  I have  taken  these  into  account,  together  with  the
    grounds of appeal and the supplementary statement, of which  paragraphs
    2 to 6 are in point, of the Sponsor.  At  the  end  of  the  hearing  I
    stated my decision.

Determination

4.    The matter revolves around a sequence of events relating to the  court
    interpreter in the Twi language who interpreted  the  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor.  These events are narrated in  paragraphs  30  to  38  of  the
    determination, the grounds of appeal and the supplementary statement of
    the Sponsor, and I do not need to reiterate them.   Shortly  after  the
    end of the hearing Mr Dixon requested of the judge a de  novo  hearing.
    After  taking  time  for  consideration,   the   judge   declined   the
    application.  This was an exercise of her judicial discretion, which is
    not to be lightly interfered with.

5.    Nevertheless, standing back and addressing the  question  whether  the
    hearing was safe, I have concluded that it was not.  The concerns about
    the interpreter were articulated and particularised to  the  judge.   A
    similar concern about him had arisen in another case the previous week.
     Cumulatively the concerns were grave. The application was made  before
    the outcome of the appeal was known.  The judge was  content  that  the
    hearing was safe.  Whilst her decision was entirely  understandable,  I
    have concluded that in the light of the gravity of the concerns it  was
    erroneous in law.

6.    Without in any way reflecting on the quality of her  determination,  I
    conclude that for reasons of perceived procedural unfairness it  cannot
    stand.  I accordingly set it aside.   Since  the  effect  is  that  the
    Appellant has not had a fair hearing, the appeal should be  reheard  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I accordingly direct that it  be  reheard  at
    the Birmingham hearing centre or one of its  satellite  courts  by  any
    judge other than Judge Gurung-Thapa.

7.    I cannot identify from the file the name of the interpreter.   Without
    casting any aspersion upon him, which I am not in  a  position  to  do,
    there should be a different  interpreter  in  the  Twi  language.   The
    administration should please identify the interpreter who acted in this
    appeal on 28 August 2014 and ensure that another interpreter is engaged
    for it.

Decision

8.    The original decision reflected a procedural error of law and  is  set
    aside.

9.    The appeal is to be reheard on all issues in the First-tier Tribunal.

10.   No anonymity direction is made.



Signed      Dated: 20th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
