
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:   OA/01533/2013

                                                        OA/01534/2013

                                                               OA/01531/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 February 2014                           |On 4 March 2014              |
|Prepared on 22 February 2014                  |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG



                                   Between

                                 ABDUL HAMID
                                 RAZNA BEGM
                              MD SHAHRIAR AHMED

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr B Thomas, Legal Representative, Lumbini
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



 1. The appellants, who are citizens of Bangladesh, born respectively on 15
    May 1970, 19 October 2007 and  30  March  2010,  are  the  husband  and
    children of the sponsor.  They applied for  entry  clearance  to  allow
    them to join the sponsor as respectively her spouse and children with a
    view to settlement, but these applications were  refused,  because  the
    respondent was not satisfied that the appellants  could  be  adequately
    maintained without recourse to public funds.  The respondent considered
    whether or not the refusal of permission would  be  in  breach  of  the
    appellants' rights under Article 8 but was satisfied that it would not.



 2. The appellants appealed against this decision and  their  appeals  were
    heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge J  Simpson,  sitting  at  Taylor
    House on 19 November 2013, but in  a  determination  promulgated  eight
    days later, Judge Simpson dismissed the appeals.  Having considered the
    evidence put before him, he was not satisfied that the  appellants  had
    established on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the  maintenance
    requirements under the  Rules  has  been  satisfied.   With  regard  to
    Article 8, Judge Simpson disposed of the  appeal  at  paragraph  11  as
    follows:

         "The appellants did not pursue any human rights applications and Mr
         Islam made no submissions  on human rights  issues. The  appellants
         all enjoy family and private life together in  Bangladesh  and  the
         respondent's decisions do not affect the enjoyment of those rights.
         If they wish to restore  the family  life   they  enjoyed  together
         with the sponsor  before she  came  to  the  UK,  the  respondent's
         decisions  will  not  interfere  with  the  family  life  but  will
         facilitate its restoration."

 3. The appellants now appeal against  this  decision,  leave  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson on 17 December 2013.

Grounds of Appeal

 4. In the grounds, complaint is made first that the  judge  did  not  take
    account of a job offer  which had been  made to  the  first  appellant,
    and secondly that he did not take account of the offer of  third  party
    support.  It is submitted that it had not been necessary for the thirty
    party sponsor to be present at  the  hearing  because  he  had  already
    submitted bank statements, and although the sponsor in   his  statement
    had stated that he had savings in his Santander Bank  account,  whereas
    the savings were in a NatWest Bank account, this was a  clerical  error
    which had been dealt with in the grounds of appeal.

 5. With regard to Article 8, it is submitted that this had been raised  in
    the grounds of appeal and accordingly should have been dealt with.

 6. When giving reasons for granting permission to appeal, Judge  Nicholson
    considered that it was arguable that the judge should have  dealt  with
    the appellants' Article 8 rights, even though it was  acknowledged  (at
    paragraph 6 of the reasons) that "appellants are generally unlikely  to
    succeed in a case in which the Rules  are  not  met".   Permission  was
    granted on  the  remaining  grounds  "notwithstanding  that  many  lack
    merit".

The Hearing

 7. I heard submissions on behalf of the  appellants  and  the  respondent,
    which I recorded contemporaneously.  As the record of these submissions
    is contained within my Record of Proceedings, I shall not set out below
    everything which was said to me during the course of the  hearing,  but
    shall refer only to such of the submissions as are  necessary  for  the
    purposes of  this  Determination.   I  have,  however,  had  regard  to
    everything which was said to me as well as to all the  documents  which
    are contained within the file.

 8. On behalf for the appellants, Mr  Thomas  submitted  first  that  Judge
    Simpson  ought  to  have  considered  the  Article  8  rights  of   the
    appellants.  This was because Article 8 gave the appellants a right  to
    private and family life which was not considered.  When  asked  by  the
    Tribunal on what basis the judge could have found  for  the  appellants
    under Article 8, he replied  that  the  first  appellant's  spouse  was
    settled in the UK as a British person and  therefore  her  husband  and
    children had the right to join her.  When he was asked what the purpose
    of the financial requirements contained within the rules was, Mr Thomas
    replied that these were satisfied  because  there  was  a  third  party
    sponsor.  However when he was asked whether, with regard to Article  8,
    there was any factor which made  this case different from other  cases,
    Mr Thomas accepted there was not.

 9. Regarding the maintenance requirements under the Rules, the sponsor had
    supplied bank statements.  Even though there was a shortfall, the first
    appellant had a job offer.  When asked how the judge had made an  error
    of  law  when  rejecting  this  evidence  at   paragraph   7   of   his
    determination, Mr Thomas first said that this offer could be open until
    the appellants reached the UK,  but  then  accepted  that  the  judge's
    finding in which he rejected this evidence had not contained any  error
    of law.

10. Mr Thomas then referred to the third party sponsor, Mr  Chaudhury,  who
    had provided his bank statement and offered to give financial  support.
    When asked by the Tribunal whether or not the judge had  been  entitled
    to consider other evidence when considering whether or  not  to  accept
    the evidence regarding third party support, Mr Thomas responded that he
    had nothing to comment on that but basically he was stressing the error
    of law with regard to Article 8.  However when asked again  what  there
    was in  this case which would entitled the judge to find in  favour  of
    the appellants under Article 8 if their claims could not succeed  under
    the Rules,  all Mr Thomas was able to say was that there were two minor
    children who needed the care of their biological mother.

11. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Deller reminded the Tribunal  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer had not been satisfied that  there  was  enough
    money available to  satisfy  the  maintenance  requirements  under  the
    Rules.   The sponsor had said  that  there  were  three  matters  which
    helped the case of the appellants.  The  first  was  that  third  party
    support was available from her nephew.  The judge dealt  with  that  at
    paragraph 5 and gave his reasons  why  he  was  not  satisfied  on  the
    evidence that this was  realistic offer.   The  next  matter  was  that
    there was a job offer which was open to the first appellant.  The judge
    dealt with that at paragraph 7, in which he gave his reasons why he did
    not feel able to take that into account.  The  third  matter  concerned
    the increase in the sponsor's earnings.  The judge dealt with  that  at
    paragraph 9, in which he gave reasons for rejecting that evidence.

12. Also, it was not clear that the wage increase  which  was  said  to  be
    recent, had been effective before the date of decision, so in any event
    it could not have been taken into account even if the  judge  had  been
    satisfied that it was a real  increase,  which  he  was  not.   So  the
    respondent would say there was nothing wrong with the judge's reasoning
    with regard to his decision that the maintenance  requirement  had  not
    been satisfied.

13. With regard to Article 8, while it was correct that the grounds for the
    original appeal raised Article 8, in very general  terms,  and  it  was
    obviously correct that the case involved  consideration  of  a  family,
    nonetheless a claim under Article 8 could only have  succeeded  at  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  if  reasons  had  been  offered  why  there  were
    considerations in this case which were  strong  enough  to  enable  the
    appellants to succeed under Article 8, even though the requirements  of
    the Rules had not  been   satisfied.   The  fact  that  no  submissions
    appeared to have been made with regard to Article 8, as recorded by the
    judge at paragraph 11, meant  there  was  simply  no  Robinson  obvious
    apparent breach of duty to consider the appellants'  Article  8  rights
    because the appeal could not have succeeded on that basis in any event.



14. The simple existence of children did not of itself  make  any  sort  of
    best interests case, as the family separation was elective anyway.   In
    this case, as was apparent from paragraph 8 of the  determination,  the
    sponsor had come to this  country  originally  intending  to  establish
    herself and then to be joined by her family. So her presence in the  UK
    was a matter of choice rather than a matter of necessity.

15. Drawing these factors together, the respondent would say there  was  no
    error and even if the judge should have taken the lead on Article 8, as
    it was an obvious matter to be decided, there was no basis upon which a
    claim based on Article 8 could  have succeeded anyway.

Discussion

16. In my judgement, there is absolutely no basis upon  which  this  appeal
    could succeed.  With regard to the claim under  the  Rules,  the  judge
    gave his reasons for finding first (at paragraph 5) that he  could  not
    rely on the evidence contained within the papers regarding the offer of
    third party support from Mr Chaudhury and then (at paragraph 7) why  he
    was not satisfied that there was a genuine offer of employment for  the
    first appellant.  Then (at paragraph 9)  he gave  his  reasons  why  he
    could not be satisfied there  had  been   a  genuine  increase  in  the
    sponsor's earnings prior to the date of decision.  There is no arguable
    error of law in any of these findings, and accordingly  no  basis  upon
    which they can properly be challenged now in this Tribunal.

17. With regard to the claim under Article 8, although this claim had  been
    raised, in general terms, in the original grounds  of  appeal,  such  a
    claim was not particularised and it was effectively  abandoned  by  the
    appellants'  representative  at  the  hearing  before  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.  In these circumstances, there was simply no basis upon which
    such a claim could possibly have succeeded, and accordingly the judge's
    failure to given any more detailed reasons for rejecting the  claim  on
    this basis cannot have made a material difference to the outcome.

18. However he had expressed his reasons  for  rejecting  the  claim  under
    Article 8, the outcome would have been the same.   The sponsor chose to
    come to this country in order to establish herself such that she  could
    then maintain her family in accordance with the Rules.  By the time  of
    this application, as found by the judge, she had not done so, and there
    was no good reason why these appellants should not be  subject  to  the
    requirements of the Rules.

19. In the absence of any  specific  reason  why  these  appellants'  cases
    should  be  considered  differently  from   other   cases   where   the
    requirements of the Rules have not been  satisfied,  any  appeal  under
    Article 8 had to be dismissed.

20. It follows that this appeal must be dismissed, and I so find.



Decision

The appellants' appeal is dismissed, on all grounds.



Signed                                  Date: 28 February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Craig


