
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/01063/2014
                                                               oa/01066/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th July 2016                              |On 4th August 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                     MIY
                                     ZIY

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms L Kullar of SH & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants are male siblings born respectively on [ ] 2002 and [  ]
    2006.  They are both citizens of Somalia.  They  applied  together  for
    entry clearance as the dependent children of their father, IYN, who had
    been granted refugee status in the UK and eventually  indefinite  leave
    to remain.  The applications were refused on 21st November 2013 as  the
    Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the Appellants  met  the
    requirements  of  paragraph  352D  of  the  Statement  of  Changes   in
    Immigration Rules HC 395.  The Appellants appealed  and  their  appeals
    were heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham (the Judge)  sitting  at
    Birmingham on 9th September 2014.  She decided to dismiss  the  appeals
    under the Immigration Rules and on Article 8 ECHR human rights  grounds
    for the reasons given in her Decision dated 29th September  2014.   The
    Appellants sought leave to appeal that decision, and on  10th  December
    2014 such permission was granted.

 2. The appeals first came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey on 27th
    January 2016.  He found an error of  law  in  respect  of  the  Judge's
    Article 8 ECHR decision which he set  aside.   He  then  adjourned  the
    appeals for that decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  remade.
    Hence the matter comes before me today for that purpose.

The Hearing

 3. At the hearing before me the Sponsor  gave  evidence-in-chief  and  was
    cross-examined.  What he said is recorded in the Record of Proceedings.
     I also heard submissions.  Mrs Aboni addressed me first when to  begin
    with she said that she relied upon the comments  made  in  the  Refusal
    Notice.  The Appellants have not been able to satisfy the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules as they and the Sponsor have never  been  part
    of a family unit.

 4. As regards Article  8  ECHR,  Mrs  Aboni  accepted  that  there  was  a
    presumption of family life between children and their  natural  father,
    but in this case such family life was very limited.   The  Sponsor  had
    only become aware of the existence of the Appellants some  five  months
    before their applications were made.  The Sponsor  had  never  met  the
    Appellants, and he had not visited them in Kenya.  The Appellants  were
    adequately cared for and attended school.  They had no health problems.
     The present arrangements for their care  could  continue.   Mrs  Aboni
    concluded her submission by saying that in the circumstances  a  breach
    of any family life was proportionate.

 5. In response, Ms Kullar argued that considering the Appellant's history,
    it would be unduly harsh to refuse them family  reunion  now  that  the
    relationship with their father had been established.  Their mother  had
    married and now did not  care  for  them.   The  Sponsor  continued  to
    support the Appellants in Kenya through a cousin of their  mother,  but
    that arrangement could not continue  as  she  had  emigrated  to  South
    Africa.  The Appellants were now cared for by a non-relative which  was
    not a possible long-term solution.  The Appellants and their carer  had
    no status in Kenya.  The  Sponsor  had  not  been  able  to  visit  the
    Appellants in Kenya as he had been persecuted there in the past.  There
    were therefore exceptional circumstances which allowed a decision  that
    there was family life between the  Sponsor  and  the  Appellants.   The
    Sponsor was originally a refugee and could not return to  Somalia.   He
    had no family in Somalia or Kenya.  Therefore any  future  family  life
    between the Appellants and the Sponsor could only be enjoyed in the UK.



Decision and Reasons

 6. It is common ground in these appeals that the  Appellants  cannot  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules as  regards  family  reunion.
    The only issue which I have to decide is whether the refusal  of  their
    applications by the Entry Clearance Officer in Nairobi  amounted  to  a
    disproportionate breach of their family life with their natural father.



 7. There was little dispute as to the facts and those which are relevant I
    find to be as follows.

 8. The Sponsor had been detained in the same prison as the mother  of  the
    Appellants between 1998 and 2006.  Whilst there he had formed something
    of a relationship with the Appellants' mother.  As  a  consequence  she
    had become pregnant in 2001 and 2005 and subsequently had  given  birth
    to the Appellants.  When she became pregnant,  the  Appellants'  mother
    had been removed from the prison only returning after  her  confinement
    without her children.  The Sponsor had not known of the births  of  the
    Appellants.  He had not been told of  the  births  by  the  Appellants'
    mother.  She had given the name of a different man to her family as the
    father.

 9. Following his release from prison, the Sponsor had lived in  a  refugee
    camp in Kenya before coming to the UK where he had been granted refugee
    status and later indefinite leave to remain.

10. The Appellants' mother had been released from prison in 2005.  She  had
    cared for the Appellants until they had gone to live in Kenya in  2013.
    In May 2013 she had contacted the Sponsor as she had become  unable  to
    look after the Appellants as she was suffering from HIV/AIDS.  This was
    the first the Sponsor had known of the Appellants.  He had arranged for
    DNA tests which had confirmed him to be  their  father.   He  had  then
    arranged for the Appellants to seek  leave  to  join  him  in  the  UK.
    There had been no contact  between  the  Sponsor  and  the  Appellants'
    mother between 2005 and 2013.

11. At the time of the application for entry clearance, the Appellants  had
    been living in Nairobi with the Sponsor's mother and a cousin of  their
    mother named Y.  The Sponsor's mother had subsequently died, and Y  had
    gone to South Africa in order to marry.  The Appellants were now  cared
    for by a man named A who  was  not  a  relative.   That  had  been  the
    situation for the past six months.  However A had no status in Kenya.

12. The Sponsor had never been able to visit the Appellants.  He had  never
    met them face to  face.   He  had  sent  some  money  to  A  for  their
    maintenance, and contacted the Appellants by telephone.

13. The Sponsor had no other relatives in Kenya or Somalia.  The Appellants
    attended school, and both were in good health.

14. As I said earlier, the only issue remaining  to  be  decided  in  these
    appeals is  whether  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  amounts  to  a
    disproportionate breach of the rights of the Appellants and the Sponsor
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.  That issue is to be decided according  to
    the circumstances at the date of the hearing.  I must decide the  issue
    by answering the five questions posed by the late  Lord  Bingham  in  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  The  first  question  is  whether  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision amounts  to  an  interference  by  a
    public authority with the exercise of the right to respect for  private
    or family life.  To answer that question, I must first  decide  if  the
    Appellants have a family life with  the  Sponsor.   I  accept  that  as
    acknowledged by Mrs Aboni,  there  is  a  presumption  of  family  life
    between a father and his natural  children.   However,  whether  family
    life exists is a question of fact, and something more is necessary than
    a mere biological connection.  In this case,  I  find  no  family  life
    between the Appellants and the Sponsor.   It  is  true  that  since  he
    became aware of their existence, the Sponsor has  sent  money  for  the
    Appellants'  maintenance  and  has  spoken  with  them  by   telephone.
    However, the Appellants have never met their father face to  face,  and
    they have never lived together in  the  same  household.   What  little
    relationship they have has only persisted for the past three  years,  a
    small proportion of the Appellants' lives.  In  these  circumstances  I
    find no family life between the Appellants and the Sponsor.  Of  course
    there is no question of the Appellants having a private life in the  UK
    which they have never visited.

15. In the  alternative,  and  if  there  is  a  family  life  between  the
    Appellants and the Sponsor, the second question can be answered in  the
    affirmative.  It is clear that the interference  caused  by  preventing
    the Appellants from coming to the UK will  have  consequences  of  such
    gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.

16. The answers to the third and fourth questions are not in dispute.  I am
    satisfied that the interference referred to above will be in accordance
    with the  law  and  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  to  maintain
    immigration control which is required for the  economic  well-being  of
    the country.

17. The remaining question is whether such interference is proportionate to
    the legitimate public end  sought.   I  find  that  it  is.   There  is
    considerable weight to be attached to the public interest in  that  the
    Appellants do not qualify for entry  clearance  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  In my judgment the  circumstances  of  the  Appellants  do  not
    outweigh that interest.  I have already  found  that  the  family  life
    between the Appellants and the Sponsor, if it exists at all, amounts to
    very little.  The  Appellants  have  the  financial  support  of  their
    father, and they have someone to look after them in  Kenya.   They  are
    being educated, and they are in good health.  The Sponsor can  continue
    his contact with the Appellants by modern methods of communication.

Notice of Decision

The appeals are dismissed on human rights grounds.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons originally given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Dated 04/08/2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeals have been dismissed there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
