
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01453/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination promulgated  |
|on 19th September 2013                          |on 23rd September 2013     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                            Mohamed Fadhel Othman
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer, TUNISIA
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr D Duheric, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McGavin, promulgated on 28th  May  2013,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against refusal of entry clearance as the husband of a UK citizen ("the
    Sponsor").

 2. The two issues now raised are (a) whether the judge  was  correct  that
    provision of the Sponsor's self-assessment  tax  return  for  the  year
    ended 5th April 2011 did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules HC 395 at Appendix FM-SE paragraph 7 because that  was  not  "the
    latest annual self-assessment tax return to HMRC"; and (b) whether  the
    judge was correct to find that bank statements provided  did  not  meet
    the requirements of the Appendix for specified evidence because most of
    the  Sponsor's  business  takings  were  not  paid  into  the   account
    concerned.

 3. The visa application giving rise  to  these  proceedings  was  made  in
    September 2012.  The Sponsor's accountancy and tax years are the  same.
     The tax return produced was for the year to 5 April 2011.  Mr  Duheric
    said that the tax return for 2011 - 12 did  not  fall  due  until  31st
    January 2013.  He argued that the requirement  for  the  latest  return
    should be construed so as to mean the last return which had  been  due,
    or the last one which had been made.  To require the return for the tax
    year last ended was unrealistic.  Tax returns are not made  immediately
    upon completion of the tax year but between then and the due date.  The
    interpretation proposed by the Respondent would  make  it  a  practical
    impossibility to apply from completion of the tax year  until  accounts
    were completed and the return was prepared, which commonly took several
    months.

 4. The  Presenting  Officer  referred  to  the  Respondent's  departmental
    instructions (IDI's) at paragraph 9.3.3: "The evidence  submitted  must
    cover  the  relevant  financial  year(s)  most  recently  ended".   She
    submitted that the terms of the Rules were correctly construed  in  the
    IDI.

 5. Both interpretations of this requirement are arguable, I prefer the one
    which makes more practical sense, and does not make life  unnecessarily
    difficult for applicants.  I would resolve issue (a) in favour  of  the
    Appellant.

 6. On issue (b),  Mrs  O'Brien  referred  to  the  Rules.   These  require
    production of:

         (e)  Where the person  holds  or  held  a  separate  business  bank
             account(s), monthly bank statements for the same twelve  month
             period as the tax return(s).

         (f)  Monthly personal bank statements for  the  same  twelve  month
             period as the tax return(s) showing that the income from self-
             employment has been paid into an account in the  name  of  the
             person or in the name of the person and their partner jointly.

 7. In this case the  Sponsor  used  the  same  account  for  business  and
    personal purposes, so (e) did not apply.  Requirement  (f)  did  apply.
    Monthly bank statements were produced in the First-tier  Tribunal,  but
    unfortunately they did not show all  the  income  from  self-employment
    being paid in.  The Presenting Officer submitted that deposits into the
    bank account could  not  be  shown  to  correspond  with  the  business
    takings, or with net income.

 8. The Sponsor is a  hairdresser,  operating  a  cash  business.   It  was
    accepted that she does not deposit all her takings.   So  long  as  she
    records them, I do not think there can be anything wrong with that  for
    accountancy or tax purposes.  However, that practice  does  not  enable
    the Appellant's application to meet the requirements of the  Rules.   I
    see no way in which issue (b) might be resolved in his favour.

 9. The background to this case seems  very  unfortunate.   The  Appellant,
    acting properly and on good legal  advice,  returned  from  the  UK  to
    Tunisia with a view to making  an  entry  clearance  application  as  a
    spouse.  It took time to meet the English language requirement.  In the
    meantime,  the  Immigration  Rules  changed  radically   and   to   his
    disadvantage.

10. The Appellant and his wife could not have foreseen the book-keeping and
    banking requirements with which they would  have  to  comply  over  the
    period of a financial year in advance of submitting a visa application.
     They appear to have done their best to supply the  evidence  available
    to them, but it simply is not capable of meeting the legal requirements
    which have come into force.

11. Departure from the Immigration Rules is up to the discretion of the ECO
    (or the SSHD).  It is not a matter over which the  First-tier  Tribunal
    or the Upper Tribunal has any power - 2002  Act,  section  86(6).   The
    practice some years ago  of  judges  making  "recommendations"  to  the
    Respondent in apparently sympathetic cases has been frowned  upon.   It
    is not for a tribunal to trespass upon the province of  the  executive,
    except where that is in its statutory jurisdiction.  All I can  say  is
    that from what is known of the case history and relevant  circumstances
    here, this seems to be a case where consideration might yet be given to
    exercising discretion.

12. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

13. No anonymity order applies.



                           [pic]


                           23 September 2013
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
