
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01136/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |          Decision & Reasons      |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 15th July 2015                        |          On 20th July 2015       |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - COLOMBO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

             MRS MUTHUTHANTHRI PATABANDIGE MONICA LUSLYN BERNARD
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms F Beach, Counsel instructed by Rex Jeon Mendis


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   I shall refer to the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 7th May 1939.   Her  appeal
    against the refusal of entry clearance  as  a  dependent  relative  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Symes on 5th March 2015 under  the
    Immigration Rules and on Article 8 grounds.



2.   The Respondent applied for permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that
    there  was  no  medical  evidence  from  a  doctor  or   other   health
    professional before the Tribunal to show that the Appellant's  physical
    or mental condition meant that she could not perform everyday tasks  or
    that she required long-term  care,  nor  was  there  evidence  from  an
    appropriate body listed in the  Immigration  Rules  to  show  that  the
    Appellant was unable, even with the practical and financial help of the
    family members in the UK, to obtain the required level of care  in  Sri
    Lanka.

3.   Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McClure on 28th April 2015 on the grounds that  it  was  arguable
    the medical condition of the Appellant had not been substantiated so as
    to meet the requirements of the Rules. Also there  was  clear  evidence
    that help and assistance was available in Sri Lanka such  that  it  was
    arguable that the Appellant could not  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules. The arguable error of law with regard to the  Immigration  Rules
    impacted on the approach to be taken with regard to Article 8.

4.   The Appellant submitted a Rule 24  response  which  in  summary  stated
    that First-tier Tribunal Judge  Symes  made  reference  to  the  expert
    evidence  which  was  before  him  and  which  was  not   substantially
    challenged by the Respondent. The Judge had  carefully  considered  and
    assessed all the relevant issues prior to finding that the  Immigration
    Rules were met.


Submissions

5.   In submissions, Mr Jarvis for the Respondent  stated  that  there  were
    plain errors of law in the Judge's findings.  The approach to  Appendix
    FM-SE had been endorsed by the Court of Appeal  in  SS  (Congo)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387 and in the interests of  consistent  decision  making  the
    requirements of paragraph FM-SE had to be strictly applied. The  expert
    report of Dr Chris Smith did not satisfy the requirements of paragraphs
    34 or 35 of Appendix FM-SE.

6.   The evidence at page 255 of the Appellant's bundle from  Dr  Mendis,  a
    medical assessment of the Appellant, also did not satisfy paragraph  35
    because, although the doctor dealt with the  Appellant's  inability  to
    perform everyday tasks, there was nothing in the report  to  show  that
    the Appellant could not obtain care  and  support  in  Sri  Lanka.  The
    Appellant had the assistance of a local carer, but the local carer  was
    taking advantage of her. Therefore, there was available care. The  Rule
    was strict in this sense. There was nothing from  the  doctor  to  show
    that the Appellant could not be cared for outside of the family.

7.   In relation to Article 8,  Mr  Jarvis  submitted  that  the  Judge  had
    proceeded on the wrong footing having effectively allowed the appeal on
    the basis of the Immigration Rules. Applying SS (Congo), there  had  to
    be compelling circumstances in order to succeed under Article 8 and for
    leave to be granted outside the Immigration Rules.  The Judge  made  no
    reference to any compelling circumstances and there was no  reason  why
    this Appellant's appeal should be allowed when she  did  not  meet  the
    evidential requirements of the Immigration Rules.

8.   On  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  Ms  Beach  submitted  that  there  was
    sufficient medical evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  to  support
    the finding that the Appellant satisfied the Immigration Rules. At page
    135 of the Appellant's bundle Dr Mendis recommended that the  Appellant
    should be with one of her children.  At page  255  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle Dr Mendis confirmed that there were no children  living  locally
    and that the Appellant's state of depression was such that  she  needed
    the care of her family. It was not safe that she  was  left  unattended
    and the care that had so far been provided was insufficient to  support
    her needs. The Appellant did not need a domestic worker  but  emotional
    support and care, which could  only  be  provided  by  family  members.
    Accordingly, the Appellant had satisfied paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE
    in that she was not able to obtain the required  level  of  care.   She
    required the emotional care of her family and none of her family  lived
    in Sri Lanka in order to be able to care for her.

9.   The First-tier Tribunal accepted the evidence  of  both  Sponsors,  the
    Appellant's daughter and son-in-law, and their evidence was  consistent
    with the medical evidence provided. The evidence of Dr Chris Smith  was
    additional evidence which  supported  the  Sponsor's  evidence  of  the
    difficulties in getting domestic help and the fact that  the  Appellant
    was being taken advantage of.  It was not suggested that  his  evidence
    was sufficient to fulfil the requirements of  paragraph  34  or  35  of
    Appendix FM-SE.

10.  Ms Beach submitted that the letter  at  page  255  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle, the medical assessment of  the  Appellant  by  Dr  Mendis,  was
    sufficient to satisfy the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.  In
    addition, the Judge was entitled to look at  all  the  evidence  before
    him. There was sufficient evidence to satisfy the  specified  documents
    under Appendix FM-SE and sufficient evidence before the Judge to  allow
    the appeal.  It was clear from the Judge's findings that  the  required
    level of care for the Appellant was to have  a  caring  family  looking
    after her and this was not possible if she remained in Sri Lanka.

11.  In relation to Article 8, Ms Beach submitted that this was  not  relied
    on in the grounds of appeal, although it was raised  in  the  grant  of
    permission.  It was not the case that the Judge had  proceeded  on  the
    basis that the Appellant could satisfy the Immigration Rules because he
    quite  clearly  stated  that  he  was  considering  Article  8  in  the
    alternative and in undertaking such a consideration he found  that  the
    Respondent's decision was in accordance with the law.  Accordingly,  it
    was quite clear that the Judge considered Article  8  and  a  grant  of
    leave outside the Immigration  Rules.  The  Judge  had  given  adequate
    reasons  for  why   the   refusal   of   entry   clearance   would   be
    disproportionate in his decision.

12.  In response, Mr Jarvis submitted that the emphasis of  the  Immigration
    Rules was not whether the Appellant needed to be with her  family.   It
    was not a case of whether the Appellant's depression could  be  treated
    more easily if she came to the UK. The Appellant had to show that there
    was no one in Sri Lanka to assist her and nobody  that  could  deal  or
    engage with her mental health disorder. That evidence, from  a  medical
    professional in compliance with the specified documents, was not before
    the Judge.

13.  If the Appellant failed under the Immigration Rules then the Judge  had
    also erred in his assessment of Article 8  because  he  had  failed  to
    engage with why there were compelling reasons for entry clearance to be
    granted outside the Immigration Rules.  The Judge had not engaged  with
    how the Appellant had failed to satisfy the Rules or why she had failed
    to do so and had not provided  evidence  as  to  her  reasons  for  her
    inability to comply.


Discussion and Conclusions

14.  The Judge accepted  the  evidence  of  the  Sponsors,  the  Appellant's
    daughter and son-in-law, Mrs Maresky  Mendis  and  Mr  Rex  Mendis.  At
    paragraphs 25-27 the Judge made the following findings:


    (i)  "The medical reports clearly set out that the  Appellant's  mental
         health problems cannot be realistically catered for without  family
         support This was a longstanding situation, hence  the  report  from
         Professor  Kathriarachchi  stated  that  her   depression   is   of
         persistent low mood."


    (ii) "The evidence is that the health condition of  the  Appellant  has
         deteriorated since her husband's death. The real issue is  that  an
         elderly,  recently-bereaved  woman  with  serious  health  problems
         requires significantly more help than simply physical support. Only
         the proximity of close family members can  provide  the  human  and
         emotional support she needs on a regular basis."


    (iii)    "Her care regime has been  found  inadequate  because  of  the
         culture amongst domestic carers in Sri Lanka of which she  has  had
         specific and unsatisfactory experience,  who  are  in  general  too
         poorly educated to ensure that her health  care  should  she  enter
         hospital is carried out with the necessary focus and expertise, and
         who are as likely to prey on their elderly charges where  they  are
         unsupported by local family members as they  are  to  secure  their
         welfare.  The expert evidence  to  such  effect  is  unrebutted  by
         contrary  material  from  the  Respondent  and  was  not  seriously
         challenged in the submissions made for the Secretary of State."

15.  The Judge's  decision  was  based  on  the  medical  evidence  and  the
    evidence of the Sponsors.  It  was  clear  from  paragraph  20  of  the
    decision that the Judge relied  on  three  doctors'  letters  from  two
    different practitioners and evidence in the  report  of  Dr  Smith  who
    commented on the availability of healthcare.

16.  The Appellant suffered from mental health issues, which meant that  she
    required more  help  than  merely  physical  support.  If  admitted  to
    hospital paid carers, who were  generally  poorly  educated,  would  be
    unable to deal with  such  procedures  with  the  necessary  focus  and
    expertise.

17.  After hearing submissions, I am of the view  that  the  issue  in  this
    case is essentially whether the evidence at page 255 of the Appellant's
    bundle, the medical assessment  of  the  Appellant  by  Dr  Mendis,  is
    sufficient to satisfy paragraphs 34 and  35  of  Appendix  FM-SE  which
    states:


         "Family members: specified evidence: adult dependent relatives


         34.  Evidence that, as a result of age, illness or disability,  the
             applicant requires long-term personal  care  should  take  the
             form of medical evidence  that  the  applicant's  physical  or
             mental condition means that they cannot perform everyday tasks
             and this must be from a doctor or other health professional.


         35.  Evidence that the applicant is unable, even with the practical
             and financial help of the Sponsor in the  UK,  to  obtain  the
             required level of care in the country where  they  are  living
             should be from a central or local health  authority,  a  local
             authority or a doctor or other health professional."


18.  The Judge found that the Appellant's mental health problems  could  not
    realistically be catered for without family support.  The Rules clearly
    state that the Appellant is to provide evidence that she is  unable  to
    obtain the required level of care. The  Appellant  could  not  get  the
    required level of care because her  family  were  not  present  in  Sri
    Lanka.  Medical opinion was that the Appellant required the care of her
    family.

19.  Accordingly, I find that the evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was sufficient to satisfy Appendix FM-SE and the Judge was entitled  to
    conclude that the Appellant satisfied the relevant requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules. I find that there was sufficient medical evidence to
    show that the Appellant required help with everyday tasks and that  she
    was unable even, with the practical and financial help of the Sponsors,
    to obtain the required level of care  in  the  country  where  she  was
    living.  I find that there was no error of law in the Judge's  decision
    under the Immigration Rules.

20.  However, if I am wrong about this, then I make the  following  findings
    in relation to Article 8. It is clear from paragraph 30 that the  judge
    considered Article 8 in the alternative.  He states:

         "In the alternative I consider the appeal under  the  Human  Rights
         Convention.  I bear in mind that the Rules  set  a  high  threshold
         which represents government policy as to the limited  circumstances
         in which a parent can join children here."

21.   I  find  that  the  Judge's  consideration  of  Article  8   was   not
    inconsistent with  SS  (Congo)  as  submitted  by  Mr  Jarvis  for  the
    following reasons. At paragraph 52 of the judgment the Court of  Appeal
    held that:

         "The  evidence  rules  have  the  same  general  objective  as  the
         substantive rules,  namely  to  limit  the  risk  that  someone  is
         admitted into the United Kingdom  and  then  becomes  a  burden  on
         public resources, and the Secretary of State has the  same  primary
         function in relation to them, to assess the  risk  and  to  put  in
         place measures which are  judged  suitable  to  contain  it  within
         acceptable bounds. Similar weight should be given to her assessment
         of what the public interest requires in both contexts."


22.  At paragraph 53 of the judgment the Court held:
         "Good reason would need to be shown why a particular applicant  was
         entitled to more preferential treatment with  respect  to  evidence
         than other applicants would expect to receive under the Rules"
23.  And at paragraph 56:
         "If an applicant can show that there are  individual  interests  at
         stake covered by Article 8 which give rise to a strong  claim  that
         compelling circumstances may exist to justify the grant of leave to
         enter outside the Rules, the fact that their case is also  a  'near
         miss' may be a relevant consideration which tips the balance  under
         Article 8 in their favour.  In such a case the  applicant  will  be
         able to say that the detrimental impact on the public  interest  in
         issue if leave to enter is granted in their favour will be somewhat
         less than in a case where the gap between the applicant's  position
         and the requirements of the Rules is great and the risk  that  they
         may end up  having  recourse  to  public  funds  and  resources  is
         therefore greater."
24.  The Judge made the following findings at paragraph 33 of the decision
    dated 5th March 2015:
         "In assessing  whether  the  interference  is  disproportionate,  I
         consider the following factors:
         (a)  Far from being a case where the Appellant might be thought  to
             be a burden on public funds in the future,  the  Sponsors  are
             able to maintain and accommodate  her  at  an  adequate  level
             applying the test set out under the nearest  comparable  Rule,
             given that the maintenance test for adult dependent  relatives
             is  simply  whether  they  can   be   adequately   maintained,
             accommodated and cared for in the UK by  the  Sponsor  without
             recourse to public funds.
         (b)  Whereas the Appellant if she remains in Sri Lanka is likely to
             live out her days alone and fearful, in an  increasingly  poor
             state of mental health which is stigmatised by  society,  here
             there is a  real  prospect  that,  with  the  company  of  her
             grandchildren she may be able to enjoy an active family  life:
             as the European Court said in Pretty v United  Kingdom  [2002]
             35 EHRR 1, paragraph 65, 'the very essence of  the  Convention
             is respect for human dignity and human freedom'."
25.  I find that it is clear from this paragraph that the  Judge  has  taken
    into account the public interest and the weight to be attached thereto.
      The  Appellant  has  shown  good  reason  why  she  was  entitled  to
    preferential treatment and the circumstances set out at paragraph 33 of
    the First-tier Tribunal decision are sufficiently compelling to justify
    a grant of entry clearance outside the Immigration Rules.
26.  I find that if the Judge made an error of law  in  his  application  of
    the Immigration Rules there was no error of law in  his  assessment  of
    Article 8. Accordingly, I find that there is no error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  Respondent's  appeal  is
    dismissed.  The decision of 5th March 2015 shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date 20th July 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



