
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01432/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th May 2017                               |On 23rd May 2017              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               mr adeel farooq
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mohammad Latif (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ghani, promulgated on 13th  May  2016,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham Sheldon Court on 7th April 2016.  In the determination,  the
    judge allowed the appeal of the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent
    Entry Clearance Officer in Islamabad, subsequently applied for, and was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, who  was  born  on  6th
    January 1990.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    10th December 2014, refusing his application  for  entry  clearance  to
    join his British citizen wife as her spouse under Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Appellant's wife's name is Shazia Begum.

The Respondent's Decision

 3. The basis of the  Respondent's  decision  is  that  the  Appellant  had
    previously applied for entry clearance as a family visitor in the  name
    of Shabir Ud Din, with a date of birth  being  given  as  11th  October
    1992.  Fingerprints showed that the Appellant and this person were  the
    same person.  These facts were material  to  the  application  and  the
    Appellant did not disclose these  facts.   Therefore,  his  application
    stood to be refused under paragraph EC-P.1.1(c) of Appendix FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge heard evidence from Mrs Shazia Begum, that the Appellant  was
    her cousin, and she had known him all her life  as  Adeel  Farooq,  and
    that they were married on 31st  October  2012  in  Pakistan,  following
    which she returned back  to  the  UK,  and  has  thereafter  maintained
    contact with her husband through phone cards and other means.  She also
    visited her husband in Pakistan on 22nd October 2013 to  26th  November
    2013.  Furthermore, in order to confirm her husband's identity she  had
    also produced a copy of the Punjab Police Character  Certificate.   The
    Appellant's Pakistani passport also makes reference to  his  ID  number
    and confirms his identity.   The  signatures  on  these  documents  are
    identical to the Appellant (see paragraph 12).

 5. The judge then gave specific consideration to the basis upon which  the
    application had been refused, namely, that he had  failed  to  disclose
    material facts, namely, that the Appellant had applied in the  name  of
    Shabir Ud Din with a date of birth of 11th October 1992 (see  paragraph
    15).  However, the judge was  satisfied  that  his  identity  has  been
    substantiated by numerous documents which the Appellant  had  produced,
    such as the  character  certificate  from  Punjab  Police,  the  family
    registration certificate, and a letter from the International  Hospital
    there (paragraph 17).

 6. Consideration was also given by the judge to paragraph EC-P.1.(c) which
    stipulated that the Applicant must fall for refusal under  any  of  the
    grounds in Sections S-EC - suitability.  In particular, the judge noted
    that under  2.2(b)  there  is  reference  to  whether  or  not  to  the
    Applicant's knowledge there has been a  failure  to  disclose  material
    facts,  such  that  an  application  would  normally  be   refused   on
    suitability grounds here.  However, given  that  the  reference  is  to
    "normally be refused" what they suggest, according to  the  judge,  was
    that "it is not a mandatory refusal as 1.1" (see paragraph 20).

 7. The judge then recounted how the visit application, where the Appellant
    had given a false identity, occurred some seven  or  eight  years  ago,
    when the Appellant was approximately 16 or 17 years  of  age,  and  the
    issue now  was  whether  the  non-disclosure  of  that  application  is
    material to the current application of  the  Appellant.   She  reasoned
    that the judiciary meaning  of  the  "material"  signifies  the  likely
    influence on the determination of a case, or substantial input, of much
    consequence, or as  pertinent  or  essential.   She  went  on  even  to
    speculate that if the Appellant was to submit an application today  and
    had disclosed his previous application as a visitor, it was likely that
    the  Appellant  would  not  have  his  visitor's  application  refused.
    Nevertheless, as the judge further explained, the issue was not whether
    the  Appellant  was  now  making  a  visitor's  application,  but  what
    relevance a previous deception in relation to a visitor's  application,
    and for a marriage application made some seven or  eight  years  later.
    As she pointed out, "what constitutes material facts  for  the  current
    application is the fact that they are married, they have the  intention
    to live together, that the marriage is genuine and  it  is  subsisting"
    (paragraph 21).

 8. The judge allowed the appeal.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in  allowing  the
    appeal against refusal of entry clearance as a partner  under  Appendix
    FM by giving insufficient weight or no weight whatsoever  to  the  fact
    that the Appellant had previously applied  for  entry  clearance  as  a
    visitor using false identity.

10. On 23rd January 2017, permission to appeal was granted.

11. Thereafter, a Rule 24 response was entered,  of  three  pages,  by  the
    Appellant's representative.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me, Mr Mills relied upon the Grounds  of  Appeal.
    He submitted that the Appellant could  not  get  passed  the  threshold
    requirement of "suitability"  because  there  had  been  a  failure  to
    disclose a material fact.  Second, the ECO had taken the point that the
    Appellant had applied under two different identities, so that one could
    not be certain who the Appellant  really  was.   In  fact,  it  is  not
    disputed at all that the Appellant had exercised deception  some  seven
    or eight years ago.  Third, and no  less  importantly,  the  judge  had
    erred at paragraph 21 when she had said that, "the issue is whether the
    non-disclosure  of  that  application  is  material  ...",  because  at
    paragraph 320(11), although not raised in the refusal decision  itself,
    was  relevant,  because  the  Appellant  had  used  deception   in   an
    application.  The judge did not consider paragraph 320(11).   Moreover,
    the judge did not exercise her discretion  in  concluding  whether  the
    Appellant could now succeed, given that a  person  in  the  Appellant's
    position could be refused "normally", but not on mandatory grounds.  It
    said the judge had simply moved to conclude that because  the  marriage
    was genuine and subsisting the Appellant would succeed.

13. For his part, Mr Latif  submitted  that  any  reliance  upon  paragraph
    320(11) was misconceived for the following reasons.  First, the ECO had
    not raised it, the HOPO had not raised it at the hearing,  the  Grounds
    of Appeal did not raise it, and there had been no notice of raising  it
    today, and certainly no application to  amend  the  Grounds  of  Appeal
    today either.  The effect of now bringing it forward  was  to  "ambush"
    the Appellant's side, who had gone to the trouble of submitting a  Rule
    24 response, in which they had carefully attempted  to  deal  with  the
    Grounds of Refusal taken against the Appellant.   Second,  and  in  any
    event, paragraph 320(11) related to "the" application.   The  reference
    to "the" application here was the application for a marriage settlement
    visa.  It was not a reference to any application made  seven  or  eight
    years ago.  Finally,  the  judge  did  give  express  consideration  to
    Section S-EC - suitability.  She expressed that she also considered  S-
    EC.2.1, where it  is  stated  that  the  applicant  will  "normally  be
    refused" on  grounds  of  suitability.   Thereafter,  she  went  on  to
    consider the failure to disclose material facts (see paragraph 19).

14. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that there is  a  distinction  between  S-
    EC.2.2(a) and S-EC.2.2(b).  The latter is an alternative to the former.
     The latter is not failing to disclose facts in the  application.   The
    Appellant had plainly applied under another name and this was  material
    to the current application.  For the judge simply to  state  that  this
    was a genuine and subsisting marriage, and therefore the appeal  should
    be allowed, was to fail to engage with the provisions of the law before
    her.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

16. First, it is not true that the judge does not consider  how  discretion
    should be exercised upon the application of the Rules, namely, the Rule
    here being S-EC.2.1, which states that the Applicant will "normally  be
    refused".  After recognising that this is not a mandatory  refusal  (at
    paragraph 20), the judge then goes on to consider what it means to  say
    "material" in a particular situation.  She goes so far as to  say  that
    if a similar visitor's application was made today, with full disclosure
    of the facts, the chances are that the Appellant would not  be  refused
    entry, and all of this simply demonstrates in no inadequate terms, that
    the judge was fully engaging with the  provisions  and  exercising  her
    discretion.  However, the judge then proceeds on to consider  what  the
    material facts will be in relation to the  current  application,  where
    the parties are married and have an intention to live together, and the
    marriage is genuine and subsisting.  She goes on to say that,  "I  find
    that in this case, the Respondent had a discretion which ought to  have
    been exercised in the Appellant's favour" (paragraph 21) and she  gives
    her reasons for so concluding.

17. Second, the issue of paragraph 320(11) was not raised  in  the  refusal
    letter, not raised in the submissions of the HOPO at the  hearing,  and
    not raised in the Grounds of Appeal.

18. Third, applications made  under  Appendix  FM  under  A320  state  that
    "paragraphs 320 (except sub-paragraph (iii), (x) and (xi)) and  322  do
    not apply to any application for entry clearance,  leave  to  enter  or
    leave to remain as a family member under Appendix FM ...".

Notice of Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd May 2017
