
[pic]
IAC-PE-SW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01507/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 October 2015                   |On 7 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     Jay
                         (anonymity Direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Cronin of Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Miss S Sreeraman of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen whose year of birth is given  as  2006.   By
    reason of a court order made in  late  2012  by  the  Ghanaian  Circuit
    Court, the Appellant then known by  another  name  became  the  adopted
    child of his United Kingdom Sponsor.   She  is  a  British  citizen  by
    naturalisation, born in Ghana in 1962.

 2. The Sponsor married a Nigerian national in the United Kingdom  in  2001
    and her evidence is that the marriage has collapsed as long ago as 2002
    (see paragraph 2 of the Sponsor's second statement) and a  decree  nisi
    was pronounced on 6 October 2015  in  the  Romford  Family  Court.  The
    Sponsor stated her  husband  has  returned  to  Ghana.   There  was  no
    documentary evidence of this.

 3. The Sponsor stated she had previously made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance for her adopted son on  27  September  2013  which  had  been
    refused.

The Respondent's Decision

 4. On 19 December 2013 the Respondent refused the  application  solely  by
    way of reference to  paragraph  310  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Respondent noted the Appellant had been a foundling and had been  cared
    for by the woman who found him.  She had reported finding  him  to  the
    police but had been asked to look after him on an interim basis.   Some
    three years later she had returned to the police and stated that due to
    financial reasons she was unable any longer to  look  after  him.   The
    Appellant was then sent to a children's home.

 5. The Respondent considered  there  was  a  lack  of  evidence  that  the
    Appellant had been on the waiting list for  would-be  adoptive  parents
    for a long time.  References were made to the adoption  order  querying
    its validity and to the United Kingdom Regulations currently  in  force
    in respect of adoptions of  children  from  designated  countries.   In
    January 2014 Ghana was removed from the List  of  Designated  Countries
    whose adoptions are recognised by the United  Kingdom  as  being  legal
    Overseas Adoptions. In this case the adoption order was made when Ghana
    was still on the List.

 6. The notice of decision concluded the Sponsor had not shown she had  and
    had had sole responsibility for the Appellant.  The Respondent referred
    to the lack of evidence of contact which the Sponsor attributed to  the
    use of international calling cards as the principal means by which  she
    maintained contact with the Appellant.

 7. The Respondent went on to consider whether there were  any  exceptional
    compassionate  circumstances  making   exclusion   of   the   Appellant
    undesirable and concluded there were none and refused  the  application
    by way of reference to paragraphs 310(i)(e)  and   310(x)-(xi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 8. On 28 January 2014 the Appellant through the Sponsor lodged  notice  of
    appeal under Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002 as amended (the 2002 Act).  The grounds make the  point  that  the
    2012 adoption order is recognised because at the time Ghana was on  the
    List of Designated Countries.  The grounds refer  to  a  report  of  30
    November 2012 prepared by the Department of Social Welfare (the Report)
    for the court in Ghana which considered whether  to  make  an  adoption
    order.  The grounds assert the Appellant was living with the  Sponsor's
    sister and gave an explanation why the money which the Sponsor sent  to
    Ghana for his maintenance was sent for collection by others.   Evidence
    of income which the Sponsor and other members of  her  family  received
    from rents paid by the Ghana police had been submitted and the  use  of
    international telephone cards was explained  as  a  means  of  reducing
    communication costs.

 9. On 26 August 2014 the Entry Clearance  Manager  reviewed  the  decision
    referring to the suspension of all adoption cases in Ghana from 18 June
    2013 (some six months after the Appellant's  adoption  order  had  been
    made) and the removal of Ghana from the List of Designated Countries on
    4 January 2014.  She went on to consider the  Respondent's  obligations
    under Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration  Act  2009
    and referred to a memorandum of  20  June  2014  said  to  highlight  a
    significant number of discrepancies and inaccuracies  in  the  adoption
    order paperwork.  No copy of that memorandum has been supplied  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.

10. She went on to agree with the finding that the Sponsor  had  not  shown
    she had sole responsibility for  the  Appellant,  noting  the  lack  of
    evidence of the advanced age of the Sponsor's sister and current  carer
    for the Appellant and the arrangements made for  collection  of  monies
    sent by the Sponsor for the Appellant.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

11. By a decision promulgated on 26 February 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Roopnarine-Davies dismissed the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article  8  of  the  European  Convention  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, applying Mundeba (s.55 and para.  297(i)(f))  [2013]
    UKUT 00088 (IAC).  At the hearing the Respondent accepted as valid  the
    2012 adoption order which had first been acknowledged by  a  memorandum
    of 20 June 2014. In the same memorandum the Respondent  had  found  the
    Sponsor had  not  established  she  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant and that the evidence in support  of  the  Appellant's  claim
    "lacked overall coherence".

12. The Appellant sought permission to appeal and on 29 April 2015 Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Brunnen granted permission  on  the  basis  the
    Judge's findings whether the Sponsor had sole  responsibility  did  not
    sufficiently identify the test she was applying and her conclusion  was
    inadequately reasoned which might have infected her  findings  on  what
    were the best interests of the Appellant.



Error of Law Hearing

13. Following a hearing on 2 September 2015 I prepared  and  signed  on  10
    September 2015 a decision to the effect that the First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision promulgated on 26 February contained errors of law such  that
    it should be set aside and  no  findings  preserved.   The  substantive
    appeal came before me at a hearing on 28 October 2015 when both parties
    said that  they  had  not  seen  a  copy  of  the  decision  signed  on
    10 September 2015.  Copies were handed to them.  It would appear  from
    the  Tribunal  file  that   the   decision   was   never   promulgated.
    Consequently, it is annexed to this decision.

The Hearing Afresh in the Upper Tribunal

14. Both parties took time to consider my error of law  decision  and  went
    outside the hearing room to discuss it.  On resuming the  hearing  they
    confirmed it was agreed that the sole  issue  for  the  re-hearing  was
    whether the Appellant's mother (the Sponsor)  had  sole  responsibility
    for him.  She was present and I explained to her the purpose of and the
    procedure to be adopted at the hearing.

The Standard and the Burden of Proof

15. The standard of proof is the civil standard; that is on the balance  of
    probabilities.  The burden is  on  the  Appellant.   Evidence  only  of
    matters at or before the date of the Respondent's decision may be taken
    into account.  The relevant Immigration Rules insofar as they relate to
    private and family life are those Rules in force at  the  date  of  the
    hearing: see paragraph A280 of the Immigration Rules and  the  judgment
    in Singh and Khalid v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ.74.

Documentary evidence

16. Bundles were filed for the Appellant on 21 August and 26 October  2015.
    The former is described as a consolidated appeal bundle.  Both  bundles
    are indexed and given the limited scope of this appeal I shall not list
    the relevant documents but refer to them as appropriate in  the  course
    of this decision.

The Sponsor's Evidence

17. The Sponsor gave evidence.  She referred to her two witness statements,
    the former in the consolidated appeal bundle of  August  2015  and  the
    latter in the October 2015 bundle.

18. The Sponsor's first statement filed for the hearing on 13 February 2015
    before the First-tier Tribunal refers to the Sponsor's daily  telephone
    contact with  the  Appellant,  to  the  difficulty  of  doing  "all  my
    parenting remotely", her regular sending of funds for  his  maintenance
    and  why  the  funds  are  collected  by  different  people  whom   she
    identifies, and the role of her sister Mary  with  whom  the  Appellant
    lives and how Mary also receives the Sponsor's rental income share from
    family properties in Ghana.  Of note also is the Sponsor's reference to
    the arrangement with her sister Mary for the care of the  Appellant  to
    have been intended only as a temporary and short term arrangement.  The
    second statement adds details of her divorce and of the distress caused
    to her and the Appellant by their continuing forced separation as  well
    as the strain on her elder sister in looking after the Appellant.

19.  The first statement refers to the arrangements  the  Sponsor  made  for
    the Appellant after he had been placed in her care in July 2012 for his
    care following her return to the United Kingdom.  Paragraph  7  of  her
    statement discloses an extensive involvement from major issues like his
    schooling to less important issues like his food.   She  describes  her
    daily contact with him and intimate involvement with  the  minutiae  of
    his life as well as contact with his school teachers.  She refers again
    to the reluctance of her sister to look after the Appellant  which  the
    Sponsor considers is aggravated by her sister's  increasing  years  and
    deteriorating health which the Sponsor became aware of  when  she  last
    visited in October 2014.

20. In her oral testimony she confirmed daily telephone  contact  with  the
    Appellant and his school and her frequent contact with her sister  Mary
    so as to retain responsibility for all aspects of the Appellant's life.
     She also explained why she had not visited the Appellant in 2013 which
    was consistent with what she had said in her first statement.

21. In cross-examination she was asked why she had said  that  she  was  in
    contact with the Appellant's school two or three times a week when  his
    teacher in his statement had said that she was in touch several times a
    month.  She insisted that she was in touch with him two or three  times
    a week.  When asked about the Appellant's school reports she said  that
    her elder sister Mary had only sent her two but she had  asked  her  to
    send all documents to her.  Everything she had received she had sent to
    the solicitors.  She knew  the  Appellant's  best  school  subjects  as
    reflected in the latest  report  were  science  and  mathematics.   She
    explained why the Appellant went to a different  church  from  the  one
    frequented by his aunt.  It was closer to home and one to  which  local
    children went.  It had been his choice to go to that church and not her
    choice.  Reference was made to the power of  attorney  of  21  November
    2012  given  by  the  Sponsor  to  her  sister  at  page  C154  of  the
    consolidated appeal bundle.  I  noted  it  was  limited  to  issues  in
    relation  to  the  proceedings  for  the  Sponsor's  adoption  of   the
    Appellant.  The Sponsor could not recall the scope  of  the  power  and
    confirmed she had not given her sister any other power of attorney.

22. She confirmed her elder sister Mary's disapproval of the  adoption  and
    reluctance to care for the Appellant.  This was in line with  what  was
    contained in the second statement of the Appellant's solicitor at pages
    5 to 8 in the second bundle.

23. The solicitor's statement records a lengthy telephone conversation with
    the Sponsor's sister Mary.  During the conversation Mary said  she  did
    not know how long she would be  able  to  continue  looking  after  the
    Appellant and that she was ever only supposed to look after him  for  a
    short period of time.  She was clear the Appellant is not  her  son  or
    her responsibility and the Sponsor  made  all  the  material  decisions
    affecting the Appellant.  Mary confirmed  what  the  Sponsor  had  said
    about the frequency and subject matter of her  telephone  conversations
    with the Appellant and the Sponsor's regular financial support was well
    as the fact that Mary received the Sponsor's share of the rental income
    from the family's properties.

Submissions for the Respondent

24. Miss Sreeraman relied on the reasons given in the Respondent's decision
    so far as related to sole responsibility. These challenge the Sponsor's
    claim to have  sole  responsibility  on  the  grounds  that  the  money
    transfer slips show that some transmissions have been sent  to  persons
    other than the Sponsor's sister Mary and the lack of evidence that  the
    funds  were  for  the  benefit  of  the  Appellant,  the  age  of   the
    documentation relating to rental income from the family's properties in
    Ghana and that  telephone  contact  had  been  evidenced  only  by  the
    production of international calling cards.

25. The Respondent relied on what the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  had
    said about  sole  responsibility  in  TD  (paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole
    responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.  She  submitted  there  were
    real issues about the scope and extent of the  Sponsor's  contact  with
    the Appellant.  She pointed to the absence of any school records before
    2015.  Other than assertion, there was no evidence the Sponsor had kept
    track of the Appellant's attendance or progress at  school.   Her  oral
    testimony had been vague about the level of school fees payable and the
    exact rate of exchange.  The evidence was of sporadic transmissions  of
    funds to Mary and that these were not sufficient  to  meet  the  school
    fees so the question who paid the fees remained open.   The  production
    of international calling cards was of limited probative value.

26. The evidence of the frequency of contact between the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant's school teacher was inconsistent.   There  was  no  external
    evidence of the position at the school  of  the  individual  concerned.
    The Sponsor had made only two visits to Ghana to see the Appellant,  in
    2012 and 2014.

27. Looked at in the round the evidence did not show the Sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility for the Appellant who had been left in the care  of  her
    elder sister for the past three years. The  Sponsor's  claim  that  the
    Appellant at the age of six had chosen which church he wanted to attend
    lacked credibility.  She concluded the  fact  was  the  Sponsor  shared
    responsibility jointly with her elder sister Mary and the appeal should
    be dismissed.

Submissions for the Appellant

28. Ms Cronin first addressed the submissions made for the Respondent.  The
    Appellant had not chosen which church  he  wanted  to  attend  but  the
    evidence was that he had requested that he be  permitted  to  go  there
    because his friends went there.  This was revealing of the  Appellant's
    perception that the Sponsor had sole responsibility for  him.   If  she
    had not, then he would have simply asked his aunt Mary for  permission.



29. I noted this reflected the Sponsor's reply when asked why the Appellant
    had decided to go to this particular church which  was  different  from
    that frequented by the Sponsor's sister.  Her reply  was  that  he  had
    said the children in the area go to it and this had been repeated:  see
    hearing replies 51 and 52.

30. The evidence from the Appellant's teacher comprised a letter at page C3
    in the consolidated appeal bundle  and  his  statement  prepared  after
    discussion with the solicitors.  Both had spoken of  frequent  contact.
    At paragraph 5 of his statement the teacher had referred  to  telephone
    contact being "very often".  The Sponsor had said it was two  or  three
    times a week: see hearing reply 38.  She submitted there was no serious
    inconsistency of any note between these statements and paragraph  7  of
    the teacher's statement that the Sponsor called him "several times  per
    month".  Ms Cronin pointed out that at  paragraph  10  the  Appellant's
    teacher had referred to  the  lack  of  contact  between  him  and  the
    Sponsor's sister, Mary.

31. She referred to what the Sponsor had said in paragraph 8 of her  second
    statement about the identity of people who  collected  the  remittances
    she sent and this had been  confirmed  to  the  solicitor  by  Mary  at
    paragraph 11 of the solicitor's second statement.  That  statement  was
    the best evidence available to the Tribunal about the role of  Mary  in
    the Appellant's life.  It was consistent with the evidence given by the
    Sponsor and had not been directly challenged at the hearing.

32. Ms Cronin referred to the skeleton argument she had  submitted  at  the
    start of the hearing.  The agreed outstanding issue was  that  of  sole
    responsibility.  She had addressed this  at  paragraphs  23-34.   These
    summarise the Sponsor's evidence about her contact and  involvement  in
    the Appellant's life, the evidence  of  remittances,  the  amounts  and
    recipient's name.  She refers  to  historic  determinations  about  the
    meaning of sole responsibility  which  are  cited  and  quoted  in  the
    determination in TD (Yemen).  She sets out paragraph 52 of  TD  (Yemen)
    which  is  the  Tribunal's  summary  of  the  law  relating  to   "sole
    responsibility":-

         "Questions of 'sole responsibility'  under  the  immigration  rules
             should be approached as follows:

         i.   Who has 'responsibility' for a child's upbringing and  whether
             that responsibility is  'sole'  is  a  factual  matter  to  be
             decided upon all the evidence.

         ii.  The term 'responsibility' in the immigration rules should  not
             to be understood as a  theoretical  or  legal  obligation  but
             rather as a practical one which, in each case, looks to who in
             fact  is  exercising  responsibility  for  the   child.   That
             responsibility may have been for a short duration in that  the
             present arrangements may have begun quite recently.

         iii. 'Responsibility' for a child's upbringing may be undertaken by
             individuals other than a child's parents  and  may  be  shared
             between different individuals: which  may  particularly  arise
             where the child remains in its own  country  whilst  the  only
             parent involved in its life travels to and lives in the UK.

         iv.  Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in  the
             upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional  that  one  of
             them will have sole responsibility.

         v.   If it is said that  both  are  not  involved  in  the  child's
             upbringing, one of the indicators for that will  be  that  the
             other has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility.  In  such
             cases, it may well be justified to find that  that  parent  no
             longer has responsibility for the child.

         vi.  However, the issue of sole responsibility is not just a matter
             between the parents. So even  if  there  is  only  one  parent
             involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may  not  have
             sole responsibility.

         vii.   In   the   circumstances   likely   to   arise,   day-to-day
             responsibility (or decision-making) for  the  child's  welfare
             may necessarily be shared with others (such  as  relatives  or
             friends) because of the geographical  separation  between  the
             parent and child.

         viii.    That, however, does not prevent  the  parent  having  sole
             responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.

         ix.   The  test  is,  not  whether  anyone  else   has   day-to-day
             responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control
             and direction of the child's upbringing including  making  all
             the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.   If   not,
             responsibility is shared and so not 'sole'."

    She then refers to the judgment in Buydov v ECO Moscow [2012] EWCA  Civ
    1739 noting that at paragraph 18  the  Court  of  Appeal  approved  the
    approach outlined in TD (Yemen).

33. Ms Cronin continued that the  Sponsor  met  the  "sole  responsibility"
    test.   She  was  the  sole  parent  and  so  there  was  an  immediate
    presumption that she was solely responsible  and  the  balance  of  the
    evidence was in favour of finding that the Sponsor did indeed have sole
    responsibility.  The "touchstone" for "sole responsibility"  identified
    by the Court of Appeal was "to look at whether what has  been  done  in
    relation to the upbringing has been done under  the  direction  of  the
    sponsoring settled parent" and  "the  importance  of  the  parent  with
    responsibility, albeit at a distance, having what can be identified  as
    direction over or control of important decisions in the  child's  life"
    quoted from Court of Appeal judgments mentioned in paragraphs 31 and 32
    of TD (Yemen).

34. The Sponsor had chosen the Appellant's home and school.   The  evidence
    of her continued financial support had been accepted.  The photographic
    evidence was consistent with her claim to  have  bought  the  Appellant
    clothes and toys.  The evidence of constant frequent contact claimed by
    the Sponsor had been confirmed by other parties playing an active  role
    in the Appellant's life.  Overall the evidence was sufficient  to  show
    the Sponsor had "sole responsibility" for the Appellant.

35. Ms Cronin then turned to the obligation to consider the best  interests
    of the Appellant as a child imposed  by  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  She referred to  the  background
    to the adoption of the  Appellant  by  the  Sponsor  contained  in  the
    adoption papers from Ghana.  She pointed to the visible change  in  the
    Appellant shown by the succession of  photographs  submitted  from  the
    Sponsor's two visits to him, the evidence from the Appellant's teacher,
    the Appellant's disrupted early life and his last three years spent  in
    the home of his disinterested aunt, the general  history  of  disrupted
    care experienced by the Appellant and the  fact  that  the  Sponsor  is
    recognised at law as the Appellant's mother.  She concluded the  appeal
    should be allowed.

Findings and Consideration

36. The only issue for decision by the Tribunal is by agreement between the
    parties whether the Sponsor has "sole responsibility" for the Appellant
    and shall therefore limit my findings to that single issue.

37. Paragraph 52(ix) of TD (Yemen) notes the issue is not who  has  day-to-
    day responsibility.  In this case it is clear by reason of the distance
    between the Sponsor and the Appellant  that  day-to-day  responsibility
    insofar as it may be exercised is exercised by  the  Sponsor's  sister.
    TD (Yemen) continues  that  the  issue  is  "whether  the  Sponsor  has
    continuing control and direction of the  child's  upbringing  including
    making all the important decisions".  The Sponsor's evidence is that in
    addition to financial responsibility she is in daily communication with
    the Appellant and  such  contact  extends  to  a  genuine  and  serious
    involvement in the daily minutiae of the Appellant's life.

38. Her two statements  and  her  oral  testimony  are  broadly  internally
    consistent and are consistent with the  evidence  given  by  her  elder
    sister, Mary, to the solicitor as recorded in  the  solicitor's  second
    statement.  If there are inconsistencies about the frequency of contact
    between the Sponsor and the Appellant's teacher, I  do  not  find  that
    they are of a material nature.  I have taken into account the  lack  of
    school reports in the Appellant's bundle from before 2015.  The  report
    together with the examination papers from July 2015 and a  receipt  for
    school fees of 14 September 2015 represent the most recent evidence the
    Sponsor may have.  I take this evidence into account  as  corroborating
    the Sponsor's oral testimony bearing in mind  the  limitations  on  the
    evidence  imposed  by  Section  85A(2)  of  the  2002   Act   and   the
    determination in DR (Morocco) [2005] UKIAT 00038.

39. A letter of 24 January 2014 from the  Sponsor's  sister  by  way  of  a
    statement was lodged  with  the  original  grounds  of  appeal  and  is
    therefore evidence at a very early stage in the proceedings. It is  all
    of a piece with subsequent  evidence  recorded  by  the  solicitor  and
    consistent with the Sponsor's oral and written testimony.   The  letter
    speaks of  Mary  as  an  aging  woman  struggling  to  look  after  the
    Appellant.  It explains the reason why money for the Appellant was sent
    by the Sponsor to a cousin.  She says she hardly ever leaves the house.
      She  refers  to  rental  income  from  family  properties  for  which
    documentary evidence is annexed: see pages C7-10  of  the  consolidated
    appeal bundle.  She speaks  of  daily  telephone  contact  and  of  her
    advanced age and physical ailments.

40. The teacher's evidence about the lack of  contact  with  the  Sponsor's
    sister,  Mary  is  consistent  with  the  Sponsor's  evidence  and  not
    inconsistent with the evidence which Mary herself gave as  recorded  by
    the solicitor that she is really uninterested in the Appellant and sees
    his presence as a burden which has increased as he  has  stayed  longer
    than was originally envisaged and as her health has declined.

41. I found the evidence about how it came  about  and  why  the  Appellant
    attends a different church from the Sponsor's sister to  be  a  telling
    illustration of their relationship.  I find plausible  and  accept  the
    explanation the Appellant had  asked  the  Sponsor  for  permission  to
    attend a church where his friends went.

42. Looked at overall, I find on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    evidence of the Sponsor is credible.  I accept the  evidence  given  by
    her sister as mediated through the solicitor's second  statement.   She
    is a solicitor well-known to the Tribunal and a partner in a  respected
    firm of solicitors with very considerable experience in immigration and
    asylum matters.  I place substantial weight on her evidence.

43. Looking at the evidence in the round, I am satisfied the Sponsor  meets
    the "sole responsibility" test and therefore this appeal is allowed.

Anonymity

44. The Appellant is a young child and there  is  no  reason  to  lift  the
    anonymity direction and anonymisation order previously made.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The appeal is allowed on immigration grounds.

    An anonymisation order made.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 05. i. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The appeal has been allowed and I have therefore considered  whether  a  fee
award should be made.  The bulk of the evidence on the basis  of  which  the
appeal has been allowed was submitted after the  date  of  the  Respondent's
decision and in all the circumstances I do not find it appropriate  to  make
a fee award.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 05. i. 2016

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

