
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01414/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8th March 2016                      |On 29th March 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                 INSA SHERAZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Singh of Counsel instructed by Kenneth Jones
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the sake of consistency and the avoidance of confusion, I
    shall continue to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Background

 2. On 27th January 2016 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Davidge  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Somal in which she allowed the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds against the  decision  of
    the respondent to refuse entry clearance as a spouse in accordance with
    the provisions of Appendix  FM  applying  the  evidential  requirements
    under Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules.

 3. In granting permission Judge Davidge thought it arguable that the judge
    was wrong to allow the appeal based upon the appellant's  own  evidence
    of her ability to meet the financial requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules when the documentary evidence specified  by  Appendix  FM-SE  was
    absent.  She also thought it arguable that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    identify compelling circumstances justifying  allowing  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds outside the Immigration Rules when the appellant  and
    sponsor  could  enjoy  family  life  outside  the  United  Kingdom  or,
    alternatively, make a fresh application correctly evidenced.   In  that
    respect Judge Davidge also considered that  the  judge  may  have  been
    affected by her incorrect decision in  respect  of  the  Rules  and  so
    arguably failed  to  assess  proportionality  in  the  context  of  the
    reasonableness of relocation.

Error on a Point of Law

 4. At the commencement of the hearing before me Mr Singh indicated that he
    accepted  that  the  appellant  had  not  met  the  provisions  of  the
    Immigration Rules, particularly the specific documentary provisions set
    out in Appendix FM-SE, and that the human rights decision  was  flawed.
    Mr McVeety confirmed that the respondent continued  to  rely  upon  the
    grounds of application which had been correctly summarised in the grant
    of permission.  Both representatives also indicated that  it  would  be
    appropriate for the appeal to be re-heard by the First-tier Tribunal as
    the evidence would need to be  re-examined  and  the  Article  8  claim
    reconsidered.

 5. I indicated that I was satisfied that the  decision  was  fundamentally
    flawed as the grant of permission indicated.  In particular I had noted
    that, in paragraph 11 of  the  decision,  the  judge  stated  that  the
    sponsor met the requirements of  Appendix  FM-SE  when  the  judge  had
    already pointed out that the personal bank statements submitted did not
    show employed income as the sponsor had been paid in cash and had  also
    noted that deposits paid in  cash,  said  to  represent  pay,  did  not
    reflect the amounts shown in payslips.  Further,  in  relation  to  the
    Article 8 claim, the  judge  had  failed  to  identify  any  compelling
    circumstances which could lead to a grant of leave  outside  the  Rules
    without  considering  the  possibility  of  relocation  or  a   further
    application providing the correct evidence.

 6. In the circumstances I have outlined it is appropriate for  the  matter
    to be heard afresh by the First-tier  Tribunal  having  regard  to  the
    provisions of paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement issued by  the
    Senior President of Tribunals on 25th September 2012.

DIRECTIONS

 7. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

 8. The remitted hearing will take place at the Stoke Hearing Centre  on  a
    date to be specified by the Resident Judge.

 9. The time estimate for the hearing is two hours.

10. No interpreter will be provided for the hearing unless  representatives
    indicate to the contrary.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt

