
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01370/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 March 2016                              |On 18 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                             MRS SHUMALIA KASHIF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representative
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born  on  16  April  1986.   She
    appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Walker  ("the
    Immigration  Judge")  promulgated  30  June  2015   ("the   Decision").
    Permission to appeal was initially refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Manuell on 23 September 2015 but subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal
    Judge Smith on 28 October 2015.

2.   At paragraph 3 Upper Tribunal Judge Smith noted that  the  refusal  had
    in fact solely been on the  basis  that  unaudited  accounts  had  been
    submitted in support of the application  for  entry  clearance  as  the
    spouse of a person present and settled in the UK.  It was  arguable  in
    her view that the requirement of the Rules  that  the  sponsor  produce
    "audited accounts" went beyond the requirements of  paragraph  7(h)  of
    Appendix FM-SE.  The Upper Tribunal Judge noted  that  the  wording  of
    that provision was "ambiguous".  Therefore, it  was  arguable,  in  her
    view, that a confirmation letter from an accountant who was a member of
    a recognised body may suffice.

Background

3.   The present appeal arises out of an application the appellant made  for
    entry  clearance  under  Appendix  FM   of   the   Immigration   Rules.
    Unfortunately, the date of that application  is  not  revealed  in  the
    documents before me.  The decision to refuse entry clearance  was  made
    on 9 December 2014 by the ECO in Islamabad, Pakistan.  On  30  December
    2014 the appellant sought to appeal the refusal of entry  clearance  to
    the First-tier Tribunal (FtT).  This triggered a review  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager (ECM) on 13  March  2015.   The  ECM  maintained  the
    decision, pointing out that in his view the appellant failed to provide
    annual audited or unaudited accounts with the appeal bundle  so  as  to
    satisfy the  respondent  that  the  appellant  was  able  to  meet  the
    maintenance requirements in relation to the sponsor's  claimed  income.
    Therefore, the respondent was  unable  to  accept  that  the  appellant
    qualified under Appendix FM.

4.   The appellant therefore maintained her appeal to  the  FtT  which  came
    before the Immigration Judge at North Shields sitting on 24 June  2015.
    His decision was promulgated on 30 June 2015.

5.   The Immigration Judge reminded  himself  that  the  appellant  had  the
    burden of showing on a balance of probabilities that she satisfied  the
    requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The  Immigration
    Judge was only able to look at post-refusal evidence if it  appertained
    to the date of  the  decision.   The  case  would  only  be  considered
    exceptionally outside the Immigration Rules if the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of Article 8 of the ECHR and  the  interference  with  her
    family or private life was of such gravity as to engage  that  Article.
    He noted that the decision had been made according to the  law  in  his
    view but because the financial requirements of E-ECP.3.3 were  not  met
    (self-employed income as a  taxi  driver  and  for  a  business  called
    Flame's Takeaway had not been  provided  to  HMRC).   Furthermore,  the
    ECM's review commented on the failure to meet  the  annual  audited  or
    unaudited accounts requirement.

6.   Both representatives attended the  Tribunal  and  made  representations
    and the sponsor had been able to provide confirmation from HMRC in  the
    form of a form (SA302) confirming his income but was  still  unable  to
    provide the required accountancy documents/accounts.  Accordingly,  the
    Immigration Judge considered himself bound to maintain the refusal  and
    dismissed the appeal.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

7.   Following the grant  of  permission  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Smith,
    directions were sent to the parties that the Upper Tribunal  would  not
    consider any evidence which was not before the FtT  unless  notice  had
    been given in accordance with Rule 15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and satisfied  the  requirements  of  those
    Rules.  Such notice was to be given and documents were to be served  no
    later than 21 days before the hearing.

8.   At the hearing the sponsor, Mr  Saghir,  attended  with  a  cousin,  Ms
    Aziz, who purported to speak on his behalf.   Mr  Saghir  was  able  to
    confirm that the appellant was his wife.  I pointed out to Ms Aziz that
    as a "McKenzie friend" she  was  entitled  to  advise  and  assist  the
    appellant but not to act as an advocate on  his  behalf.   I  found  it
    difficult to get this point home and in fact Ms Aziz did,  effectively,
    speak on behalf of the appellant rather as though she were acting as an
    advocate.

9.   The respondent's representative,  Mr  Diwnycz,  pointed  out  that  his
    client had submitted a response under Rule 24 of the 2008 Rules.   This
    provided that the respondent opposed the appeal,  submitting  that  the
    FtT had directed itself appropriately.

10.  Mr Diwnycz went on to point out that the Immigration Judge had  made  a
    valid point about the absence of appropriate accounts.   The  case  was
    looked at at the date of the decision and at that  date  the  appellant
    did not satisfy the requirement of the  Rules.   The  lack  of  audited
    accounts was therefore a proper reason for refusal in this case  and  a
    proper reason for the Immigration Judge to dismiss the appeal.

11.  The appellant pointed out through  Ms  Aziz  that  the  calculation  of
    income had not  been  correct.   Ms  Aziz  embarked  on  a  complicated
    explanation of how the tax figures differed.   As  far  as  the  suffix
    "AFA" referred to in the accountant's letter  dated  27  July  2014  is
    concerned, this letter provided confirmation that as the accountant for
    the sponsor, who lived at 288 Southfield Lane, Bradford,  BD7  3DN,  he
    was the accountant for the  business.   The  letters  "AFA"  stood  for
    "member of Associate of Institutional Financial Accountants".  However,
    that was not an organisation the respondent recognised.

12.   At  this  point  I  was  helpfully  referred  by  Mr  Diwnycz  to  the
    Immigration Law Handbook 9th  Edition  at  page  1178/1179.   Paragraph
    7(h)(iv) provides for the provision of "one of the following" documents
    in respect of self-employment as a partner, a sole trader  or  under  a
    franchise agreement.  If the business is  required  to  provide  annual
    audited accounts those documents for the full financial year had to  be
    produced.  Where unaudited  accounts  were  permitted  an  accountant's
    certificate of confirmation that he was a member  of  a  UK  recognised
    supervisory body as defined by the Companies Act 2006 was required.  Mr
    Diwnycz pointed out that neither of these alternatives were fulfilled.

13.  Ms Aziz commented that her understanding was that a full  eighteen-page
    tax form was submitted.  She said there was "no discrepancy", she  said
    there was no request for any additional documents  and  no  requirement
    for audited or unaudited accounts as she understood it.

14.  At the end of the hearing I reserved my  decision  which  I  will  give
    having summarised my reasons below.

Discussion

15.  Upper Tribunal Judge Smith, when she gave  permission  on  the  renewed
    application for permission  to  appeal,  commented  on  the  fact  that
    paragraph 7(h) of Appendix  FM  appeared  to  her  to  be  "ambiguously
    worded" (see paragraph 3 of her grant of permission).  Judge Smith  did
    not explain what she meant by this but I assume she  was  referring  to
    the fact that some types of business are required to  produce  "audited
    accounts" and others are  required  to  produce  "unaudited  accounts".
    However, in the latter case, the accountant has to be "a member of a UK
    recognised  supervisory  body".   I  have  not  been  referred  to  any
    authority on the meaning of "UK recognised supervisory body"  but  have
    referred to the Companies Act 2006.  Schedule 10 allows  the  Secretary
    of State for business innovation and skills to recognise  such  bodies.
    I  can  find  no  information  on  the  "Association  of  Institutional
    Financial Accountants" and therefore assume it is not a "UK  recognised
    supervisory body".

16.  The FtT considered the documents provided,  including  the  income  and
    expenditure accounts produced by Mr Ali.  The Immigration Judge noted a
    number of discrepancies.  Whether they were true discrepancies or  not,
    he also found that the "To  whom  it  may  concern"  letter  from  "the
    appellant's accountant" (presumably the letter dated 27 July 2014)  did
    not contain any explanation of the  letters  "AFA"  and  no  additional
    evidence had been placed before the Immigration Judge.  In my view, the
    Immigration Judge was entitled to reject this evidence as  it  did  not
    comply with the Rules, although it had been submitted to  the  ECM  and
    was also considered by him.  It follows also that the Immigration Judge
    was entitled to come to the decision he came to which was in accordance
    with the law.

17.  Neither the letter dated 27 July 2014 nor the document  headed  "income
    and expenditure account for the period ended 5 April 2014" appear to me
    to amount to a  certificate  of  confirmation  within  the  meaning  of
    paragraph 7(h)(bb) of Appendix FM.  Accordingly, it  appears  that  the
    appellant did not provide  information  on  the  sponsor's  income  and
    expenditure of the type required for the financial year in question  in
    compliance with Appendix FM.

18.  Therefore, the respondent was justified in  rejecting  the  application
    and the FtT in dismissing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

I do not find any material  error  in  the  decision  of  the  FtT  and  the
decision to dismiss the  appeal  against  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
stands.

No anonymity direction  was  made  by  the  FtT  and  I  make  no  anonymity
direction.



Signed                                  Date 18 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore make no fee award.






Signed                                  Date 18 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

