
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01382/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 18 August 2014                             |On 18 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SIDDHARTHA KANJILAL
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of this appeal I shall  describe
    the parties as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal, that
    is Mr Siddhartha Kanjilal as the appellant and the Secretary  of  State
    as the respondent.

 2. The appellant is an Indian national born on 20 April 1983  and  appeals
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  (the
    EEA Regulations) and the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
    against the decision to refuse the issue of a  residence  permit  under
    the Regulations.

 3. On 26 June 2014 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Cresswell  considered
    the appeal on the papers and allowed the appeal.

 4. An application for permission to appeal was made by the  respondent  on
    the following grounds.  At paragraph 15(iii) the judge found  that  the
    respondent had demonstrated the proper suspicion that the appellant had
    shown that this was not a marriage of convenience.  It was  claimed  by
    the respondent that the judge had failed to  provide  adequate  reasons
    for his findings that the appellant had proved a genuine marriage.   At
    15(v) the judge  found  there  was  considerable  evidence  of  contact
    between the parties but failed to reason the findings.  The judge found
    the evidence credible but in doing so failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    sponsor's failure to attend the hearing and the  circumstances  at  the
    date of decision rather than the date of  hearing.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Ransley
    who noted that the judge found that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had
    demonstrated proper suspicion but that  the  judge  was  "more  than  a
    little surprised that the sponsor did not attend an  oral  hearing  and
    that appellant was content to have a decision  taken  on  the  papers".
    The judge then stated that at 15(v)  of  the  determination  there  was
    "considerable  evidence"  of  contact  between  the   parties   without
    identifying the evidence that he  accepted.   The  judge  (at  15(vii))
    stated: "Either there has been a hugely time consuming, very  expensive
    and documentary generating false exercise here involving much travel by
    the couple and the involvement of the families or there  is  a  genuine
    marriage".  The judge failed to give adequate reasons why he found  the
    evidence pointed to the latter and not the former.   The  judge  stated
    that there was arguable error of law.

 6. Mr Melvin submitted at the hearing that this was  a  paper  case  dealt
    with by Judge Cresswell with insufficient reasoning.   Once  again  the
    appellant's sponsor had  failed to attend.  In these circumstances  the
    evidence had not been tested.  Questions  would  arise  from  the  bank
    statements and visa and passport which identified visits and  this  had
    not been undertaken.

 7. It was confirmed that the matter was indeed determined on the papers.

Conclusions

 8. Boodhoo (EEA Regulations - relevant evidence) [2013] UKUT  00346  (IAC)
    confirms that Section 85A of the 2002 Act  has  no  application  to  an
    appeal under the EEA Regulations.

 9. The judge cited and followed  Papajorgji  (EEA  spouse  -  marriage  of
    convenience) Greece [2012] UKUT 0038 (IAC) in that there is  no  burden
    at the outset of an application on the claimant to demonstrate that the
    marriage to an EEA national is not one of convenience, but once that is
    established that there is an  evidential  burden  on  the  claimant  to
    address evidence justifying reasonable suspicion that the  marriage  is
    entered into for the predominant purpose of securing residence rights.

10. Nowhere in the application for permission  to  appeal  was  the  ground
    raised to the effect that the matter should not have been dealt with on
    the papers and I note from the notice of the hearing that was  sent  to
    both the appellant and the Entry Clearance Officer on  24  April  2014,
    that the matter was to be decided on the papers without a  hearing  and
    that "the Tribunal may determine the appeal on the basis of the  appeal
    documents together with any further written evidence or submissions  he
    may wish to  make".   Further  written  evidence  was  directed  to  be
    received by the office by 20 June 2014.

11. It was open to the Entry Clearance Officer to request an  oral  hearing
    on the basis that further evidence might be submitted. He  did  not  do
    so.

12. The Entry Clearance  Manager  who  confirmed  the  decision  identified
    further evidence and  that following the refusal the appellant has "now
    provided supporting documentation relating to  his  application  in  an
    attempt to show that he has a genuine and subsisting  relationship with
    his sponsor Eldiko".   That  documentation  consisted  of  photographs,
    emails and copies of travel tickets. The appellant claims that  he  was
    married to Miss Eldiko Cseriova from Slovakia and  who  was  exercising
    her EEA rights.  Thus the respondent was aware that there  was  further
    information and indeed had sight of the further evidence  submitted  in
    the form of photographs, emails and copies of travel tickets.

13. The judge states at 15(iii): "I have looked at all of the  evidence  in
    the round' and he records that he placed in the  balance  all  that  he
    recorded in his following subparagraphs.  The judge was clear that  the
    respondent had demonstrated suspicion but the appellant had shown  that
    this was not a marriage of convenience.  Although the judge  registered
    surprise that the sponsor did not attend an oral hearing  (15(iv))  the
    judge did refer to the substantial body of documentation and noted that
    the respondent accepted that photographs showed meetings of the parties
    including at the wedding.  The judge identified at  15(iv)  that  there
    was evidence of a visit by the sponsor to the UAE in May 2014 and there
    were further photographs of the couple in various settings.  The  judge
    identified at 15(v) "there is considerable evidence now too of  contact
    between the parties".

14. The judge also  refers  to  the  description  given  by  the  sponsor's
    employer of her excitement and planning for the wedding.

15. The judge concludes the findings stating that the  evidence  points  on
    the balance of probabilities to the  fact  that  there  was  a  genuine
    marriage.  Having  already  referred  to  the   substantial   body   of
    documentation, the photographs, the  wedding  and  the  visit  and  the
    further photographs of the couple in various settings, and the evidence
    of the contact between the parties,  by  implication  the  emails,  the
    judge found that this supported that the case was made  out  that  this
    was not a hugely time consuming very expensive  documentary  generating
    false exercise  involving  much  travel  but  that  it  was  a  genuine
    marriage.  This, I find on careful reading of  the  determination,  was
    clearly expressed by the judge.

16. A reading of the determination as a whole supports the contention  that
    the judge made reasoned findings and further to Shizad (sufficiency  of
    reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC) those findings do not  need
    to be extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense having regard to
    the material accepted by the judge.

17. I find that the application for  permission  to  appeal  was  merely  a
    disagreement with the judge's findings and the  determination  although
    brief, gives adequate  reasons  and  discloses  no  error  of  law  and
    therefore shall stand.





Signed                                  Date  16th September 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
