
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/01935/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On September 7, 2015                 |On September 10, 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                       MS NATALYA NIKOLAYEVNA NIKITINA
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Turner, Counsel
Respondent  Ms Isherwood (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Russia  and  on  November  8,  2013  she
    submitted an application to join the sponsor, Ms Tatyana Taylor, as  an
    adult dependant. The respondent refused her application on January  17,
    2014 on the grounds she did not satisfy Section E-ECDR 2.4  or  2.5  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The  appellant  appealed  this  refusal  under  section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on January 31, 2014.

 3. The Entry Clearance Manager reviewed the matter July 8, 2014 but upheld
    the original decision.

 4. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Malins on
    February 23, 2015 and in a decision promulgated on March 16,  2015  the
    Tribunal refused her appeal finding she did not satisfy the Immigration
    Rules. No finding was made under Article 8 ECHR.

 5. The appellant applied for permission to appeal on  April  7,  2015  and
    permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Landes on May 21, 2015.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Turner  was  scathing  both  in  his  grounds  of  appeal  and  oral
    submissions of the Tribunal's decision. He submitted  that  there  were
    fundamental errors and flaws in the decision including material  errors
    of fact and a failure to give proper reasons -

      a. The Tribunal had materially erred in identifying the appellant as a
         widow when in fact the appellant had been divorced  and  there  was
         evidence within the court bundle of that divorce.  It was therefore
         wholly inappropriate for the Tribunal to  suggest,  as  it  did  in
         paragraph 9(h)(ii), that the appellant could find a "fellow  widow"
         to move in to the house with her.

      b. The Tribunal had material erred by referring to  the  appellant  as
         having a son whereas in fact she only had one child,  the  sponsor,
         and she did not live in Russia.

    These material errors of fact undermined the whole decision.

 8. Mr Turner further submitted the Tribunal had failed to take account  of
    the conclusion contained in the medical report dated October  15,  2013
    when the doctor made it  clear  that  the  appellant  was  in  need  of
    continuous care and had failed to have regard to the  fact  that  there
    was a family dispute regarding the property that potentially would make
    her destitute. There was evidence to support her medical condition  and
    the unavailability of assistance in  Russia.  It  was  clear  that  the
    appellant would be best placed with her daughter in the United  Kingdom
    as she had demonstrated an ability to look  after  her  mother  and  to
    ensure her medical  problems  did  not  lead  to  a  worsening  of  her
    condition.

 9. The Tribunal had failed to give it any adequate  reason  for  rejecting
    the  court  document  setting  out  the  family  dispute  and  it   was
    insufficient for the Tribunal to make no finding on the issue.

10. The Tribunal failed to give any reasons  to  disbelieve  the  sponsor's
    evidence and whilst the  case  was  not  an  "open  or  shut"  case  he
    submitted there was a material error.

11. As regards Article 8  ECHR  Mr  Turner  submitted  there  had  been  no
    consideration and whilst the appellant would face an uphill struggle on
    this this was a further example of the Tribunal not undertaking its job
    correctly.

12. Ms Isherwood opposed the application and submitted that:

      a. The factual errors were not material as they  did  not  go  to  the
         issue of whether the appellant satisfied the immigration rules.

      b. In order to satisfy Section  E-ECDR  2.4  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
         Immigration  Rules  the  appellant  had  to  demonstrate  that  she
         required long-term personal care to  perform  everyday  tasks.  The
         Tribunal had considered a report provided by Christopher Bluth  and
         had given numerous reasons for rejecting the content of that report
         concluding that the appellant had failed to provide an  independent
         report as required  by  paragraph  35  of  Appendix  FM-SE  of  the
         Immigration Rules.  Despite  Mr  Turner's  lengthy  submissions  no
         challenge had been made today to those criticisms.

      c. As regards Section E-ECDR 2.5 of Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration
         Rules the Tribunal had considered the medical evidence and the help
         available and had rejected the appellant's claim that she would  be
         unable to obtain the required level  of  care  and  concluded  that
         firstly  there  was  state  care  available;  secondly,  there  was
         financial support available  from  the  sponsor  and  thirdly,  the
         appellant had claimed when she submitted her application  that  she
         still had savings despite her subsequent claim that  those  savings
         were used on her application. The mere fact the  appellant  prefers
         not to employ someone to help care for her is not a reason to allow
         the appeal.

      d. None of the reports provided  stated  no  care  was  available  and
         consequently the appellant had not discharged the burden of  proof.
         The Tribunal was aware of the appellant's claim there  was  no  one
         available to look after her but it rejected the  claim  that  there
         was no help available.

      e. Whilst the  Tribunal's  decision  was  not  perfect  there  was  no
         material error.

      f. With regard  to  Article  8  she  accepted  the  Tribunal  had  not
         addressed Article 8 but in light of the  decisions  of  Kugathas  v
         SSHD (2003) INLR 170 and SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ  387
         there was no material error as the appellant could not succeed.

13. At the conclusion of the evidence I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS AND REASONS ON ERROR IN LAW

14. The appellant had made an application to enter the United Kingdom as  a
    dependent relative. According to the papers before me the appellant had
    been living in Russia, away  from  the  sponsor  since  1995.  She  had
    visited her daughter on a number of occasions during  that  period  and
    had visited on the basis of a multi-visit  Visa.  Two  medical  reports
    were submitted setting out her current medical ailments and  a  further
    report  setting  out  country  conditions  was  also  provided  to  the
    Tribunal. Evidence was given by the sponsor but the Tribunal found  the
    Immigration Rules were not met.  Mr  Turner  has  raised  a  number  of
    challenges to that decision.

15. At the outset,  Mr  Turner  submitted  that  the  two  material  errors
    relating to the appellant's family undermined the  whole  decision  and
    the decision should be set aside. At  the  hearing  I  raised  with  Ms
    Isherwood whether there was any evidence that the appellant was widowed
    as against divorced. She indicated to me that she had seen a  reference
    in the sponsor's statement but I have checked the  sponsor's  statement
    and I am satisfied there is no reference to this fact.

16. However, as I indicated to Mr Turner when he addressed me I  failed  to
    see how that fact alone would amount to a material  error  because  the
    appellant's   case   remains    that    her    ex-husband    was    not
    able/required/willing to provide any assistance and in light  of  their
    divorce there would clearly be no expectation  for  that.  I  therefore
    find the error relating to the appellant's husband is not material.

17. The Tribunal also made a factual error in paragraph 9(c). The  Tribunal
    stated-

         "There is no evidence at all from the appellant's brother who would
         normally be expected to feel and possibly be  responsible  for  his
         mother - especially as the only child living in  the  same  country
         when the sponsor had emigrated."

18. Mr Turner submits that this error was material but I am satisfied  that
    the error referred to is a regrettable mistake but  it  is  clear  from
    that paragraph and paragraph 9(h)(ii) that the Tribunal  was  aware  it
    was dealing with the  appellant's  brother  as  against  her  son.  The
    reference in paragraph 9(c) to mother and  child  should  have  been  a
    reference to sister and sibling.

19. Whilst I accept both errors are regrettable and unsatisfactory they are
    not material without more.

20. The appellant brought her claim under two provisions of Section  E-ECDR
    of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules-Sections  2.4  or  2.5.   The
    grounds of appeal  provided  by  Mr  Turner  helpfully  set  out  those
    sections.

21. The applications under Sections E-ECDR 2.4 and 2.5 of Appendix  FM  are
    clearly interlinked as both involve a consideration of the  appellant's
    medical condition and then  in  the  case  of  Section  E-ECDR  2.4  of
    Appendix FM an assessment of whether she requires  "long-term  personal
    care to perform everyday tasks" and in the case of Section  E-ECDR  2.5
    of Appendix FM an assessment of whether the appellant  could  with  the
    sponsor's practical and financial help obtain the appropriate level  of
    care.

22. In order to succeed  under  Section  E-ECDR  2.4  of  Appendix  FM  the
    appellant must show "as a result of age, illness  or  disability"  that
    she requires long-term personal care to perform every day tasks.

23. Leaving aside the issue of age, illness or disability the Tribunal  was
    required to consider whether this appellant required long-term personal
    care to perform everyday tasks.

24. The appellant submitted an "expert report" from Christopher Bluth.  The
    Tribunal was wholly unimpressed with  that  report  and  gave  detailed
    reasons in paragraph 9(f)(iii)-(v). All  of  the  criticisms  made  are
    valid and Mr Turner's submission  contained  at  paragraph  21  of  his
    grounds of appeal does not address the  core  issue  namely  that  this
    expert is not an expert on Russian society and in particular is not  an
    expert on Russian health and social care provisions.

25. Paragraph [35] of Appendix FM-SE requires an independent expert  report
    for appeals under Section E-ECDR 2.4  and  I  am  satisfied  that  this
    report does not fall within the definition  of  an  independent  expert
    report especially  in  circumstances  where  he  failed  to  address  a
    critical question posed to him  in  his  instructions  namely,  "is  it
    possible for the appellant to obtain a live in carer/nurse".

26. Although  Mr  Turner  criticises  the  Tribunal  for  its  comments  in
    paragraph 9(h)(ii) it is clear that the "expert" failed  to  give  this
    issue proper consideration and Mr Turner's suggestion to  me  that  the
    Tribunal was perhaps suggesting that the appellant's should "shack  up"
    with another widow is a misinterpretation  of  what  the  Tribunal  was
    suggesting. The Tribunal was referring to the availability of others to
    assist the appellant bearing  in  mind  she  had  been  assisted  until
    recently by a third party.

27. Medical evidence was produced in this case and Mr Turner's criticism is
    the Tribunal failed to have regard to the evidence.

28. The Tribunal did  consider  the  medical  evidence  contained  in  both
    Christopher Bluth's  report  and  Dr  Zulya  Taukenova's  report  dated
    February 11, 2014.  This latter report was considered by  the  Tribunal
    at paragraph 9(h) and the Tribunal also referred to the conclusions  of
    an earlier medical report dated October 15, 2013 provided  by  Dr  Olga
    Mazalskaya at paragraph 4(a) of its decision.

29. The Tribunal had in mind both medical reports and also  had  regard  to
    the  other  evidence  provided  by  the  sponsor.  The   Tribunal   was
    unimpressed with the evidence about the brother that was raised at  the
    hearing. Mr Turner challenged effectively the weight to be attached  to
    her current living circumstances and the availability of help from  the
    appellant's brother.

30. I therefore turn to the materiality of any complaints raised about  the
    Tribunal's decision.

31. The Tribunal noted at paragraph 9(e) of its decision that the appellant
    did not require treatment  for  any  condition  whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom and Mr Turner submits that this was because she  was  receiving
    better care in the  United  Kingdom  as  she  was  with  her  daughter.
    However, Mr Turner's submission overlooks the fact that the sponsor  is
    in full-time employment and clearly  cannot  and  would  be  unable  to
    provide the "continuous care to perform every day  tasks"  that  it  is
    argued she is in need of.

32. The mere fact a medical report makes  reference  to  such  a  necessity
    merely raises the issue for the  Tribunal  to  consider.  The  Tribunal
    considered the issue and effectively concluded that the  appellant  was
    not in need of "continuous  care  to  perform  every  day  tasks".  The
    medical reports dated October  15,  2013  and  February  11,  2014  are
    nothing more than a record of  the  appellant's  ailments.  The  report
    dated October 15, 2013 concluded stating, "Due to difficulties in self-
    service and daily life the patient  needs  continuous  home  care".  No
    explanation of why or what this  appellant  could  do  for  herself  is
    provided by the report. It describes  certain  problems  but  does  not
    provide an explanation why the appellant was  in  need  of  "continuous
    care to perform every day tasks". The  updated  report  from  Dr  Zulya
    Taukenova similarly does not provide any insight  into  those  problems
    although recommends that she is in  need  of  continuous  care  by  her
    relatives. No explanation was provided why it had to be  her  relatives
    and the doctor was clearly unable to comment on  what  state  help  was
    available.  The  Tribunal  was  not  satisfied   that   the   appellant
    demonstrated she was in need of continuous care to  perform  every  day
    tasks.

33. The Tribunal was therefore entitled to conclude that the appellant  had
    failed to satisfy Section E-ECDR 2.4 of Appendix FM.

34. The case was also brought under Section E-ECDR 2.5 of Appendix  FM  and
    this required the appellant to demonstrate that  she  must  be  unable,
    even with the practical and financial help of the sponsor to obtain the
    required level of care in Russia because either it is not available and
    there is no person  in  that  country  can  reasonably  provide  it  or
    secondly it was not affordable. The sponsor has been supporting her and
    the evidence before the Tribunal was she continued to have a  place  to
    stay because any dispute over the house had not been  resolved  by  the
    courts. The court order appears to post-date the date of  the  decision
    in any event. The Tribunal also noted the appellant received a  pension
    and support from the sponsor and rejected her claim to have  spent  her
    savings bearing in kind she referred to them  when  she  submitted  her
    application.

35. The Tribunal was provided with limited  evidence  to  make  a  positive
    finding in the  appellant's  favour  and  the  conclusion  reached  was
    clearly open to it.

36. For these reasons I reject Mr Turner's submissions that  there  was  an
    error under the Immigration Rules.

37. Both parties agreed that the Tribunal had failed to consider the matter
    under Article 8 ECHR but any assessment under Article 8 would have been
    undertaken having regard to the fact that the appellant had  failed  to
    satisfy the Rules. She was not refused for financial  reasons  but  she
    was refused for substantive reasons.

38. I am satisfied the Tribunal applying Kugathas v SSHD  (2003)  INLR  170
    and SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 would  not  have  allowed
    this appeal under Article 8 ECHR.

39. In Kugathas the Court of Appeal said that, in order to establish family
    life, it is necessary to  show  that  there  is  a  real  committed  or
    effective support or relationship between the family  members  and  the
    normal emotional ties between a mother and  an  adult  son  would  not,
    without more, be enough. The Court of Appeal made clear in  SS  (Congo)
    that appeals on family life would be difficult and made it  clear  that
    Article 8 does not confer an automatic right to join  a  family  member
    because the state is entitled to control immigration and  the  Tribunal
    should look to whether there are any exceptional circumstances.

40. Based on the way this case was presented I am satisfied that there  are
    no matters that would  have  warranted  consideration  outside  of  the
    Rules. Put simply, if the appellant met the Rules she would  have  been
    granted entry and may do so in the future if the  appropriate  evidence
    to satisfy the Rules is adduced.

41. Whilst I accept that  Article  8  should  have  been  considered  I  am
    satisfied, as Mr Turner conceded, that any such application would  have
    been an uphill task and there is nothing in these papers that  suggests
    the appellant would have succeeded on Article 8 grounds  having  failed
    under the Immigration Rules.

42. I dismiss the appellant's appeal.

    DECISION

43. There was no material error.  I uphold the original decision.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
