
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/01410/2014
     OA/01415/2014
     OA/01417/2014
     OA/01419/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th July 2016                             |On 16th August 2016           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                    mrs pushpa gauchan (first appellant)
                    miss deena gauchan (second appellant)
                   master prabin gauchan (third appellant)
                   master sabin gauchan (fourth appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr S Mesquit, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Nepal.  The first Appellant was born  on
    29th December 1972.  The second, third and fourth  Appellants  are  her
    children born respectively on 21st November 1996, 9th January 1999  and
    3rd September 2000.

 2. The first Appellant applied for entry  clearance  as  a  partner  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The second to fourth  Appellants
    had each applied for entry clearance as a child with  a  view  to  join
    their Sponsor in the UK.  Their applications were similarly refused.

 3. The basis of the first Appellant's refusal was that the Entry Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied that her relationship with  her  Sponsor  was
    genuine  and  subsisting  or  that  they  intended  to  live   together
    permanently in the UK.  In addition the Entry Clearance Officer was not
    satisfied that the Sponsor's income was as claimed and did not meet the
    financial requirement.

 4. The Appellants' applications were refused and the  appeal  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hunter sitting at Hatton Cross on 21st
    September 2015.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 15th December
    2015 the Appellants' appeals were allowed on human rights grounds.

 5. On 29th December 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.  The Grounds of Appeal were  brief.   They  note
    that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  at  paragraph  73  of  his
    determination that:
         "Mr Gauchan has now been in the UK for some fifteen years and is  a
         British citizen and in those circumstances I do consider  it  would
         be unreasonable to expect him to return to Nepal."

    The Secretary of State submits that  the  judge  has  given  inadequate
    reasons as to why the Appellants' Sponsor could not join his family  in
    Nepal and that this lack of reasoning amounts to a  material  error  of
    law.

 6. On 27th May 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson granted permission
    to appeal.  The judge noted the basis of the Grounds of Appeal and went
    on to recite the authority of R (on the application of Agyarko)  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 440 where it was held that the mere fact that the Sponsor  was
    a British citizen who had lived all his life in the United Kingdom  and
    who had a job here - and hence might find it difficult and reluctant to
    relocate to (in that case Ghana) to continue family life there -  could
    not  constitute  insurmountable  obstacles  to  his  doing  so.   Judge
    Nicholson noted that the test of reasonableness outside  of  the  Rules
    was different to the test of insurmountable in Appendix  FM  but  given
    the correlation between the two, it was arguable  that  the  judge  had
    failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  it  would   be
    unreasonable to expect Mr Gauchan to enjoy family life  in  Nepal  -  a
    country of which he had previously been  a  national  for  40  years  -
    particularly as it appears there was no evidence to show  that  he  was
    not still a dual national of that country and it also  appears  he  had
    only been in the United Kingdom legally since 2010.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  I note  that  this  is  an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State.  For  the  purpose  of  continuity  throughout  the
    appeal process Mrs Gauchan and the children  are  referred  to  as  the
    Appellants and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.  The Appellant
    appears by her instructed Counsel Mr Mesquit.  The Secretary  of  State
    by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Tarlow.

Submissions/Discussion

 8. Mr Tarlow relies on the Grounds of Appeal.  He  acknowledges  that  the
    appeal turns on paragraph 73 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge and the finding therein that because the Sponsor has been in  the
    UK for some fifteen years and is a British citizen the judge considered
    in such circumstances that it is unreasonable to expect him  to  return
    to Nepal.  Mr Tarlow points out that that  is  the  sum  total  of  the
    Article 8 acceptance.  He accepts there has been prior reference within
    the decision by the judge to the  position  of  the  second  to  fourth
    Appellants  and  that  the   second   Appellant   has   suffered   from
    hydrocephalus since birth.  He submits however that the decision is  so
    inadequately reasoned that to  come  down  in  favour  of  the  Sponsor
    constitutes an error of law based on the lack of reasoning given.

 9. Mr Mesquit submits that the judge granting  permission  to  appeal  has
    himself fallen into error and that the inadequacy of  reasons  referred
    to in the authority of the R (on the application of Agyarko) relates to
    the test for insurmountable obstacles and that the test involved  is  a
    completely different test as  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  He goes on to emphasise that the judge has not only  considered
    Article 8 at paragraph 73 but that the overall assessment on Article  8
    begins at paragraph 67 and that the judge has at paragraph 69 done what
    is necessary under Statute.  She submits that there is nothing wrong in
    the decision, that there is no material error in law and  asked  me  to
    dismiss the Secretary of State's appeal.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

12. The contention of the Secretary of State is very limited indeed and  as
    indicated above concentrates entirely as to whether the  reasons  given
    by the judge are sufficient for the Appellants to succeed under Article
    8 outside the Rules.  I am satisfied that there is no material error of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  It is important that I
    give reasons.  My starting point  are  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   When
    looked at in isolation as set out within those Grounds of Appeal  there
    may be some merit in the contention put forward  by  the  Secretary  of
    State but that is not the case when this decision is looked  at  fully.
    At paragraph 62 the judge has set out factors that  he  has  considered
    when assessing the  Appellants'  case  outside  the  Immigration  Rules
    pursuant to Article 8 of the ECHR.  Thereafter at paragraphs 63  to  65
    he has set out the ambit of Article 8 and at paragraph 69 has, as he is
    required to, taken into account  the  public  interest  in  maintaining
    effective  immigration  control.   He  has  thereafter  given   careful
    consideration to  the  adequacy  of  funds  at  paragraph  70  and  the
    accommodation available to the Appellants and the best interests of the
    children.  He states that he had found the Sponsor to be  credible  and
    that he has been in regular contact with the Appellants since  he  left
    Nepal in 2000.  He has then gone on to consider whether or  not  family
    life - which he accepts exists - needs to take place in the UK  and  he
    has given reasons as to why he considered it should.

13. When looked at in this context whilst acknowledging that  what  is  set
    out at paragraph 73 is limited I am satisfied that this is a judge  who
    has given thoughtful and proper consideration to the required  features
    in order for an Appellant to succeed under Article 8 outside the  Rules
    and has made findings that  he  was  entitled  to  and  given  adequate
    reasons.  In such circumstances the  submission  of  the  Secretary  of
    State amounts to little  more  than  disagreement  and  the  appeal  is
    therefore for all the above reasons dismissed and the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
