
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/01621/2013
     OA/01624/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 November 2013                            |On 25 November 2013          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                              rose njeri kiruju
                                                             First Appellant
                             FRED KIRUJU MATIRI
                                                            Second Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr F Kodagoda, Counsel instructed by Harrison Morgan
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms E Martin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are married to each other.  The first appellant was  born
    on 25 December 1960 and so is now 52 years old.   The  second  appellant
    was born on 10 December 1937 and so is now  75  years  old.   They  each
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal decisions of the respondent refusing
    them entry clearance as adult dependant relatives of persons present and
    settled in the United Kingdom.

 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  solely  because,
    arguably, the First-tier Tribunal had  not  considered  the  appellants'
    contention that the decision contravened their rights under Article 8 of
    the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  therefore  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Convention.  By letter dated  27  August
    2013 the respondent formally conceded that the First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred and said:

         "The respondent does not oppose  the  appellants'  application  for
         permission to appeal  on  the  Article  8  point  and  invites  the
         Tribunal to determine the appeal with a  fresh  oral  (continuance)
         hearing   to   consider   whether   the   decision   would   be   a
         disproportionate breach of the appellants' Article 8 rights."

 3. Before me Mr Kodagoda confirmed that his case  was  limited  to  arguing
    that the appeal should be allowed with reference to Article 8.

 4. It is for the appellants to  prove  their  cases  and,  there  being  no
    international protection element in this case, the appellants must prove
    their cases on a balance of probabilities and I direct my mind to  facts
    appertaining at the date of decision.  It remains for the respondent  to
    justify any interference with the appellants' private and  family  lives
    consequent  on  the  decision  complained  of  (see  for   example   Naz
    (subsisting marriage - standard of proof)  Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT  00040
    (IAC).

 5. In order to follow this Determination I outline in extreme summary  form
    the nature of the appellants' cases.  The second appellant has  suffered
    from cancer and as a result has undergone a laryngectomy.  He wishes  to
    have further surgery with a view to his regaining the ability to  speak.
    The proposed treatment is not yet  widely  available  and  will  involve
    putting  an  artificial  voice  box  into  an  opening  in  the   second
    appellant's throat.  Such a voice box would have limited  life  and  the
    valves would have to be changed  frequently.   The  life  of  the  valve
    depends on a variety of circumstances but it can be as short  as  a  few
    weeks.  The person managing the artificial voice box must maintain  high
    standards of hygiene and there is an ever present risk of the voice  box
    dislodging into the lung. This would always  be  serious  and  would  be
    extremely serious, and probably fatal, if the patient was  not  able  to
    get high quality medical treatment quickly.

 6. The appellants live in a rural part of  Kenya  but  have  to  travel  to
    Nairobi for expert medical treatment. Even then the medical expertise is
    not as specialised as is available in the  United  Kingdom.   Travel  to
    Nairobi involves a long journey by public transport that is more  suited
    to travel on rough roads than it is to the needs of sick person and,  in
    any event, can only be accessed after a long walk.

 7. Ms Margaret Newland, the second appellant's sister, gave evidence before
    me. She is a qualified nurse and a director of a successful care home. I
    found her to be an entirely truthful witness.

 8. Nearly all of the second appellant's medical treatment has been provided
    in the United Kingdom at Mrs Newland's  expense.   At  every  stage  the
    appellant or appellants, have had appropriate permission to  be  in  the
    United Kingdom and the costs have not come from public funds.

 9. Mrs Newland was very cautious in answering questions about her sister-in-
    law, the first appellant, but when I  suggested  to  her  that  she  was
    trying to tell me, without being offensive to  her  sister-in-law,  that
    the first appellant was willing but not competent to  help  her  husband
    manage an artificial voice box her relief  that  I  had  understood  her
    evidence was palpable.

10. The appellants would like to live in the  United  Kingdom  so  that  the
    second appellant could have treatment that would lead to his being  able
    to speak and also benefit from the follow-up care that would be  readily
    available in the United Kingdom and which is necessary for the procedure
    to be successful.

11. The First-tier Tribunal agreed  with  the  respondent  that  the  second
    appellant did not "require long-term personal care to  perform  everyday
    tasks" within the meaning of E-ECDR 2.4 and so could not come within the
    terms of the Rules.  The second appellant plainly does not require  help
    with everyday tasks.   What  he  wants  is  frequent  help  with  highly
    specialised tasks. The rules do not provide for this, or at least not as
    a basis for settlement.

12. I appreciate that the Entry Clearance Manager's review  speculates  that
    the second appellant expected the National Health Service  to  meet  the
    cost of his treatment. Unlike the respondent, the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    with the benefit of better evidence, was satisfied  that  the  costs  of
    maintaining and accommodating the appellants as well  as  the  treatment
    would be met by Mrs Newland.

13. The "refusal  of  entry  clearance"  used  to  support  the  immigration
    decision did not deal directly with the human rights of either appellant
    but did suggest that the kind of care that  was  needed  to  manage  the
    artificial voice box could be paid for in Kenya, possibly by a  domestic
    worker.

14. The second appellant's daughter,  Ms  Caroline  Gardner,  gave  evidence
    before me.  She adopted her statement of 21 May 2013.  She confirmed her
    willingness and ability to accommodate the appellants, her  parents,  at
    her four bed-roomed home.

15. I have read the bundle dated 23 May 2013.  I do not think  it  necessary
    to go through each item in that bundle because many of the  points  made
    lend themselves to easy summary or agreement.

16. Having considered the evidence as a whole, including the  evidence  from
    medical experts, I find it unlikely that the second  appellant  will  go
    ahead with the treatment in the United  Kingdom  if  he  would  have  to
    return to Kenya.  I accept that he lives a long  way  from  Nairobi  and
    that managing his condition without access to good quality medical  care
    creates risks that are likely to be unacceptable to him.  I accept  that
    the second appellant has no realistic way of living in  Nairobi  and  in
    any event I am satisfied that the kind of treatment available in Nairobi
    is not the kind that he seeks.

17. Mr Kodagoda  put  his  case  very  simply.   He  said  the  respondent's
    objections stem from an unfounded and remote suspicion that  the  second
    appellant might become a burden on public funds.  Since 2004 his  sister
    had been spending considerable sums on  his  health  and  there  was  no
    reason to think that would not continue.

18. He reminded me that Article 8 is about respecting  a  person's  physical
    and moral integrity and should not be reduced to a picky analysis  about
    whether something is an interference  of  a  person's  private  life  or
    family life.  He suggested there were few things more basic to  a  human
    being than the desire to communicate by speaking.  The evidence was that
    this second appellant would be able to speak again if  he  was  able  to
    come to the United Kingdom and have treatment but  that  he  should  not
    embark on that treatment unless he could be confident  of  the  kind  of
    ancillary care that would not be available practically, if  at  all,  in
    Kenya.  The decision clearly interfered  with  his  private  and  family
    life. Further, denying the first appellant entry clearance was a failure
    to promote both her and the second appellant's private and  family  life
    and the respondent had failed to justify the decision  on  human  rights
    grounds.

19. Although neither party placed it before me I  have  reminded  myself  of
    the considerable difficulty created for this argument by the decision of
    the Tribunal in Sun Myung Moon v Entry Clearance Officer (Seoul)  [2005]
    UKIAT 00112. This decides that the obligation under  the  Convention  to
    respect a person's private and family life,  sometimes  expressed  as  a
    person's "physical or moral integrity", does not exist in  the  case  of
    persons outside the jurisdiction except is so far as  it  bears  on  the
    rights (usually thought  of  as  family  life)  of  persons  within  the
    jurisdiction. That decision is not "starred" and so I am not obliged  to
    follow it. It is plain from Naik, R (on the application of) v  Secretary
    of State for the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1546 that this area  of
    jurisprudence is ripe for development. Nevertheless I have decided  that
    article 8 is only relevant at  all  to  the  extent  that  the  decision
    complained of interferes with the private and family  life  (really  the
    family life) of the second appellant's close  relatives  in  the  United
    Kingdom who want to provide for him. I find  that  article  8  does  not
    establish a general right of a foreign  national  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom for the purpose of medical treatment even if such a "right"  was
    tempered with many restrictions and caveats.

20. Nevertheless I  recognise  that  the  human  desire  to  protect  family
    members is sometimes very strong. Mrs Newland in particular is  keen  to
    use the profits of her endeavours to assist her brother whose cancer has
    cost him the ability to speak. She wants to help him and has  created  a
    state of affairs where she could help him, and his wife,  without  their
    being a  burden  on  the  state.  I  am  satisfied  that  excluding  the
    appellant's is a decision that comes within the scope  of  article  8(1)
    because it interferes with a strong human desire to take care  of  needy
    family members. This is not as weighty a point as, for example, the duty
    to promote a person's marriage or the relationship between a minor child
    and a parent but it is certainly within the scope of a person's  private
    and family life that has to be respected.

21. Nevertheless, I find the decision to refuse the applications made  is  a
    proportionate interference with the right to private  and  family  life.
    The appellants applied for permission to settle in the  United  Kingdom.
    If they had been successful then they  would  have  accrued  rights  far
    beyond the right to visit for the purposes of  medical  treatment.  Many
    people want to settle in the United Kingdom. It is not fair to  them  to
    give others permission to settle outside the  ordinary  rules.  Refusing
    the applications protects the rights and freedoms of others.

22. Further, settlement might create demands on the public resources in  the
    future. The appellants cannot come within the  rules  relevant  for  the
    purposes of settlement and so excluding them protects the economic  well
    being of the United Kingdom even though their  admission  would  clearly
    not create and immediately foreseeable risk.

23. It follows that although I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in so far as it was incomplete because it did not deal with the
    human rights  of  the  people  involved  I  dismiss  the  appeal  having
    considered the grounds not determined by the First-tier Tribunal.

24. However I think it is necessary to say more.  The  appellants  have  not
    done anything to their discredit in the conduct  of  these  proceedings.
    At worst, they have made an inappropriate application. The appellants do
    not satisfy the rules for admission. It may well be that they will  make
    a further application for entry clearance under the  rules  relating  to
    medical treatment and it may well be that the appellants with  say  that
    they expect that they would have to seek to extend their stay within the
    rules. These are things to consider if a further  application  is  made.
    Nothing has emerged in the course of these appeals that should  be  seen
    as undermining the credibility of a more appropriate application.

25. Nevertheless, in the circumstances I dismiss these appeals.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 21 November 2013               |











