
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/01811/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 April 2014                               |On 8 April 2014              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE JEREMY BAKER
               SITTING AS A DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                  Appellant
                                     And

                           MRS BINTO SONKO BADGIE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr C Jacobs of Counsel instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors
For the Appellant:     Mr G Saunders, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Binto Sonko Badgie is 29 years of age, having been born on  30  October
    1984.  She is a citizen of Gambia.  On 15  July  2009  she  met  Morrow
    Badgie in Gambia and commenced a relationship with him.  On 18  October
    2010 Binto and Morrow Badgie were married, and on 11 March 2011  a  son
    was born to them called Abdul.  The last time  that  Binto  and  Morrow
    Badgie spent time together was on  20  January  2012,  following  which
    Morrow Badgie, who has dual Gambian and British  citizenship,  returned
    to the United Kingdom whilst Binto Badgie and  their  son  remained  in
    Gambia.  Subsequently Binto Badgie applied for entry clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as a partner under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.



 2. That application was refused by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  19
    December 2012.  An appeal against that  decision  was  refused  by  the
    Entry Clearance Manager on 25 September 2013.   A  further  appeal  was
    allowed by the First-tier Tribunal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7
    February 2014.  The Entry Clearance  Officer  appeals  with  permission
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The reasons given by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  for  refusing  the
    original application included: a failure by Binto Badgie  to  discharge
    an invoice from the NHS   in  relation  to  the  costs  which  she  had
    incurred when Abdul was born during  a  visit  by  her  to  the  United
    Kingdom; a failure to provide sufficient evidence that  she  was  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with  her  husband;  a  failure  to
    provide sufficient evidence that the marriage was valid; a  failure  to
    provide sufficient evidence of her husband's income, and in  particular
    she had not provided payslips for  Morrow  Badgie's  earnings  for  the
    period of six months prior to the date of the application.

 4. When the matter was reconsidered by the Entry Clearance Manager it  was
    noted that  despite  the  reasons  for  the  original  decision  and  a
    subsequent invitation to Binto Badgie to  submit  additional  evidence,
    she had failed to do so.  On this basis the Entry Clearance Manager not
    only confirmed the reasons for the original  decision,  but  considered
    that this was a proportionate decision under Article 8(2) of the  ECHR.



 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Morrow Badgie provided  a
    letter from the NHS confirming that on 29 July 2013 he  had  discharged
    the outstanding amount owed to it.  This was accepted by the First-tier
    Tribunal who also found that the marriage was valid and that there  was
    a genuine and subsisting  relationship  between  them,  and  that  they
    intended to live together permanently in the United Kingdom.   Although
    the First-tier Tribunal  accepted  that  Binto  Badgie  had  failed  to
    provide payslips for Morrow Badgie's earnings for  the  period  of  six
    months prior to date of the application, it found on the basis of other
    evidence that during the period between December 2010 and November 2013
    he had earned substantially in excess of the figure required under  the
    Rules.

 6. As the First-tier Tribunal  acknowledged  that  the  appeal  could  not
    succeed under  the  Rules,  it  proceeded  to  consider  those  factors
    relevant to Binto Badgie's Article 8  rights  outside  the  Rules.   It
    found that she had satisfied the "substance" of  the  Rules  and  noted
    that Morrow Badgie not only lived and worked in the United Kingdom, but
    had two other young children by a previous  relationship  for  whom  he
    made financial contributions and who he saw on  a  regular  basis.   It
    found Morrow Badgie to be an industrious individual who contributed  to
    the United Kingdom economy, and that since his  return  to  the  United
    Kingdom had maintained in regular  electronic  communication  with  his
    wife and youngest child such that family life existed between them.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal considered that the  best  interests  of  Abdul
    would be provided by  him  living  with  both  parents  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Accordingly  it  found  that  the  original  decision  was  a
    disproportionate "... interference with the right to family  life  ..."
    and allowed the appeal.

 8. The grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  are:  firstly,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to direct itself that  where  an  individual
    fails to obtain leave to remain under the Immigration Rules, it is only
    if there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under
    the Rules that an individual should  be  granted  leave  to  remain  on
    Article 8 grounds and; that Binto Badgie's remedy lay not in an appeal,
    but by making further applications which accorded with the  Rules  such
    that  no compelling circumstances could be said to exist in this case.

 9. It is clear that there was  no  express  reference  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to the decisions in R (Nagre) v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720  (Admin),
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC),  and  Shahzad  (Article  8:  legitimate  aim)  [2014]  UKUT  85.
    However, and more to the point, we cannot detect  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal considered the effect of  these  decisions,  namely  that  the
    Immigration Rules are designed to  be  a  comprehensive  code  for  the
    consideration of an individual's Article 8 rights and  it  is  only  if
    there are compelling circumstances beyond  those  envisaged  under  the
    Rules that an individual may be able to succeed on  Article  8  grounds
    outside the Rules.  Furthermore, in Alam and Others v SSHD [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 960, the Court of Appeal said that the effect of Section 85A of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 was  that  a  Tribunal  is
    obliged to consider the question of compliance  with  the  points-based
    system on the basis of the documentation provided by an applicant  with
    his application, and was not  entitled  to  remedy  omissions  in  that
    documentation with further evidence made available at the hearing.

10. At paragraph 45 of the decision Lord Justice Sullivan said this:

          "... I endorse the view expressed by the Upper Tribunal in Shahzad
         (paragraph 49) that there is no unfairness in  the  requirement  in
         the PBS, that an applicant must submit with his application all the
         evidence necessary to demonstrate compliance with  the  Rule  under
         which he  seeks  leave.   The  Immigration  Rules  and  the  policy
         guidance and the prescribed application for form all make it  clear
         that  the  prescribed  documents  must  be   submitted   with   the
         application and if they are not the application will  be  rejected.
         The price of security, consistency and predictability is a lack  of
         flexibility that may well result in 'hard' decisions in  individual
         cases, but that is not a justification for imposing  an  obligation
         on the Secretary of State to conduct a  preliminary  check  of  all
         applications to see whether they are  accompanied  by  all  of  the
         specified documents to contact applicants where there  is  not  the
         case and to give them an opportunity to supply missing documents."

11. There is a reflection of those observations in the more recent case  of
    SSHD v Rodriguez and Others [2014] EWCA Civ 2,  which  was  considering
    the  extent  to  which  the  "evidential  flexibility  policy"  affords
    flexibility to the Secretary  of  State  and  Tribunals  in  overcoming
    defects  or  omissions  in  documentation  provided   in   support   of
    immigration applications.

12. At paragraph 92 Lord Justice Davies said this:

         "... Taken overall, the evidential flexibility process  instruction
         is demonstrably not designed to given an applicant the  opportunity
         first, to remedy any defect or inadequacy  in  the  application  or
         supporting documentation so as to save the application from refusal
         after substantial consideration."

13. In  the  present  case  although  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  no  doubt
    sensitive to decisions such as Raju  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  754,  expressly
    disavowed  the  notion  that  it   was   considering   the   issue   of
    proportionality "..... in  terms  of  a  'near  miss'  .....",  it  did
    consider it on  the  basis  that  Binto  Badgie  had  met  the  "......
    substantive financial requirements of the Rules .....".  What the First-
    tier Tribunal did not refer to was the fact, that not only  had  Binita
    Badgie failed to provide the appropriate financial  documentation  with
    the original application but, after a specific invitation to do so, had
    failed to provide it subsequently to the Entry Clearance Manager.

14. It is clear that since the inception of the points-based system, it  is
    the provisions of the system which have to be complied with in  respect
    of any applications made under it. The system  is  strict  as  are  the
    evidential requirements set out  in  paragraph  EC-P  of  Appendix  8A.
    However the fact that it is strict does not  in  the  circumstances  of
    this case permit the First-tier Tribunal to ignore those strictures and
    deal with the situation on the basis that, as it was satisfied that the
    substance of the Rules had been met, it could without more  turn  to  a
    consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules.  Instead  it  should,  in
    line with the  decisions  to  which  we  have  already  referred,  have
    considered  whether  there  were  any  compelling   circumstances   not
    sufficiently envisaged under the Rules  which  justified  Binto  Badgie
    succeeding under Article 8(2).  If it had done so, although undoubtedly
    the factors identified by the First-tier Tribunal in  relation  to  her
    child, were of significance  and  could  in  other  circumstances  have
    surmounted the hurdle, in the present case the interference  to  family
    life could have been remedied by a further Rules compliant  application
    for entry clearance.  Indeed the situation might never have arisen  had
    not only Binto Badgie complied with the Rules in the first  place,  but
    had provided the requisite evidence when subsequently invited to do  so
    for consideration by the Entry Clearance Manager.

15. In these circumstances the decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    cannot be said to have been disproportionate to the Article 8 rights of
    this family.

16. We have listened with care to  the  able  arguments  of  Mr  Jacobs  of
    Counsel on behalf of Binto Badgie in this  case.   However  we  do  not
    accept that where the separation, as in  this  case  is  likely  to  be
    short, because, as acknowledged by the Secretary of State,  a  properly
    evidenced application is likely to succeed, that the present separation
    does amount to compelling circumstances.

17. Accordingly we find that there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    approach taken by the First-tier Tribunal in this case and that for the
    reasons that we have given Binto Badgie is not in a position to succeed
    under  Article  8(2).   In  those  circumstances  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's appeal succeeds and we substitute our  decision  and  dismiss
    Binto Badie's appeal to the Tribunal.






Signed                                  Date


The Honourable Mr Justice Jeremy Baker
Sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


