
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02785/2014
                                                               OA/02788/2014
                                                               OA/02791/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 12th June 2015                             |On 19th June 2015              |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT


                                   Between

   LETEBREHAN SOLOMON ZEWELDI                              First Appellant
  ABRAHAM KIDANE TSEHAYE                                   Second Appellant
  ASOMOROM KIDANE TSEHAYE                                   Third Appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr T Royston, of Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Before the Upper Tribunal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.
     However, for the avoidance of confusion, I shall continue to refer  to
    the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.



Background

 2. On 15th January 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Parkes  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal S J Pacey  in  which  he  allowed  the  appeals
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse  entry  clearance  for
    the first named appellant as a partner and the second and  third  named
    appellants as  her  children  in  accordance  with  the  provisions  of
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

Error on a point of law

 3. The grounds of application contended that, in allowing  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds outside the Immigration Rules, the  judge  failed  to
    apply the guidance of the Upper Tribunal in Gulshan [2013]  UKUT  00640
    (IAC) by identifying compelling circumstances  not  recognised  by  the
    Rules.  In particular it is  submitted  that  the  appellants  and  the
    sponsor could continue their family life together in Sudan should  they
    wish to do so and there was no reasoning in the decision to explain why
    it would be unjustifiably harsh for them to continue family life there.
     The grounds suggest  that  any  separation  of  the  parties  will  be
    temporary at best.

 4. At the commencement of the hearing before me Mr McVeety  conceded  that
    more recent case law has overtaken the guidance  set  out  in  Gulshan.
    The need to identify compelling circumstances  was  not  required.   He
    indicated that the respondent would rely upon the grounds but he had no
    further comment to make.

 5. Mr Royston drew attention to the Rule 24 response  which  submits  that
    the argument in the grounds is  misconceived  bearing  in  mind,  inter
    alia, the decision of the Court of Appeal in MM [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985.
    The grounds were in error in  referring  to  a  test  of  unjustifiable
    harshness in relation to  return  to  Sudan.   Further,  there  was  no
    evidence from either party that the appellant could reside  permanently
    in Sudan.

 6. Mr Royston also expanded upon the grounds by emphasising that the judge
    had applied the correct tests and given  appropriate  consideration  to
    proportionality.  It was self-evident that the sponsor could not go  to
    Sudan as Eritrea was his country of origin and his other family members
    were living unlawfully in Khartoum as the conclusions of the  judge  in
    paragraphs 21 to 24 make clear.

Conclusions and reasons

 7. After hearing the submissions particularly bearing in mind the comments
    made by Mr McVeety I indicated that I was satisfied that  the  decision
    did not show an error on a point of law and now  give  my  reasons  for
    doing so.

 8. The grounds attack the decision on the basis that  the  judge  did  not
    follow the procedure and guidance recommended in Gulshan by identifying
    compelling circumstances  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  that  would
    enable him to deal with the Article 8 claim on that  basis.   In  fact,
    the  decision  shows  that   the   judge   did   identify   exceptional
    circumstances as that guidance required.   The  reasons  are  given  in
    paragraph 18.  However the need for any such intermediary test has  now
    been removed by  the  comments  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MM  and
    subsequent case law.

 9. The grounds are also wrong  to  suggest  that  the  judge  should  have
    identified circumstances making it unjustifiably harsh for the  parties
    to continue their family  life  in  Sudan.   The  appellants  are  from
    Eritrea and not Sudan and, at the  time  of  their  applications,  were
    living illegally in Khartoum.  The  judge  deals  with  this  issue  in
    paragraph 18 having already identified that the appellants  are  asylum
    seekers in Sudan but originated from Eritrea.  Additionally, the  judge
    deals with  the  possibility  of  the  appellants  making  any  further
    application from Sudan which will meet the relevant requirements of the
    Rules reaching conclusions open to him.

10. The grounds do not show an error  on  a  point  of  law.  The  decision
    carefully considers the proportionality  of  the  respondent's  refusal
    having regard to Section  117B  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and taking into consideration the best interests of the
    child appellants and the sponsor's financial position.   It  reaches  a
    cogently reasoned decision open to the judge.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested at the hearing before me nor before  the  First-
tier Tribunal and so I do not make a direction.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
