
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02846/2013
     OA/02845/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 March 2014                              |On 28 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                           MR JUSTICE JEREMY BAKER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                            MR SURAJ KUMAR GURUNG
                             MR SURENDRA GURUNG
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms A Jaja, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by Surendra Gurung and Suraj Kumar Gurung against the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 2 January 2014 which
    refused their appeal against the  determination  of  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department not to grant  them  leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom as the dependants of Bel Bahudur Gurung.

 2. Bel Bahadur Gurung is a former Gurkha soldier and one of the issues  in
    this appeal concerns the "historical injustice" which is now recognised
    that these soldiers may have suffered as a result of  the  differential
    immigration provisions applied to those soldiers as compared  to  other
    non-British commonwealth members of the British Armed  Services.   That
    arose because for a number of years Gurkha veterans were  treated  less
    favourably that comparable non-British commonwealth  soldiers  who  had
    served in the British Army, in that the Secretary of State had a policy
    outside the  Immigration  Rules  which  allowed  the  latter  group  of
    individuals who had been serving the British Army to enter  the  United
    Kingdom, whereas Gurkhas who  were  in  a  similar  position  were  not
    included in that policy.  Following a number of representations made to
    HM Government this situation changed in 2004.  As a result of which the
    Immigration Rules were altered to enable Gurkha veterans with at  least
    four years' service who had been discharged  from  the  Armed  Services
    within the past two  years  to  apply  for  settlement  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

 3. In addition, the Secretary of State introduced  a  policy  outside  the
    Rules under which Gurkhas  were  permitted  to  settle  in  the  United
    Kingdom even if they had been discharged before 1 July 1997 an/or  more
    than two years prior to the date of the application.

 4. Annex A set out part of  the  discretionary  arrangements  outside  the
    Rules for former Gurkhas discharged before 1 July 1997; Annex A stated:

         "Dependants

         Discretion will normally be exercised  and  settlement  granted  in
         line with the main applicant for spouses, civil partners, unmarried
         and same-sex partners and dependant children under the age of 18.

         Children over the age of 18 and other dependant relatives will  not
         normally qualify for the exercise of discretion in  line  with  the
         main applicant and would be expected to qualify for leave to  enter
         or remain in the United Kingdom under the  relevant  provisions  of
         the Immigration Rules, for example under paragraph  317,  or  under
         the provisions of Article 8 of the Human Rights  Act.   Exceptional
         circumstances may be considered on a case by case basis.......".

 5. The question as to the weight that should be attached to this  historic
    injustice, where it has been established, was the subject of  a  number
    of decisions by tribunals, and a number of those decisions came  to  be
    considered by the Court of Appeal in Gurung &  Others  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8. At paragraph 35 of the
    judgment, The Master of the Rolls said that, :

         "It is accepted on behalf of the SSHD that the  historic  injustice
         is  a  relevant  factor  to  be  taken  into   account   when   the
         proportionality balancing exercise is undertaken.  The question  is
         what weight should be given  to  it.........  The  present  appeals
         raise  the  point  of  principle  whether  the  historic  injustice
         suffered by Gurkhas  should  be  accorded  limited  or  substantial
         weight in the Article 8(2) balancing exercise."

 6. There then followed discussion about the differential  factors  between
    Gurkhas and British overseas citizens who had also suffered an historic
    injustice, and the fact that some tribunals had held that  less  weight
    should be given to the historic injustice suffered by Gurkha  veterans,
    than that given to British overseas citizens.  However,  the  Court  of
    Appeal concluded  that  the  differential  was  inappropriate,  and  at
    paragraph 42 The Master of the Rolls said that:

         "...... lf a Gurkha can show that, but for the historic  injustice,
         he would have settled in the United Kingdom  at  a  time  when  his
         dependant (now) adult child would have been able to  accompany  him
         as a dependant child under the age of 18, that is a  strong  reason
         for holding that it is proportionate for an adult child to join his
         family now."

    As  a  result  of  this  decision,  the  Upper  Tribunal  gave  further
    consideration to one of the cases which had been  the  subject  of  the
    earlier appeal to the Court of Appeal,  in  Ghising  &  Others  v  SSHD
    [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC). At paragraphs 59 and 60 of  the  determination
    it was said that :

         "... We accept Mr Jacobs' submission that where Article 8  is  held
         to be engaged and the fact that but  for  the  historic  wrong  the
         appellant would have been settled in the United Kingdom long ago is
         established, this will ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the
         proportionality assessment  and  determine  it  in  an  appellant's
         favour... in other words the historic injustice  issue  will  carry
         significant weight on the appellant's side of the  balance  and  is
         likely to outweigh the matters relied on by  the  respondent  where
         these consist solely of the public interest just described."

 7. The Upper Tribunal observed that if there were other factors which were
    relevant and weighed  against  the  applicant  in  the  proportionality
    assessment under article 8, then if they were of sufficient weight they
    could justify the refusal of leave to enter. However, at paragraph  60,
    the UT concluded:

         "......... But if the respondent is relying only  upon  the  public
         interest described by the  Court  of  Appeal  at  paragraph  41  of
         Gurung, then the weight to be given to the historic injustice  will
         normally require a decision in the appellant's favour."

 8. The situation in the present case is that the appellants'  father,  Bel
    Bahadur Gurung, served in the Gurkha regiment of the British  Army  for
    fifteen years and was discharged on 22 June 1993.  He was  married  and
    had three children, the eldest being Surendra Gurung who  is  presently
    aged 24, born on 6 June 1989, the second son was Suraj, now 23 years of
    age, born on 24 January 1991 and the youngest son Dipesh, who was  born
    on 23 July 1999 and now 13 years of age.  A joint application was  made
    for the father and his family to enter the United Kingdom in  order  to
    settle, under the policy outside the Rules, with his wife and  children
    as his dependants.  So far as the father, his  wife  and  the  youngest
    child are concerned, the application was granted by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 24 August 2012.  However, the application  of  the  elder  two
    children was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on 4 December 2012.
     The decision letter stated that:

         "I have also taken account, as I must, of the requirements  of  the
         Human Right Act, specifically Section 6 and  the  incorporation  of
         the European Convention on Human Rights and  Responsibilities  into
         my consideration of your application,  specifically  in  your  case
         Article 8.  I note that you are over 18 and an adult.  I note  that
         your relationship per se is no guarantor of acceptance that Article
         8(1) of the Convention is  engaged.   It  requires  more  than  the
         acceptance of the normal emotional ties to  be  so.   I  have  seen
         nothing that would lead me to conclude that  there  are  particular
         bonds in your case that would lead  to  an  engagement  of  Article
         8(1).   I  am  mindful  of  Article  8  jurisprudence  and   recent
         determinations  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the  United   Kingdom
         including, when dealing with a proportionality test, the addressing
         of an historical injustice.  I note the judge (UKUT IAC  [2012]  RG
         Nepal) indicated that this had substantially less weight than  that
         to be afforded to a British national.  I also  note  the  need  for
         fair and effective immigration control and that you do not  qualify
         under the Immigration Rules and the margin of appreciation afforded
         to me.  In my assessment of Article 8, I find that Article 8(1)  is
         not engaged and so there is no need to assess proportionality.

         However, even were Article 8(1) to be engaged, I am  not  satisfied
         that you have provided any evidence that indicates to me  that  you
         are not currently capable of living an independent adult life.   It
         was your sponsor's  decision  to  split  the  family  in  the  full
         knowledge that their adult child would not automatically qualify to
         join them.  You have completed your studies which will improve your
         opportunities of finding employment in Nepal.  On that  basis  this
         application fails.  I consider that refusing  this  application  is
         proportionate in the exercise of firm immigration control."

 9. An appeal was made against the decision, which was  considered  by  the
    Entry Clearance Manager, who  confirmed  the  earlier  decision.  These
    decisions were the subject of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

10. The First-tier Tribunal found, firstly, that the two applicants had not
    established that they had family  life  with  the  remainder  of  their
    family under Article 8(1).  Secondly, that even if family life had been
    established,  the  decision  of  the  Entry   Clearance   Officer   was
    proportionate with the interference with their Article 8 right.

11. Ms Jaja, who appears on behalf of  Surendra  Gurung  and  Suraj  Gurung
    submits that:  firstly, the First-tier Tribunal were wrong to  conclude
    that family life had not been established and; secondly, the First-tier
    Tribunal  misinterpreted  and  misapplied  the   latest   jurisprudence
    concerning the weight that should be given to the historic injustice in
    assessing the issue of proportionality under article 8.

12. We have been helpfully assisted by Mr Avery on behalf of the  Secretary
    of State.  In relation to  the  question  whether  the  appellants  had
    established family life, although  he  did  not  entirely  concede  the
    point, he accepted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  take  into
    account the latest jurisprudence concerning the  factors  to  be  taken
    into account when considering whether  or  not  family  life  has  been
    established under Article 8(1); such that this was a matter  which  was
    open to be reviewed by us. In relation to the second  ground,  he  very
    properly  conceded  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  not  properly
    understood the Court of Appeal's decision in Gurung, and in  particular
    the weight that should be given to any historical injustice, if it  was
    able to be established.  In those circumstances he  accepted  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal could not be properly supported and
    both parties have invited us to re-determine these issues.

13. In dealing with the issue as to whether the  appellants  were  able  to
    establish family life  under  article  8(1),  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    referred to Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31.  However the jurisprudence  in
    this area has progressed, and a helpful review of it is set out in  the
    determination of the Upper Tribunal in the previous  Ghising  decision,
    reported at [2012] UKUT 160 (IAC). We note that in the Gurung  case  in
    the Court  of  Appeal,  at  paragraph  46,  the  Master  of  the  Rolls
    specifically endorsed this review of the jurisprudence which is  to  be
    found between paragraphs 50 to 62 of the earlier decision.  We  do  not
    consider it necessary to refer to all of  the  authorities  which  were
    carefully considered in the earlier decision. However we do  note  that
    at  paragraph  56,  Lang  J  observed  that  Kugathas  may  have   been
    interpreted too restrictively in the past and now ought to be  read  in
    the light of subsequent domestic and Strasbourg decisions.

14. The most recent of these decisions was AA v United Kingdom (Application
    No.8000/08) a decision of the European Court of  Human  Rights  and  in
    particular at paragraph 49,where it was said that:

         "An examination of the court's case law would tend to suggest  that
         the applicant, a young adult of 24 years old, who resides with  his
         mother and has not yet founded a family of his own, can be regarded
         as having 'family life'."

15. As was said in the earlier Ghising determination at  paragraph  61,  AA
    appears to support that proposition that one of the factors which could
    be taken into account in relation to the issue of  "family  life,"  was
    whether or not the adult child is still living with  the  parents  upon
    whom he is alleged to be dependent. If so, that  would  be  a  positive
    factor to be taken into account in his favour.

16. The evidence that was before the Entry Clearance Officer  at  the  time
    when the decision was made in the present  case  included  the  witness
    statement of Bel Bahadur Gurung dated 14 August 2012, which stated that
    he was living in Nepal with his wife and three children and that he was
    entirely responsible for the financial support of all his  family.   In
    particular he said at paragraph 17:

         "My two adult dependent children are  unmarried,  have  never  been
         employed and are not leading independent  lives.   They  are  still
         very much part of the family unit.  My children  have  always  been
         financially dependent on me.  I fund their education  and  pay  for
         their living expenses."

    He then set out the personal circumstances in respect of  each  of  the
    three children noting that so far as Surendra  was  concerned,  he  was
    attending a college together  with  Suraj  Kumar  Gurung  and  that  he
    suffered ill-health.  He also stated  that  it  was  his  intention  to
    settle in the United Kingdom with the whole of his family.

17. We have reviewed  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in
    particular paragraph 21, where the finding was made  that  family  life
    under Article 8(1) had not been established.   We  have  already  noted
    that the only reference to previous authorities  was  the  decision  of
    Kugathas. On this basis although the First-tier Tribunal correctly made
    reference to the need to consider the strength of  the  emotional  ties
    between the relevant family members,  it did not go beyond this  factor
    and did not take into account  other  factors  which  the  more  recent
    jurisprudence suggest may also be of relevance.  In  our  judgment  the
    First-tier Tribunal ought to have considered the issue of  family  life
    more broadly and in particular ought to have considered the  fact  that
    not only were the  two  applicants  dependent  financially  upon  their
    father, but in particular they all remained as  a  single  family  unit
    living together in Nepal.  If the Tribunal had done so we consider that
    it is likely, as we now determine that, looking at  the  evidence  that
    was available to the Entry Clearance Officer, "family  life"  persisted
    between the two appellants and their parents, and  in  particular  with
    their father. In reaching this view we consider that the fact that  the
    family still remained as an inter-dependable single family unit, was  a
    significant factor to be taken into account  and  one  which  does  not
    appear to have been given sufficient  weight  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.  In those circumstances we are satisfied that  both  of  these
    applicants have established that at the relevant time they  had  family
    life with their father and other family members in Nepal.

18. We have looked with care at the First-tier Tribunal's decision  and  do
    not find  it  easy  to  assess  whether  or  not  that  Tribunal  asked
    themselves the correct  question  when  considering  the  issue  as  to
    whether the "historic injustice" applied in this case. The  matter  was
    referred to at paragraph 18 of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    where it was stated that:

          "... I find however that there is no credible evidence  before  me
         that when the sponsor was discharged from the army in 1993  he  did
         not understand that he would not have a  right  to  settle  in  the
         United Kingdom at that time..........".

    With respect  that  is  not  the  question  that  was  required  to  be
    considered.  The question was  whether  there  was  evidence  that  the
    father had an intention to come to the United Kingdom when he left  the
    army had it not been for the prevailing policy.  By the time the appeal
    came before the First-tier Tribunal, it had the benefit  of  a  witness
    statement from Bel Bahadur Gurung on this point.  As this was  evidence
    of his intent at the time of his  discharged  from  the  army,  it  was
    evidence upon which the Tribunal were entitled to take into account.

    At paragraph 17 of that statement the father said:

         "Had I been allowed to apply for settlement in the  United  Kingdom
         on discharge I would have applied with my wife and children.   They
         would have then qualified as my minor dependants.   However  I  was
         never given the opportunity and hence  my  children  is  [sic]  now
         being separated from their parents who are present and  settled  in
         the UK."

19. It is apparent from what we have said that this issue does  not  appear
    to have been properly addressed by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  re-
    determining the matter, we have reached the view that this evidence  is
    credible  and  there  are  no  counter-veiling  reasons  to  doubt  its
    veracity. On this basis we conclude  that  at  the  date  of  when  the
    original decision was made in this case, the appellants had established
    that the historic injustice applied to their situation.

20. We then turn to the third matter, which is the  effect  that  that  the
    establishment of this factor has upon the question of  proportionality.
    Despite their apparent conclusion that the historic injustice  was  not
    established in  this  case,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  considered  the
    relevance of this potential factor to the issue of  proportionality  at
    various parts of their determination.  It  reviewed  a  number  of  the
    authorities, including the earlier Ghising case  at  paragraph  14  and
    then referred to the Court of Appeal's decision in Gurung at  paragraph
    16, stating that:

         "The court held that normally questions of weight are a matter  for
         the decision-maker and that it is relevant to consider whether  the
         historic injustice suffered by Gurkhas should be  accorded  limited
         or substantial weight in an Article 8(2) balancing exercise".

    Although the Tribunal were correct in identifying the  issue  that  was
    before  the  Court  of  Appeal,  we  cannot  find  reference   in   its
    determination either to the answer that was provided by  the  Court  of
    Appeal, nor the application of it to the present case; namely, that  if
    family life has been established and the  historic  injustice  applies,
    then in considering the article 8(2) proportionality issue in  relation
    to an adult dependent child, in the absence  of  other  counter-veiling
    factors,  it  is  a  strong  reason  for  holding  that  it  would   be
    proportionate to permit the adult child to join his family in  the  UK.
    In these circumstances, as Mr Avery has very  properly  conceded,  this
    aspect of the First-tier Tribunal's decision cannot be  maintained  and
    we have re-determined the matter.

21. One matter which was raised by Mr Avery was  that  since  the  original
    decision  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  the  Appellants'  father
    together with his wife and Suraj Gurung have moved to Brunei,  so  that
    his father can take up employment,  leaving  Surendra  Gurung  and  the
    youngest brother in Nepal; the latter  being  at  boarding  school.  Mr
    Avery submits that this is a  matter  which  ought  to  be  taken  into
    account by us.  This is a state of affairs  which  postdates  the  time
    when the decision by the Entry Clearance Officer was made, and  we  are
    obliged to consider the situation at that time. However, even  if  this
    is a matter which ought to be taken into account, we  do  not  consider
    that it is of such substance that  it  would  be  sufficient  to  weigh
    against the significance of remedying the historic  injustice  in  this
    case. In reaching this conclusion we note that in his witness statement
    the Appellants' father provides an account of why it  is  that  he  has
    taken this course of action, namely to provide an income  in  order  to
    support his family.

22. In conclusion, we are  satisfied  that  each  of  the  Appellants  have
    established that they have family life together with the father and the
    rest of the family, and in the absence  of  sufficient  counter-veiling
    factors, the significance of the historic injustice  which  applies  to
    their situation is  of  such  strength  that  it  ought  to  have  been
    reflected  by  the  Secretary  of  State   concluding   that   it   was
    disproportionate under article  8(2)  to  have  separated  the  family,
    including the two adult applicants. Accordingly we allow the appeals of
    each of these Appellants and set aside the determination of the  First-
    tier Tribunal. We remake the decisions in the appeals  which  we  allow
    against the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  and  direct  that
    entry clearance be promptly issued to the appellants.






Signed                                  Date


The Honourable Mr Justice Jeremy Baker
Sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

