
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02973/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 June 2016                      |On 26 August 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                  A--- I---
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION IN FORCE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Hassan, Counsel, instructed by Ahmad Law
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because it raises  issues  concerning  the  paternity  of  a
    private  citizen.  The  public  have  no  legitimate  interest  in  his
    identity.

 2. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing the appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary
    of State to refuse him a Certificate of Entitlement  to  the  Right  to
    Abode in the United Kingdom.

 3. Cases of this kind can often  be  extremely  complex.  The  point  that
    matters here is  whether  or  not  the  appellant  can  show  that  his
    purported father, who is a British citizen, is in fact his father.   If
    he wins on that point he is entitled to a certificate.   If  he  cannot
    achieve that he cannot have a certificate.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal dated its decision 30 January 2015 but  it  was
    not promulgated until 13 August 2015.  That is a long gap.   I  do  not
    know the reason for that.  I do know that  these  delays  do  sometimes
    happen but they are undesirable.

 5. Delay is relevant in this case. Upper Tribunal Judge  Rintoul  when  he
    gave permission to appeal  was  concerned  about  the  long  delay  and
    speculated, I think correctly, that one of  the  points  taken  in  the
    grounds came about because of the delay.  The fact is that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not consider either at  all  or  certainly  not  with
    conspicuous care,  letters  and  associated  documents  that  would  be
    capable of establishing paternity and I am satisfied  that  this  error
    amounts to an error of law.

 6. What the First-tier Tribunal Judge did do was seize upon a  DNA  report
    prepared by the appellant and  expressed  himself  satisfied  with  the
    quality of that DNA evidence.   If  there  was  good  clear  scientific
    evidence that the purported father was not in fact the father then,  as
    I understand it, the appellant's case would  be  quite  hopeless.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge describes the report as  "strong  and  cogent
    evidence" establishing to "at least the above standard  of  proof  that
    the appellant is not the sponsor's son".

 7. With respect, it is not and it does not.

 8. The only copy of the scientific  evidence  available  is  a  very  poor
    photocopy. I know that there are occasions when the Secretary of  State
    is dismissive of photocopied evidence even though the  photocopy  comes
    from an impeccable source and is of very high quality.  Here the source
    may well be respectable but the copy is deeply inadequate.   There  are
    large parts of it that simply cannot be  read.   There  is  an  obvious
    mistake because  in  the  printed,  legible  part  of  the  report  the
    appellant is named with  a  surname  ending  "ad".   That  is  not  the
    appellant's surname.  His surname ends "al".  On a simple  reading  the
    report  relates  to  the  wrong  person.  It  may  not  be   quite   as
    straightforward as that because there is attached to the  printed  part
    of the report a form that has been completed in manuscript.   The  name
    on there might end "al", the writing is not  entirely  clear,  but  the
    first name appears to end with an "a" whereas on the printed version it
    ends with an "r".    The dates of birth  appear  to  coincide  but  the
    names do not.

 9. There is a picture attached to the report. Presumably it is intended to
    be a picture of the person who provided the sample.  In this case  that
    is the purported father.

10. There is another picture of the father in a photocopy of his  passport.
    There is not a lot to  go  on  because  of  the  poor  quality  of  the
    photocopying but to the extent that the poor photocopy can be discerned
    it looks to me like that of a different person.

11. I do not know why the judge described the DNA report  in  such  glowing
    terms. I regard it as completely unsatisfactory.

12. I note in parenthesis that the  Secretary  of  State  was  directed  to
    produce better  DNA  evidence  and  did  not  do  it.   The  Presenting
    Officer's Unit in the formal reply showed that attempts had  been  made
    but the evidence is not available.

13. Although it  does  not  disprove  the  alleged  paternity  I  am  quite
    satisfied that the appeal could not have been allowed on the  basis  of
    the scientific evidence.

14. Ms Hassan invited me to look carefully at all the other  evidence  that
    has  been  produced.   Certainly  it  is  capable  of  supporting   the
    conclusion that the sponsor is the  appellant's  father  but  it  is  a
    matter of great concern to me that there is no  DNA  evidence  provided
    from the appellant to fill the gap and to show that paternity indeed is
    established according  to  scientific  testing.   It  is  a  remarkable
    omission and one that led me to the  preliminary  view  that  I  should
    dismiss the appeal even though the First-tier Tribunal erred.

15. However, it is clear that there is a history here  of  the  appellant's
    representatives being somewhat wrong footed because they did  not  know
    about the date of the hearing. They were disadvantaged by  a  direction
    requiring them to produce documents in accordance with a timetable that
    could not be achieved. The order  expired  on  the  same  date  as  the
    document was dated.

16. Although I might be being generous to a  fault,  I  think  that  it  is
    possible that the Appellant's representative  had  been  led  into  the
    error of trying to address the faults identify in his case rather  than
    the larger task of proving that he satisfied the  requirements  of  the
    rule.

17. I am therefore persuaded  that  I  will  give  the  appellant  and  his
    representatives another opportunity to serve further evidence.  It will
    be for the First-tier Tribunal to evaluate that evidence if any  comes,
    but I am happy to record here that if there is good scientific evidence
    establishing paternity then the appellant would appear to have  a  very
    strong case.  Conversely, if there is no such evidence any  explanation
    that would explain its absence satisfactorily would  have  to  be  very
    persuasive. Otherwise the Tribunal would be close to being  obliged  to
    reject the documentary evidence because of a  failure  to  explain  why
    better evidence was not produced.

18. In making this decision I am mindful of how long this  has  been  going
    on. It does seem to me that if the appellant can  address  the  gap  no
    injustice will have been done and if he cannot, then all  I  will  have
    done was added a little  delay  to  an  already  protracted  case.   On
    balance I think I have made the best decision but I am quite  satisfied
    that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge should be set  aside
    and, for the reasons given, I have persuaded myself to direct  that  it
    be decided again in the First-tier Tribunal and that is the decision  I
    have made.

Notice of Decision

19. The appeal is allowed. The existing decision is  set  aside.  The  case
    must be decided again in the First-tier Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 9 August 2016                  |







