
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/02984/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower Birmingham         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th May 2017                               |On 21st June 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                Khalida begum
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - islamabad
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Norman, Counsel instructed by Jacob Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born on 1st January 1945.
     She is a widow.  She visited the UK regularly from December 2008,  and
    eventually applied for leave to enter as the adult  dependant  relative
    of her son, Mohammed Arif, a British  citizen.   That  application  was
    refused on 7th May 2015 for the reasons given in a Notice  of  Decision
    of that date.  The Appellant appealed, and  her  appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Obhi  (the  Judge)  sitting  at  Birmingham
    initially on 5th January 2016.  The Judge decided to dismiss the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds for the reasons
    given in her Decision dated 22nd January 2016, but  subsequently  as  a
    consequence of a typographical error made by the Judge, the appeal  was
    allowed in a Decision dated 15th August 2016.   The  Respondent  sought
    leave to appeal that decision, and on 9th January 2017 such  permission
    was granted.

 2. According to the Decision of 22nd January 2016,  the  Judge  found  the
    provisions  of  paragraph  E-ECDR.........1  satisfied,  and   in   the
    alternative she found that the decision to refuse the  Appellant  entry
    clearance amounted to a disproportionate interference with her  Article
    8 ECHR rights.  At the hearing, Mrs Aboni argued  that  the  Judge  had
    erred in law in respect of both decisions.   As  regards  the  decision
    made under the Immigration Rules,  the  Judge  had  failed  to  make  a
    finding relating to financial requirements as set out in  paragraph  E-
    ECDR.3.1 and E-ECDR.3.2.  As regards the Article 8 decision, the  Judge
    had failed to attach sufficient weight to the public interest, and  had
    not made specific findings in  respect  of  the  factors  mentioned  in
    Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. In response Miss Norman first reviewed the unfortunate history of  this
    application for entry clearance and the subsequent  appeal  and  argued
    that the issue of financial requirements had not been  a  matter  dealt
    with at the initial hearing before the Judge.  However, it was accepted
    that the Sponsor had not given any sort of undertaking as  required  by
    paragraph E-ECDR.3.2 of Appendix FM.  Miss Norman further  argued  that
    there was no error of law with regard to the Article 8  decision.   The
    Judge had come to a conclusion open to her on the evidence before  her,
    and she had  demonstrated  that  she  had  carried  out  the  balancing
    exercise necessary for any assessment of  proportionality.   The  Judge
    had explained why she found  the  circumstances  of  the  Appellant  to
    outweigh the public interest in the appeal.

 4. I find an error of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  Judge  as  to  the
    Immigration Rules and that part of the Judge's decision is  set  aside.
    To qualify for entry clearance, the Appellant must show that both parts
    of paragraph E-ECDR.3 of Appendix FM are satisfied and  it  is  not  in
    dispute that paragraph E-ECDR.3.2 is not so satisfied.

 5. However, I find no error of law in the decision of the Judge  that  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer amounted to a  disproportionate
    interference with the Appellant's Article 8  ECHR  family  rights.   As
    Miss Norman argued, at paragraph 27 of the Decision the  Judge  carried
    out the balancing exercise and came to an assessment of proportionality
    open to her.  It is trite law that the Judge did not have  specifically
    refer to Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  It is clear from what the Judge
    wrote that she attached the proper weight to the public  interest,  but
    found that to be outweighed by the compassionate circumstances  in  the
    case.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal under the  Immigration
Rules did involve the making of an error on a point of  law.   I  set  aside
that decision.

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal under Article  8  ECHR
did not involve the making of an error on a point of law.  That decision  is
not set aside.

I remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  by
dismissing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order  for  anonymity.   I  was  not
asked to do so and indeed find no reason to do so.






Signed                              Date    19th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
