
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02207/2014
     OA/02209/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 18th November 2015                 |                On 4th January 2016  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAIRD

                                   Between

                    MISS JAMEENA LIMBU (FIRST APPELLANT)
                    MISS NABEETA LIMBU (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Rai - Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Willock-Briscoe - Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against  the  determination
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Hamilton issued on 21st May 2015  allowing
    under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds the Appellants'
    appeal against the decision of the Respondent made on 20th January 2014
    to refuse leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  adult  dependent
    relatives of their father, an ex-Gurkha settled in the UK.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    9th September 2015.  He said:

         "5.  I am satisfied that Ground 1 is arguable as it  has  not  been
             explained how the change in  the  Second  Appellant's  primary
             carer to the First Appellant from their mother impacts on  the
             presence of family  life  said  to  exist  between  the  adult
             Appellants and their parents here.

           6. I am  satisfied  that  Ground  2  is  arguable  regarding  the
             Appellants' father's lack of credibility regarding his ability
             (or as  found  inability)  to  maintain  or  accommodate  them
             without recourse to public funds.  In the  absence  of  family
             life (as found as flowing from Ground 1) it is  arguable  that
             the private life financial  burden  consideration  in  Section
             117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  has
             been stated but not applied."

 3. In the grounds seeking permission it is submitted that  the  Judge  had
    erred in finding that there was nothing before him to enable him to  go
    behind a finding in a previous determination issued in March 2012  that
    both Appellants had  established  a  family  life  with  their  parents
    despite being adults. He found  that  there  had  been  no  significant
    changes since then.  It is submitted  that  this  finding  ignores  key
    evidence in that when the case was previously heard in March  2012  the
    Appellants' mother was  the  Second  Appellant's  primary  carer.   The
    Second Appellant is permanently disabled and that was a material factor
    in considering whether or not there  was  family  life  at  that  time.
    There has been a material change because the  First  Appellant  is  now
    looking after the Second Appellant in the absence of their mother.  The
    second ground seeking permission is that the Judge had said that  there
    was no reliable or  credible  evidence  of  the  Sponsor's  ability  to
    adequately maintain the Second Appellant who  is  permanently  disabled
    and there was also an issue about accommodation for her.  The  Tribunal
    in 2012 had made findings that the Sponsor was not credible  about  his
    earnings and  Judge  Hamilton  found  that  he  was  "inconsistent  and
    evasive" in his evidence of care arrangements for the Second Appellant.
     It is submitted that this appears to show a clear pattern  since  2012
    of the Sponsor "tailoring  and/or  withholding  evidence  in  order  to
    strengthen the Appellants' case".  Judge Hamilton erred in  failing  to
    give sufficient evidence to the issues arising from the evidence  about
    maintenance and accommodation.

 4. Briefly the history of this case is that in or  around  July  2009  the
    Appellants' father applied for indefinite leave to enter the  UK  as  a
    former Gurkha.  His wife and the Appellants' younger sister applied  as
    his dependents.  On 20th March 2010 their  applications  were  granted.
    The Appellants had been  unable  to  apply  at  that  time  because  of
    financial constraints.  The Sponsor moved to the UK  in  February  2011
    and was joined in the UK by his youngest daughter.  His  wife  remained
    in Nepal with the Appellants.  In July 2011 the Appellants applied  for
    entry clearance and this was refused on 6th July 2011.  The  Appellants
    appealed and Designated Judge Manuell and Immigration Judge  Fox  heard
    the appeals on 24th February 2012.  In a determination  promulgated  on
    23rd  March  2012  the  appeals  were  dismissed.   At  that  time  the
    Appellants' mother was in Nepal caring for the Second  Appellant.   The
    First Appellant was in full-time education and although  she  may  have
    provided some assistance to her mother it was her mother  who  was  the
    primary carer.  There was  an  issue  over  the  Sponsor's  ability  to
    maintain and accommodate the  Appellants  and  there  was  insufficient
    evidence of this.  It was accepted that the  Second  Appellant  had  an
    established family life with her parents that went  beyond  the  normal
    emotional ties one would expect to  exist  between  parents  and  adult
    child and she also had an established family life with her parents.  It
    was accepted that the Second Appellant would find it "very difficult to
    function because of illness or disability without the help and  support
    of at least one of her parents ideally her mother who  is  her  primary
    carer."  It was the fact that there was no satisfactory  evidence  that
    the Sponsor could maintain and accommodate the Second Appellant and the
    likely burden on the public purse if  she  came  to  the  UK  would  be
    significant that was the main reason for the appeal being dismissed  as
    the Panel found that this outweighed any "historic injustice"  argument
    arising from the fact that her father was in the UK as a Gurkha.

 5. Judge Hamilton considered the appeal at length.  He relied  heavily  on
    the decision issued in 2012.  He relied on current case law  applicable
    to applications by Gurkhas and their families.  He dismissed the appeal
    under the Immigration Rules but allowed it on Article  8  grounds.   In
    doing  this  he  took  into  account  that  the  First  Appellant   had
    established some element of an independent life in Nepal  being  young,
    educated and healthy.  She could continue to be  supported  financially
    by her parents if they are living in the UK.  In respect of the  Second
    Appellant he took into account the likelihood that if she comes to  the
    UK her disability means that she will be a significant  burden  on  the
    public purse.  He also took into account that medical care and adequate
    physical care is likely to be available for her in Nepal.  He  went  on
    to say:

         "However in respect of both Appellants I do  not  find  that  these
         factors can be given the sort of weight contemplated in  Gurung  so
         as to enable them to 'outweigh the powerful factors bearing on  the
         Appellants' side'.  I also have some concern as to whether treating
         the Second Appellant differently because of her disability may  not
         be consistent with the Equality Act.   I  therefore  find  that  in
         respect  of  both   Appellants   the   refusal   decision   was   a
         disproportionate interference with the Appellants' family life  and
         therefore not in accordance with the law."

    In considering the issue of family life the Judge  Hamilton  took  into
    account that at the time of the appeal hearing in March 2012 the  First
    Appellant was in full-time education and was living in the family home,
    financially supported by her parents.  The Tribunal found that  despite
    the fact that she had established an independent  life  she  was  still
    sufficiently dependent on her parents to have established a family life
    with them.  Her circumstances at the time of the  refusal  decision  in
    January 2013  were  almost  identical.   The  reasons  for  the  Second
    Appellant's dependency on her parents he found to be obvious.  He found
    therefore that both Appellants have an  established  family  life  with
    their parents in particular their mother who was in Nepal looking after
    the Second Appellant at the time of the refusal.

 6. Mr Rai said that the Appellants' mother had returned to Nepal  for  ten
    months to look after her daughter.  She spends a lot of time  with  her
    because it is difficult for the First  Appellant  to  manage.   Mr  Rai
    submitted that there have been changes to the situation but  these  are
    not material.  The Appellants' mother is still going to Nepal  to  look
    after her daughter.

 7. I have had some difficulty with this case but it seems to me  that  the
    Judge was entitled to rely on the previous determination  and  to  find
    that there was no material change in the situation  of  the  Appellants
    since that decision was made including  a  finding  that  there  was  a
    family life that went beyond normal ties  between  the  Appellants  and
    their parents.  It seems to me that the Judge looked at the evidence in
    the round which is what was required of him.  When  one  looks  at  the
    situation in reality the First Appellant was left  to  look  after  her
    sister because her mother could not be there all the  time  but  it  is
    clear from the information and the evidence before me that  the  mother
    has spent a vast amount of the time since she got  entry  clearance  to
    come to the UK in Nepal looking after her daughter herself. The refusal
    of entry clearance to the Second Appellant has impacted considerably on
    the family life of the whole family since the  mother  spends  so  much
    time away. The burden on the First Appellant without the mother' s help
    is very great, especially for a young single woman.   It  seems  to  me
    that it is the failure of the Secretary of State to consider this  that
    renders his decision arguably disproportionate.  It may  well  be  that
    had I dealt with this case I would not have reached the  same  decision
    as the Judge but his decision  cannot  be  said  to  be  perverse.   He
    refused the appeal under the Immigration Rules and would  have  refused
    it under the Home Office policy for applications  for  entry  clearance
    for Gurkhas' dependents but he maintained  the  previous  finding  that
    there was a family life and found that interference with that would  in
    all the circumstances be proportionate. He did consider  the  financial
    issues and his conclusion was open  to  him  on  the  entirety  of  the
    evidence before him.

Notice of Decision

I find that there is no material error of law in the  determination  of  the
First-tier Tribunal and I uphold that decision.

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

Signed


N A Baird
Deputy         Judge         of         the          Upper          Tribunal
         Date: 15th December 2015








