
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02700/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                                |Determination Sent         |
|on 17th September 2013                          |On 23rd September 2013     |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              Anikstala Robert
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, COLOMBO
                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, Advocate, instructed by Quinn, Martin &
                    Langan, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Case history.

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 20th  September  1992.
    Under cover of a letter from her solicitors dated 30th August 2010  she
    submitted an application to enter the UK on the basis of family reunion
    outwith the requirements of the Immigration Rules, based on  compelling
    and compassionate circumstances.

 2. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application by notice dated 14th
    December 2010.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mozolowski  dismissed  her
    appeal by determination promulgated on 13th December 2011,  and  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Deans dismissed  her  further  appeal  by  determination
    promulgated on 23rd October 2012.

 3. The Court of Session remitted the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by
    interlocutor dated 28th June 2013, pursuant to  a  joint  minute.   The
    material part of the minute is as follows:

         The Respondent accepts that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not
         ... state whether she considered it ... in the  best  interests  of
         the applicant's brothers, who reside in the UK, for  the  applicant
         to be admitted to the UK or not.  The applicant's brothers are both
         children.   Their  best  interests  are  accordingly   a   'primary
         consideration'.  The [First-tier  Tribunal]  Judge  has  failed  to
         consider [a] whether  it  is  in  the  'best  interests'  of  these
         children to live with the consequences  of  the  exclusion  of  the
         applicant.  [b] If the [First-tier Tribunal]  Judge  considered  it
         was not in the children's 'best interests' for the applicant to  be
         allowed to reside in the UK, she has failed to state  why  this  is
         the case.  [c] If she considered that  it  was  in  the  children's
         'best interests' for the applicant to reside in the  UK,  but  that
         there were countervailing considerations that outweighed the  'best
         interests' of the children, she has failed to  state  what  matters
         outweighed the best interests of the children.

 4. I have added the identifiers  [a],  [b]  and  [c]  to  show  the  three
    questions which parties agreed to be points for further decision.  (The
    application for permission to appeal to  the  Court  acknowledged  that
    these were not issues previously raised in the Upper Tribunal; and they
    appear to have been raised only faintly in the First-tier Tribunal.)

Background history.

 5. The Appellant's mother (referred to at some stages of these proceedings
    as "the Sponsor") is Mary Helen Yanci Rani Robert,  a  citizen  of  Sri
    Lanka, born on 18th December 1971.  Her husband died in  Sri  Lanka  on
    10th April 2001.  They had three children  -  the  Appellant;  Robinraj
    Robert, born on 6th November 1994; and Velindraj Robert, born  on  15th
    July 1997.

 6. The  immigration  history  of  the  Appellant's  mother  has  not  been
    presented in detail but does not appear to be in  significant  dispute.
    She came to the UK with her brother in August 2001, leaving  the  three
    children  with  her  sister  in   Sri   Lanka.    She   sought   asylum
    unsuccessfully, but did not leave the  UK.   She  lived  with,  or  was
    supported by, a brother in London who did obtain asylum.

 7. The Appellant's brothers  travelled  from  Sri  Lanka  to  the  UK  via
    Malaysia in 2008.  They were treated as  unaccompanied  asylum  seeking
    minors and accommodated in Glasgow.  According to a letter  dated  30th
    August 2010 from Social Work Services in Glasgow, the boys had believed
    that their mother was missing and that their sister was  travelling  on
    another flight to the UK.  They were  reunited  with  their  mother  on
    9th September 2009 in Glasgow.  They were granted discretionary  leave
    to  remain  until  11th  April  2011,  apparently  being   treated   as
    unaccompanied  asylum  seeking  minors  -  notwithstanding  which,  the
    Sponsor was granted discretionary leave to remain as their carer  until
    the same date.  (The grants seem to have been on  the  basis  of  three
    years from the children's arrival, which would thus have been in  April
    2008.)  All three applied, in time, for an extension  of  their  leave.
    Those applications have been outstanding before the Respondent for  two
    and a half years.  Their leave continues in the meantime.

 8. The ECO's reasons for refusing the Appellant's application included the
    following.  On 11th April 2008 she submitted an application in  another
    identity, based on a forged marriage certificate, to join a  spouse  in
    the UK.  That would lead to mandatory refusal of any application  under
    the Rules.  She did not mention that earlier  application  when  making
    her present application.

Further evidence put before the Upper Tribunal on 17th September 2013.

 9. The Respondent had no objection to admission of the further evidence.

10. An affidavit by a  translator  clears  up  discrepancies  arising  from
    earlier mistranslations of certain documents from Sri Lanka provided on
    the Appellant's behalf.  There was no further reference to this matter,
    and nothing contentious arises from the corrections.

11. The Appellant's mother provides a further statement dated 5th September
    2013.  She speaks further to  how  much  she  and  her  sons  miss  the
    presence of the Appellant.  She dismisses the option  of  the  family's
    return to Sri Lanka, because her sons  can  barely  read  or  write  in
    Tamil, cannot understand Singhalese, would lose the opportunities  they
    have here, would find it difficult to readjust, and there is a lack  of
    safety and a risk of kidnapping.

12. In a statement dated 5th September  2013,  Robinraj  Robert  speaks  to
    similar matters and to the upsetting effects of the separation  on  all
    the family members.   A  statement  from  Velindraj  Robert  dated  4th
    September 2013 is along the same lines.

13. Mr Caskie indicated he  had  no  further  examination-in-chief  of  the
    witnesses, and their statements were all  deemed  to  be  adopted  into
    evidence.

14. Cross-examined for the Respondent, the Appellant's mother said that she
    left Sri Lanka in 2001 and was not in contact with her  children  again
    until 2009, when they were reunited in Glasgow through  the  assistance
    of Social  Services.   After  that  reunion,  she  also  re-established
    contact with her daughter.  When she left Sri Lanka the  children  were
    in the care of her sister and her mother.  She speaks to the  Appellant
    by telephone daily, and so do her  sons.   Their  telephone  calls  are
    emotional, with all the family members crying.  She came to the  UK  in
    2001 leaving her children because her life was in danger and  so  there
    is no chance for her to go back.  She and her boys speak Tamil at home.

15. Re-examined by Mr Caskie, the witness said that her mother has died and
    the Appellant is still living with  her  (the  Appellant's)  aunt.   In
    February this year she asked their lawyer to chase with the Home Office
    the applications for extension of the three years' discretionary  leave
    granted in 2008.  There has been no reply.

16. Cross-examined by the Presenting Officer, Robinraj Robert said that  in
    Sri Lanka, after his mother left, he lived with his brother, sister and
    his aunt and not with any other relative.  (In answer to  my  question,
    he said that his grandmother lived in a house about one  minute's  walk
    away.)  Although their aunt was their main carer, his  younger  brother
    was particularly close to their sister.  He speaks and understands  but
    does not write Tamil.  He is presently attending  a  one  year  college
    course in sport and fitness.  He speaks to his sister almost  daily  by
    telephone and Skype.

17. Re-examined by Mr Caskie, the witness said that he had no knowledge  of
    an aunt of his mother (his great-aunt).  When he finishes his education
    he would like to become a police officer.  He chose a sport and fitness
    course as useful preparation.  He speaks no Singhalese.

18. No questions further to his statement were put to Velindraj Robert.

Submissions.

19. The Presenting Officer said that the findings reached previously in the
    First-tier Tribunal, as upheld in the Upper Tribunal, stand for present
    purposes, and these included  findings  of  the  use  of  deception  in
    previous applications.  That was  to  be  given  some  adverse  weight.
    While the family might see the ideal situation as  having  all  members
    living together, the fact was that they have not all lived together for
    a long time.  The history of deception, the  fact  that  they  had  not
    lived as a family unit, and the extended  past  separation  from  their
    mother  was  significant.   Their  mother  failed   to   gain   refugee
    recognition, and then remained without any status.  While  it  appeared
    anomalous that she was granted leave in line with the two  children  as
    unaccompanied asylum seeking children, after it turned  out  that  they
    had a parent in the UK, matters had to be dealt with as they now stood.
     The further leave sought was also on a discretionary basis.  No reason
    could be offered for the applications not yet being dealt with.  It was
    accepted that  the  delay  might  tend  in  favour  of  the  Appellant.
    Nevertheless, the Appellant could not meet  the  Immigration  Rules  in
    respect of Article 8, and outside the Rules it was not disproportionate
    to refuse her application.  The Appellant could not be  seen  as  a  de
    facto parent to her two brothers, because they had all been in care  of
    other relatives.  It was accepted that given  the  family  history  the
    protective attitude of an elder sister towards younger  brothers  might
    be enhanced.  The parties in the UK did not have  any  settled  status,
    but it would be little to the point if  they  did,  because  there  was
    nothing to show that the family could not choose to live in Sri Lanka.

20. Mr Caskie submitted that by April 2014 the brothers  of  the  Appellant
    would have spent six years in the UK, and one of them  would  still  be
    under 18.  The older brother, as  was  clear  from  his  evidence,  has
    already become an "integrated alien".  He has  had  all  his  secondary
    education here and has begun tertiary education with a view to a career
    in the Scottish police.  Even  if  the  Respondent  were  to  make  the
    decision on the outstanding applications by the  Appellant's  relatives
    without further delay, and if that  were  to  be  negative  and  to  be
    appealed, the practical outcome is that  the  family  is  in  the  near
    future likely to place its residence in the UK on a firm legal footing.
     The Respondent  referred  to  deception  by  the  Appellant,  but  the
    significant deception occurred when  she  was  aged  only  15  and  the
    subsequent non-disclosure when she was aged only 17.  She  was  in  the
    hands of others in those matters.  The Respondent's case was  based  on
    the good administration of the immigration system,  yet  there  was  an
    unexplained delay on outstanding applications of two and a half  years.
    The past reality of a fractured  family  had  led  to  the  Appellant's
    brothers living very closely with her, in the absence of both  parents,
    throughout their tender years.  While there were  other  caring  family
    members, no  doubt  there  would  lead  to  a  particularly  protective
    attitude by the older sister.  That was why all the  parties  spoke  so
    strongly to the strength of their relationship.  It was  clearly  true,
    from the way it emerged in evidence, that the parties  speak  daily  by
    telephone.  Although the Appellant is an adult, an 18th birthday  does
    not draw a bright  line,  and  she  is  a  single  young  female  in  a
    patriarchal society.  The question was not whether,  as  posed  by  the
    Presenting Officer, Article 8 demanded that she be  allowed  entry  but
    whether on balance, with the interests of the  children  treated  as  a
    primary consideration, there was any interest  in  immigration  control
    and in penalising failure to comply with the Rules such as  to  justify
    her exclusion.

Conclusions.

21. I find that the Appellant and her  brothers  have  particularly  strong
    sibling bonds, and that it would bring much emotional satisfaction  and
    relief to both brothers if she were to join them in the UK.  That would
    be in their best interests.  No reason has been suggested why it  might
    be against their  interests.   Issues  [a]  and  [b]  are  both  easily
    resolved to the Appellant's advantage.

22.  The  decisive  issue  is  [c],  whether   there   are   countervailing
    considerations that outweigh the best interests of the children.

23. It is relevant to assess just how far  the  children's  best  interests
    (not the Appellant's) would be promoted by entry of their sister.  They
    would feel much better for having the Appellant here, but  it  has  not
    been suggested that it would make a great difference to their prospects
    in life. While preparing this determination I notice that although both
    sides referred to the interests of "the children", the older brother is
    no longer legally a child.  He had his  18th  birthday  on  6  November
    2012, soon after the previous decision in the Upper Tribunal and  prior
    to the Court's interlocutor.  The younger brother will  have  his  18th
    birthday on 15 July 2015, under two years from now.  The case does  not
    affect best interests during early childhood years, and there is only a
    short period of childhood left.

24. It was not explored in evidence or submissions how family life might be
    carried  on,  short  of  reunion  in  the  UK.   I  find  that  regular
    communication would continue.  It is probably not realistic  to  expect
    the Appellant to be granted entry clearance to visit  the  UK,  failing
    success in these proceedings.  If her mother and brothers  continue  to
    live in the UK, it might be possible for them in time to meet on visits
    to Sri Lanka or in a third country.  I accept that all  family  members
    would regard such communications and visits as of much lower value than
    living together, or close to each other, in the UK,  and  it  is  seems
    unlikely that such a visit might happen during the little that  remains
    of  childhood years.

25. The Appellant's mother claims to have had no contact with her  children
    or knowledge of their circumstances for many years, but  they  were  at
    home with close relatives,  and  elaborate,  deceptive,  and  obviously
    quite expensive mechanisms were deployed in hope of bringing  them  all
    to the UK.    Her  version  does  not  sound  likely.   She  failed  to
    establish any asylum claim.  While she is determinedly  against  return
    to Sri Lanka, there is no reason to think that any family member has  a
    valid basis for refugee or humanitarian  protection.   Even  if  it  is
    unlikely to happen, it can be given a little weight that  there  is  no
    barrier to return to Sri Lanka, and that the family  could  voluntarily
    reunite there.

26. The Appellant claims to have had no  knowledge  of  her  previous  visa
    application.  That was not previously accepted, and it does  not  stand
    up well to examination.  She was taken to Malaysia with  an  agent  and
    the deception included dressing her up and photographing her at a false
    wedding ceremony.  She must have had a good idea  what  was  going  on.
    However, I accept that both applications were prepared not directly  by
    her but on her behalf.  Although she was the intended beneficiary,  she
    was not the prime mover.  The matter is adverse in the  proportionality
    balance, but it is capable of being outweighed.

27. The bad features of the immigration history do not count  in  assessing
    the children's best interests, but  do  weigh  in  the  proportionality
    balance.  The adverse weight is diminished by firstly the  actions  and
    later the inaction of the Respondent (or rather, of  the  Secretary  of
    State, but that makes no practical difference).  The  family  here  was
    granted three years leave, for obscure reasons, and there is no  reason
    why the applications for extension should have remained outstanding for
    so long.  In the  meantime  the  Appellant's  brothers,  as  is  to  be
    expected, have gone a long way towards becoming integrated aliens.  The
    older of the Appellant's brothers left a good impression as a  witness.
     I find force in Mr Caskie's submission that in reality the family  is
    rather more likely to move towards recognition as settled migrants than
    to be removed.

28. Neither party referred to any  case  on  when  Article  8  may  require
    departure from the Immigration Rules, or to any case involving the best
    interests of children.  It is  accepted  that  the  case  involves  the
    interests of the child as a primary consideration, and that it  reaches
    the ultimate proportionality  question.   There  is  the  usual  public
    interest in effective immigration control (Huang v  SSHD,  [2007]  UKHL
    11, [2007] 2 AC 167, paragraph 16).  Although there was no delay by the
    ECO, the actions and inaction  of  the  SSHD  towards  the  Appellant's
    relatives tend to weaken the weight to be given to  that  interest  (EB
    Kosovo v SSHD [2008] UKHL 41).

29. The ideal of all family members is that they should  live  together  in
    the UK.  Not all such wishes should be granted,  when  the  Immigration
    Rules are against them.  To live in a family unit with an  adult  older
    sibling is not the most powerful type of case  under  Article  8.    It
    does not equate to cases of  parent  and  children  (particularly  very
    young children), or of spouses.  There is a strong  sympathetic  aspect
    to  the  appellant's  situation.   However,  drawing  all  the  strands
    together, I find that the case involves a relatively small disadvantage
    to the best interests of a 16 year old child,  and  even  allowing  for
    features which diminish the public interest  in  upholding  the  Rules,
    that interest is not outweighed on the facts of this case.

30. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside, for error of
    law as identified by parties  in  their  joint  minute.  The  following
    decision is substituted: the Appellant's appeal, as originally  brought
    to the First-tier Tribunal, is dismissed.

31. No order for anonymity has been requested or made.



                           [pic]




                           20 September 2013
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
