

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers:
                                                               OA/02275/2014
                                                               OA/02271/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 7th March 2016                         |On: 18th March 2016            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     ST
                                     MST
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Accra
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ryan, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Appellants  are  both  nationals  of  Guinea.  They  appeal  with
    permission[1] the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  TRP
    Hollingworth) to dismiss their appeals against a decision to refuse  to
    grant them entry clearance under  paragraph  352D  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, as the family  members  of  a  recognised  refugee  present  and
    settled in the UK.  They seek leave to enter in  order  to  join  their
    mother, AK (the Sponsor).








    The Applications and Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal


 2. The Appellants' applications for  entry  clearance  had  been  rejected
    because the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) had not been  satisfied  that
    these children were in fact the biological children of the Sponsor.  It
    would appear that there was good reason for  that  initial  doubt.  The
    Sponsor had submitted an application for entry clearance in April  2009
    in which  she  had  apparently  declared  that  she  had  no  dependent
    children. She and her partner M had arrived in the UK  that  same  year
    and had claimed asylum. He had been interviewed in  relation  to  their
    claim and had named his own three children, but had not  said  anything
    about the Appellants.   The only evidence that the relationship was  as
    claimed were birth certificates issued in 2003 which the  ECO  declined
    to place weight upon.


 3. By the time the matter reached the First-tier Tribunal  the  Appellants
    had produced DNA evidence to show that the Sponsor  is  in  fact  their
    mother. The discrepancies arising  from  the  VAF  and  interview  were
    squarely blamed on their (by then former) step-father M;  it  was  said
    that he and the Sponsor had split up as a result of his  reluctance  to
    support her in her efforts to bring the children here.

 4.  The  appeals  were  dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    Judge
    Hollingworth accepted, albeit with some reluctance,  that  the  "family
    link" was as claimed. He was not prepared to accept that  the  children
    had been part of  the  Sponsor's  household  before  she  left  Guinea.
    Although not in issue before him  he  looked  in  some  detail  at  the
    particulars of the sponsor's asylum claim and rejected  as  ill-founded
    the evidence that she had suffered serious harm as a result of her then
    partner's political activities. This in turn  led  him  to  reject  her
    evidence that she had decided to leave her two children behind  in  the
    care of a housekeeper because she had to leave the country suddenly and
    in haste.  Judge Hollingworth considered it far more  likely  that  the
    children would be left with their  grandmother  or  one  of  the  other
    family members still in Guinea at that time.  He rejected her  evidence
    that it had been M who had completed all the relevant forms because she
    could not write  English:  he  found  her  to  be  an  "articulate  and
    informed" witness and he did not accept that she would  have  signed  a
    form without knowing  what  it  said.   The  determination  appears  to
    conclude that the children are and were at all material times living in
    the household of their grandmother. Paragraph 54 reads:


         "on the available evidence  the  Sponsor  has  not  discharged  the
         evidential burden that the  Appellants  were  living  in  the  same
         household unit as her former partner who entered the United Kingdom
         in 2009 in order to seek refugee status but did not disclose them"






      Error of Law

 5. At a hearing on the 2nd June 2015 the  Appellants  gave  the  following
    grounds for challenging the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. It was
    submitted that it was flawed for:


        i) Material misdirection in law. The relevant test was at paragraph
           352D (iv). This required the Appellants to show that  they  were
           "part of the family unit of the person  granted  asylum  at  the
           time that the person granted asylum  left  the  country  of  his
           habitual residence".  The  test  applied  in  the  determination
           appeared to have  been  whether  they  were  part  of  the  same
           household  of  the  sponsor's  former  partner.   There   is   a
           difference between household and family unit. Further there  was
           no suggestion that the claim was founded on a  link  with  their
           former stepfather. The sponsor is their mother, who has  refugee
           status in her own right.


       ii) Irrationality, procedural unfairness  and  taking  into  account
           irrelevant factors in respect of the Sponsor's credibility.  The
           sponsor has been recognised as a refugee. Her claims  about  the
           events which led to that recognition have never been  challenged
           by the Respondent, and were not a matter  which  required  Judge
           Hollingworth's adjudication. She was not put on notice that  any
           of that was in issue. Much of the determination in taken up with
           his reasons for rejecting her claims to  have  been  persecuted;
           this in turn  unfairly  impacted  upon  his  assessment  of  her
           overall credibility.

      iii)  Procedural   unfairness.   The   First-tier   Tribunal   places
           considerable weight on a VAF in which the sponsor is said not to
           have named her children, and an interview in which  her  partner
           is said never to have mentioned them either.   Neither of  these
           documents were ever produced by  the  Respondent  and  in  those
           circumstances the First-tier Tribunal was not entitled to  place
           the weight upon them that it did.


       iv) Mistake of fact. At paragraph 13 the determination records  that
           M had brought his own  children  to  the  UK  in  2009;  adverse
           inference is drawn from this since these applications  were  not
           made until 2013. In fact his children were brought to the UK  in
           2011, considerably shortening the gap.

        v) Failure to consider  relevant  evidence.  At  paragraph  13  the
           determination states that there was "no apparent reason" why the
           Appellants and their 3 step-siblings did not go  and  live  with
           the Sponsor's mother. In fact an explanation had  been  offered.
           That was that M  had  given  instructions  that  all  five  were
           initially to be kept together, and there was no indication  that
           the Appellants' grandmother would have been able or  willing  to
           care for three children who had no biological connection to her.



       vi) Taking irrelevant  matters  into  account.  The  determination's
           preoccupation  with  the  presence  of  other   family   members
           currently in Guinea was not relevant to the  resolution  of  the
           appeal: the only question was whether the children had been part
           of their mother's family unit when she left Guinea.

 6. The Respondent was that day represented by Senior Presenting Officer Mr
    McVeety. Mr McVeety accepted that the determination did contain  errors
    of fact and that ground (iv) was made out. He also  accepted  that  the
    presence of other family members in Guinea (ground vi) was  "completely
    irrelevant".   In respect of ground (v) he accepted it to  be  arguably
    the case but not that this should result in the determination being set
    aside.


 7. The Respondent's position on ground (i) was that  the  Appellants  were
    correct to say that the relevant test is the family unit of the mother,
    but that on the findings as made by the First-tier Tribunal,  this  was
    not made out. The background facts to the asylum claim had not been  in
    issue but the Tribunal had been entitled  to  look  with  care  at  the
    moment that the sponsor fled Guinea, since it was required to do so  by
    the rule itself. Mr McVeety submitted that ground (iii)  was  factually
    correct in that the documents had not been produced, but that this  was
    immaterial since the Sponsor herself appears to accept  the  assertions
    made in respect of both VAF and M's interview.

 8. In a written decision dated 3rd July 2015 I  set  the  decision  aside.
    Having accepted the DNA tests the question before the  Tribunal  was  a
    relatively simple one: were these two children part of the family  unit
    of the sponsor at the time that she left Guinea? There was no  need  to
    embark on a forensic analysis of her asylum claim, nor indeed  to  make
    adverse findings on matters already accepted by the Respondent. Nor was
    there any need to conduct an enquiry into  whether  there  were  family
    members in Guinea then or today  who  are  able  to  look  after  these
    children. The  evidence  was  neatly  divided.  On  the  one  hand  the
    Respondent could point to the fact  that  the  children  had  not  been
    mentioned on the VAF or in M's interview. This was at least capable  of
    suggesting that they were not living with the couple at the  time  that
    they left Guinea. On the other hand  there  was  the  evidence  of  the
    sponsor, an accepted refugee, that offered some explanation  for  those
    omissions, and  the  remaining  documentary  evidence,  none  of  which
    features in Judge Hollingworth's  analysis.  There  were  for  instance
    photographs of the children together with their step-siblings: if  they
    were all living together it might be thought to follow that  they  were
    all part of the same family unit at the relevant time.  The  Tribunal's
    formulation of the relevant test at paragraph 54 of  the  determination
    does amount to a material error of law.  The grounds were made out  and
    the determination set aside.






    Re-Making the Decision


 9. There followed an unfortunate and lengthy delay in having these appeals
    finally determined. This was in  part  because  of  the  difficulty  in
    securing a Mandingo interpreter, and because a  hearing  was  adjourned
    due to the Sponsor being unwell. The case was finally heard on the  7th
    March 2016 at Field House. I heard oral evidence from the  Sponsor  and
    helpful submissions from both parties. At the  end  of  the  hearing  I
    indicated that I would allow the appeals and I now give my reasons why.




    My Findings


10. In her written[2] and oral evidence the Sponsor  explained  her  family
    history as follows.


11. In 2001 she married a Mr T. They had two children, MST  born  in  2002,
    and ST born in 2003. The relationship broke  down  shortly  after  ST's
    birth.   The children came to live with the  Sponsor  at  her  parents'
    home in Conakry. Mr T lived nearby at his own house  and  continued  to
    see the children. Mr T is now deceased[3].

12. In 2004 the Sponsor met and fell in love with M. He was separated  from
    his first wife with whom he had had three children. He had  a  daughter
    who was approximately 9 and twin girls who were  then  aged  3.  M  had
    custody of the children and they did not see their  biological  mother.
    When the Sponsor married M the families were joined  together  and  she
    was left to care for all five children. In her oral evidence  she  told
    me that she had done this on her  own  with  no  help.   Of  her  step-
    daughters she said "they know the care I gave them".  The children grew
    up together. Her daughter MST was very close to the  twins  since  they
    were only a year apart in age. She showed me some  photographs  in  the
    bundle which showed four children sitting together. She identified  the
    three girls in the picture as her daughter and the twins, and  the  boy
    as her son.

13. The Sponsor and M hoped to add  to  their  family  by  having  a  child
    together, but this did not happen. In 2009 they decided  to  travel  to
    the UK in order to receive fertility treatment. M went to Sierra  Leone
    in order to apply for their visas whilst the Sponsor remained  at  home
    with the children. In the few days that he was away the family home was
    attacked by people who were  politically  opposed  to  M.  Finding  him
    absent they instead attacked the Sponsor, and a security guard that the
    family had employed. Upon his return from Sierra Leone M  decided  that
    they needed to leave Guinea immediately. He had secured the  visas  for
    himself and the Sponsor and they were therefore able to travel  to  the
    UK. They left the children in the care of  the  housekeeper,  with  the
    intention of sending for them later.   M  left  instructions  that  the
    children were to be kept together.

14. When they arrived in the UK they both claimed asylum. The basis of  the
    claim was that M had made a  number  of  political  enemies  in  Guinea
    because of his involvement  with  a  local  politician.  It  was  these
    enemies  who  had  attacked  the  Sponsor  and  the  guard.     M   was
    interviewed in respect of his claim. The  Sponsor  was  told  that  the
    immigration authorities could not find a Mandingo  interpreter  so  was
    asked to wait. When M got home from his interview (presumably conducted
    in French or English) she asked him if he had mentioned  the  children;
    he said that he had not. The Sponsor did not question this,  since  she
    presumed that this would all be dealt with at a  later  stage  and  she
    trusted M to sort it all out.  In the end the authorities never managed
    to find a Mandingo interpreter and the claim was assessed  without  the
    Sponsor being substantively interviewed.

15. The Sponsor and M were both granted refugee status on the 2nd  February
    2010.   They were living together in Nottingham at  the  time  and  had
    managed to have another child, their son who was born in December 2011.
     In this period the relationship started to  deteriorate.  The  Sponsor
    wanted applications made for the children to all come to the UK  but  M
    insisted on his own children coming first. He promised that if his  own
    children were successful  then  he  would  make  applications  for  the
    Appellants to come. His daughters were all issued with  refugee  family
    reunion visas in 2011 and came to live with their father,  the  Sponsor
    and their new baby brother in Nottingham. The  Sponsor  described  this
    period as very difficult for  her.  Her  step  daughters  missed  their
    sister and brother a lot and would cry - they  would  always  tell  her
    that they were praying for them to come and join them in the UK.  M was
    stalling and giving excuses why the applications  could  not  be  made.
    This was "heartbreaking" for the Sponsor.   In 2012 she came back  from
    work  to  find  that  some  documents,  including  her  refugee  status
    document, were not where she had left them. M denied having anything to
    do with this, which "surprised" the Sponsor since he and she  were  the
    only two adults living in the house. The arguments that  this  incident
    caused led to her finally moving out.


16. After their step-sisters left to come to the  UK  the  Appellants  were
    sent to live in Conakry with their grandmother.  Their  grandmother  is
    not very well and cannot afford to send them to school. That  is  where
    they still are.

17. After she left M the Sponsor met a man  from  the  Ivory  Coast.   They
    started a relationship. He helped her to get legal advice about  making
    applications for the children. They are now in a relationship and  have
    a child together.

18. When the Sponsor discovered that the applications had been refused, and
    why, she was "devastated". She states "the decision affected me  badly.
    I was always crying and feeling very emotional. My heart breaks for  my
    children. I am constantly upset and this is made even worse by the fact
    that my children cry every time I speak to them".  As  to  the  reasons
    for refusal, the Sponsor recognises that this was because  of  her  own
    visa application in 2009 and the alleged failure of M  to  mention  the
    children at interview. She squarely lays the blame for each omission on
    M.  He never gave her  an  explanation  why  he  did  not  mention  the
    children on her visa application or at interview. She can  only  assume
    that it is because they are not his biological children and he did  not
    want to take any responsibility for them.   She points out that she was
    never given the  opportunity  to  give  this  information  herself.  He
    completed her visa application form in 2009. She cannot read  or  write
    English so had no idea what he had written. She trusted him completely:
    "I come from a culture where as a wife I have  to  trust  my  husband's
    decisions and the fact that I was unable to read or write meant that  I
    could not really question my husband and I had to assume  that  all  he
    asked me to do was for both our benefit".  It was M's attitude  towards
    her children that eventually led to her leaving him.

19. In her oral evidence the  Sponsor  showed  me  a  photograph  of  three
    smiling young women, in what looks like  Nottingham  town  centre.  She
    told me that this was taken this year and  it  is  her  (former)  step-
    daughters. She still sees them from time to time in Nottingham and they
    are pleased to see her. They call her "Mama". She  does  not  ask  them
    about whether they have had any contact  with  the  Appellants  because
    they are living with their father and she is estranged from him.

20. Against this evidence, the Respondent  relies  on  the  VAF,  completed
    online in 2009.   It is completed in the name of the Sponsor and  shows
    her to have been seeking a visa in order to travel for private  medical
    treatment. This is consistent with her evidence that she was trying  to
    come to the UK in order to get  fertility  treatment.    As  an  online
    application, it is unsigned. Mr Bramble was unable to tell me if  there
    had ever been a 'paper counterpart' ie a pro-forma  completed  by  hand
    and signed by the Sponsor. At part 4, Q44, the question  is  asked  "do
    you have any dependent children" to which the answer is given "no".

21. The second piece of evidence upon which the Respondent  relies  is  the
    alleged failure of M to mention the children in his asylum interview. I
    say  alleged  because  the  Respondent  has  still  not  produced  that
    document,  notwithstanding  numerous  attempts   by   the   Appellants'
    representatives to have it disclosed, and the fact that its absence has
    been a feature of this appeal since the refusal in 2013.   The  Sponsor
    has never seen that document. What she can say is that when  she  asked
    her husband whether he had given her children's names, he said that  he
    had not. This would tend to support the Respondent's allegation.

22. I have considered all of this evidence in  the  round,   and  I  remind
    myself that the burden of proof rests on the Appellants who must  show,
    on a balance of probabilities, that they were part of the  family  unit
    of their mother at the date that she left Guinea.

23. At the time of the decision to refuse the Entry Clearance  Officer  had
    the following evidence available. There was a lady claiming to  be  the
    mother of these children. She relied on birth  certificates  which  had
    not been issued contemporaneously with the births.  There  was  no  DNA
    evidence. Against this was the  fact  that  this  lady  had  apparently
    denied having any children when she applied for her UK visa,  and  that
    her husband had subsequently listed his own children as his dependents,
    but not mentioned the Appellants.  Entry Clearance Officers must  apply
    strict evidential  requirements  before  granting  entry  clearance  to
    children. This scrutiny is driven in  part  by  the  need  to  maintain
    immigration control, but also by the  need  to  safeguard  against  the
    trafficking  of  minors.   In  those  circumstances  it  was   entirely
    understandable that these applications were  refused  for  the  reasons
    given.

24. Today the position is quite different. I have available to me  evidence
    which goes to circumstances pertaining at the time of the decision.   I
    have the DNA evidence which establishes  beyond  any  reasonable  doubt
    that the Appellants are the biological children  of  the  Sponsor.   We
    also have the detailed evidence of the Sponsor about her  circumstances
    and how it came to be that the visa application form  did  not  mention
    the Appellants.  That form is now the centrepiece of  the  Respondent's
    case, and I consider it below in the context of the Sponsor's evidence.
    Before I do I say something about M's interview. I have never seen that
    interview record and  it  is  entirely  unclear  in  what  context  the
    omission was made. Was it the case, for instance, that M was not  asked
    about his family circumstances, or was he asked directly and denied the
    Appellants' existence?  There is very limited weight I can place  on  a
    document I have never seen, and in the circumstances there is  a  limit
    to the weight I can place on evidence that did not emanate from one  of
    the parties to this appeal.  Mr Bramble  fairly  recognised  this,  but
    asked me to take into account the Sponsor's own evidence about  what  M
    had told her. I have done this in my overall assessment.

25. I have had the opportunity of hearing oral evidence from  the  Sponsor.
    She answered the questions put to her in  a  straightforward  and  open
    manner. I  found  there  to  be  no  material  inconsistencies  in  her
    evidence. I note that the Sponsor was recognised as a refugee  in  2011
    and there has hitherto never been any challenge to her  credibility.  I
    found her evidence to be detailed, cogent and consistent.  I found  her
    evidence about how the visa application form was completed by M  to  be
    credible, and consistent with the document itself.   It  is  an  online
    application made to  Freetown  and  it  is  unsigned.    I  accept  her
    evidence that she trusted her then husband to complete  this  form  for
    her, and to subsequently handle  all  their  legal  affairs.   She  has
    advanced  "cultural"  reasons  for  this  division  of  labour  in  the
    household and I have taken this into account, but I would observe  that
    it is easy to understand how any husband, anywhere, would  be  left  to
    perform such tasks when the wife has five young children to  care  for.
    She had not reason to imagine that he would, for whatever reason,  give
    false information on that form.  Whilst his subsequent behaviour  might
    suggest a nefarious motive,  it  may  be  that  there  is  a  perfectly
    innocent explanation for M's mistake.  For instance, he  may  not  have
    considered the children to be "dependent" on his wife since he was  the
    breadwinner.  I note in this regard that he makes no mention of his own
    three children for whom the Sponsor had at that point been the de facto
    mother for a period of five years.   The Respondent has accepted that M
    and the Sponsor were a married couple when they  arrived,  and  it  was
    subsequently recognised that his three daughters  formed  part  of  the
    family unit prior to the flight from Guinea: the fact that they do  not
    feature at Q44 of the VAF would appear to suggest that it could  simply
    have been a misunderstanding on M's part.

26. I accept the Sponsor's evidence that her relationship with M broke down
    because of his failure to take responsibility for the Appellants and to
    support their applications to come to the UK.  Overall I  am  satisfied
    that the answer given at part 4 of the VAF was not given by the Sponsor
    herself, and that it did not reflect the true position. I have assessed
    her oral evidence in the round  with  the  Respondent's  evidence,  the
    photographs of the children, the DNA evidence and  the  fact  that  her
    relationship with  M  has  now  broken  down.   Having  done  so  I  am
    satisfied, on a balance of probabilities, that these children were part
    of the Sponsor's family unit at the time that she left Guinea.




    Decisions


27. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


28. The decision in the appeal is re-made as follows:

    "the appeals are allowed under the Immigration Rules".

29. I was not asked to make a direction for anonymity but I do  so  because
    of the young age of the Appellants:

      "Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,   the
      Appellants are granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings
      shall directly or indirectly identify them  or  any  member  of  their
      family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellants  and  to  the
      Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
      contempt of court proceedings".






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     7th
                                 March 2016




      Fees


      Each Appellant paid a fee of �140  to  pursue  their  appeal.  I  have
      allowed each appeal and I am satisfied that in light of the  way  that
      the  evidence  developed  these  fees  should  be  returned   to   the
      Appellants. The DNA evidence was made available in April 2014 and  the
      Respondent given an opportunity to reconsider the decisions  in  light
      of that evidence. The Respondent maintained the  decision  relying  on
      two pieces of evidence, only one of which was belatedly produced.










                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                     7th
                                 March 2016


      -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchinson on
the 14th January 2015
[2] Before me the Sponsor adopted two witness statements, dated 8th July
2013 and 3rd October 2014.
[3] The bundle contains a document purporting to be a death certificate
issued in Conakry by the Ministry of Health on the 12th January 2010. This
states that Mr T, a mechanic, died of heart failure.

