

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/02186/2013
      OA/02192/2013
      OA/02200/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 18 December 2014                        |On 19 December 2014            |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                       & UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                       M TALAH, M F N ASAD, & I ANWAR
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellants:    Mr M Shoaib, of Shoaib Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge D'Ambrosio, dismissing their appeals  against  refusal  of  entry
    clearance as the children of a person settled in the UK.   The  appeals
    failed under the Immigration Rules and on ECHR grounds.

 2. Their father is the  sponsor.   He  had  divorced  the  mother  of  the
    appellants, but has since re-married her.  The  appellants  lived  with
    her in Pakistan.  At the date  of  the  applications  leading  to  this
    appeal and at the date of the ECO's decision she had  not  applied  for
    entry clearance.  She applied at a later  date  and  is  now  with  her
    husband in the UK.

 3. The first, second and third grounds of appeal relate to the case  under
    the Rules.  Their point is that  the  judge  should  not  have  applied
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules as amended from 9  July  2012  but
    paragraph 297 of the pre-existing Rules.

 4. That is correct, but it does not help the appellants.  As  Mr  Matthews
    observed, their circumstances do not fall within  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297.  Mr Shoaib accepted that  he  was  unable  to  find  any
    argument that their appeals might succeed under the Rules.

 5. The case was also put to the First-tier Tribunal under Article 8 of the
    ECHR, although on a rather confused basis.  The fourth ground of appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal complains that the Article 8 aspect of  the  case
    was "not analysed properly under  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence".   Mr
    Shoaib asked us to look again at the case under  Article  8.   He  said
    that the appellants have a half-sister living in Belfast and that while
    they have visited their father in the UK  in  the  past,  there  is  no
    certainty that they will be able to do so in the future.

 6. The Article 8 ground of appeal is vague.   It  points  to  no  material
    legal error, and none is apparent.

 7. The decision to split the family, now and in the past, has been one  of
    parental choice.  If the matter were for fresh decision, we would  have
    no difficulty in holding that there is  no  good  reason  for  allowing
    entry clearance outside the Rules.

 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

 9. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            19 December 2014
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




