
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02421/2015
                                                               OA/02422/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7th December 2016                      |On 11th January 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                    ms MK
                                     UK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms C Record from the Chambers of Celia Record
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014. I continue that order. Unless and until a Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise, the  Appellants  are  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or any member of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

 1. The Appellants, nationals of Sierra Leone appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against  decisions  dated  16th  January  2015  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to refuse their applications for entry  clearance  to
    join their father, the Sponsor, in the UK.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clarke dismissed the appeals under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  The Appellants now appeal to this Tribunal with
    permission granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 11th November 2016.



 2. The background to this appeal is that the Sponsor first arrived in  the
    UK as a student in 2007 and his wife (the  mother  of  the  Appellants)
    entered the  UK  about  six  months  later  as  his  dependent  spouse.
    According to the  skeleton  argument  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    applications for entry clearance for the Appellants were made  in  2011
    but  were  refused  because  the  Sponsor  did  not  fully   meet   the
    requirements.  It is stated that some time after this the  Sponsor  and
    his wife separated.  As a result of her health conditions the Sponsor's
    wife claimed asylum and has been granted limited leave to remain in the
    UK outside the Immigration Rules. The Sponsor is a naturalised  British
    citizen.  Between them the couple have five  children,  three  of  whom
    reside with the  Sponsor's  wife,  (the  Appellants'  mother).   It  is
    asserted that the Appellants' mother has suffered from a number of long-
    term medical complications and as a result she has been unable to  take
    a role in the lives of the Appellants and that the father has exercised
    sole responsibility for the Appellants.

 3. The  current  applications  were  made  in  December  2014.  The  Entry
    Clearance officer (ECO) refused the applications on  16  January  2015.
    The ECO concluded that the Appellants had provided evidence that  their
    father has had a role in their upbringing with letters from the  school
    and a local drug store and money transfers showing he assists in  their
    upkeep and the ECO accepted  that  the  Sponsor  "has  a  say"  in  the
    upbringing of the Appellants.  However the ECO considered a letter from
    the Appellants' mother in which she constented to  them  joining  their
    father  in  the  UK  and  noted  that  the  letter  provided  no  other
    information as to the Appellants' mother's role in their upbringing and
    concluded that the care of the Appellants had at least been  shared  by
    the Appellants' mother and father.

Error of law

 4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  considered  paragraph  297  of   the
    Immigration Rules.  The relevant provisions of paragraph  297  for  the
    purposes of this appeal are as follows:

         "297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite
         leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents
         or a relative present and settled or being admitted for settlement
         in the United Kingdom are that he:


         (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent,
         parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:


             ...


             (e) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
             being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has had
             sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or


             (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in the
             United Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
             settlement and there are serious and compelling family or
             other considerations which make exclusion of the child
             undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for the
             child's care; and


             ... "


 5. In considering paragraph 297(i)(e) the judge said  that  he  took  into
    account the principles in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e) sole  responsibility)
    Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  00049  [34-36].   The   guidance   as   to   sole
    responsibility given by the Tribunal in TD is as follows;

         "52. Questions of "sole responsibility" under the immigration rules
         should be approached as follows:


             i.   Who has "responsibility" for  a  child's  upbringing  and
             whether that responsibility is "sole" is a factual  matter  to
             be decided upon all the evidence.


             ii.  The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules should
             not to be understood as a theoretical or legal obligation  but
             rather as a practical one which, in each case, looks to who in
             fact  is  exercising  responsibility  for  the   child.   That
             responsibility may have been for a short duration in that  the
             present arrangements may have begun quite recently.


             iii.  "Responsibility"  for  a  child's  upbringing   may   be
             undertaken by individuals other than a child's parents and may
             be   shared   between   different   individuals:   which   may
             particularly arise where the child remains in its own  country
             whilst the only parent involved in its  life  travels  to  and
             lives in the UK.


             iv.  Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in
             the upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional  that  one
             of them will have sole responsibility.


             v.   If it is said that both are not involved in  the  child's
             upbringing, one of the indicators for that will  be  that  the
             other has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility.  In  such
             cases, it may well be justified to find that  that  parent  no
             longer has responsibility for the child.


             vi.  However, the issue of sole responsibility is not  just  a
             matter between the parents. So  even  if  there  is  only  one
             parent involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may not
             have sole responsibility.


             vii.  In  the  circumstances  likely  to   arise,   day-to-day
             responsibility (or decision-making) for  the  child's  welfare
             may necessarily be shared with others (such  as  relatives  or
             friends) because of the geographical  separation  between  the
             parent and child.


             viii.    That, however, does not  prevent  the  parent  having
             sole responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.


             ix.  The test is,  not  whether  anyone  else  has  day-to-day
             responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control
             and direction of the child's upbringing including  making  all
             the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.   If   not,
             responsibility is shared and so not "sole"."


 6. In considering sole responsibility the judge said that the Sponsor  had
    to prove that he had sole responsibility for the Appellants  and  would
    need to prove on the ordinary civil standard that neither his wife  nor
    the guardians that the Appellants live with in  Sierra  Leone  exercise
    parental responsibility for them [37].  The judge assessed the case put
    forward that the Sponsor's wife's medical conditions meant that she was
    not involved with the Appellants' upbringing.  The judge considered the
    medical problems and the medical evidence and found  that  the  medical
    evidence did not establish that the medical  conditions  would  prevent
    her from contacting the Appellants, discussing  their  upbringing  with
    the Sponsor, contacting the school and  making  decisions  about  their
    upbringing.  The  judge  did  not  accept  that  the  mother's  medical
    conditions  meant  that  the  Sponsor  has   had   to   exercise   sole
    responsibility  for  the  Appellants.   The  judge   noted   that   the
    Appellants' mother continued to look after her three daughters  in  the
    UK with the Sponsor and after they separated and that  they  live  with
    her and concluded that it is illogical for the Sponsor  to  claim  that
    her medical  conditions  mean  that  she  has  not  exercised  parental
    responsibility [38-40].

 7. The judge referred to the Sponsor's oral evidence and, because  he  had
    rejected the assertion that the Sponsor's wife was medically  unfit  to
    look after the children, he also concluded that the Sponsor's claim  to
    have had sole responsibility for the Appellants was undermined  by  the
    fact that he obtained her consent for the Appellants to come to the UK.



 8. Ms Record made no specific submissions in relation to  the  conclusions
    in relation to the Appellants' mother but the Grounds of Appeal contend
    that it was not open to the judge to make adverse credibility  findings
    in relation  to  the  asserted  position  of  the  Appellants'  mother.
    However I do not accept this submission as,  looking  at  the  evidence
    before the judge  and  the  conclusions  reached  in  relation  to  the
    Appellants' mother, I find that these  conclusions  were  open  to  the
    judge on the basis of the evidence before him. Given that the judge did
    not accept that the Appellants' mother has not had a role  in  relation
    to the Appellants' upbringing  the  appeal  was  bound  to  fail  under
    paragraph 297(i)(e).

 9. However the judge went on to assess the situation in  relation  to  the
    claimed guardians.  I find that  the  judge  did  fall  into  error  in
    relation to an assessment of the role of the guardians in  the  context
    of the guidance given in TD.  This is because, in  conclusions  clearly
    inconsistent with paragraph 52 (vi) of the guidance  in  TD  the  judge
    said [44];

         "Furthermore, I  reject  the  Sponsor's  claim  to  have  had  sole
         responsibility for the Appellants because from 2007 the  Appellants
         have lived with guardians in Sierra Leone. It is inconceivable that
         these guardians did not exercise some parental  responsibility  for
         the Appellants on a day-to-day basis from 2007 to the date of their
         application, even on the simple basis of the geographical  distance
         from their biological parents.  I find that the  physical  distance
         between the Appellants in Sierra Leone and  their  parents  in  the
         United Kingdom points to a guardian acting in  locus  parentis  and
         exercising responsibility at least in part  for  two  children  who
         were approximately 9 and 5 in 2007".

10. Further at paragraph 46 the judge found

         "... I find that both the Sponsor and his wife were  quite  content
         to leave their two young children in Sierra  Leone  with  guardians
         while the Sponsor and his wife forged a new life for themselves  in
         this country.  I  have  already  accepted  that  the  Sponsor  made
         financial contribution towards the upbringing of the Appellants but
         I find that the Sponsor and his wife were  obviously  content  with
         the care that the Appellants were  receiving  from  the  guardians,
         otherwise an application for entry clearance would have  been  made
         much sooner".

    Again this ignores the guidance in TD.

11. Further at paragraph 51 the judge found that the fact that the guardian
    is listed  as  an  emergency  contact  by  the  school  undermines  the
    Sponsor's claim that he has had sole responsibility for the  Appellants
    because in an emergency "it will be  the  guardian  who  will  exercise
    responsibility for the Appellants which leads me to conclude yet  again
    that the Sponsor does not have sole responsibility for the Appellants".



12. I find that the judge's conclusions in relation  to  the  guardian  are
    inconsistent with the guidance in TD and therefore are unsafe.

13. I accept that the judge went on from paragraphs 55 to  62  to  consider
    the provisions of paragraph 297(i)(f).  The issue here is whether there
    are serious and compelling family or other  considerations  which  make
    exclusion of the Appellants undesirable.  In  this  context  the  judge
    considered the assertions by the Sponsor and the  guardian  that  there
    were a number of risks to the Appellants in Sierra Leone, in particular
    the risks from the Ebola outbreak, the risks of the Appellants becoming
    pregnant and the risks of female genital mutilation (FGM).

14. In the context of this issue the  judge  took  into  account  that  the
    actions  of  the  guardian  in  relation  to  alleged  threats  of  FGM
    undermined the Sponsor's claim to have had sole responsibility for  the
    children [58] and at paragraph 61 the judge assessed the evidence of an
    e-mail produced by the Sponsor at the hearing purporting to be from the
    Appellants complaining about their  conditions  in  Sierra  Leone.  The
    judge found that this  e-mail  was  "self-serving"  and  in  fact  only
    reinforced the judge's  view  that  the  Sponsor  does  not  have  sole
    responsibility  for  his  children.   The  judge  concluded  that   the
    Appellants had not  established  that  they  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297(i)(f).

15. In my view the difficulty with the judge's assessment  in  relation  to
    paragraph 297(i)(f) is that it was tainted by the findings in  relation
    to the guardian at paragraphs 44 to 53 of the decision.   Further,  the
    findings in relation to 297(i)(f) are confused with the  assessment  of
    sole responsibility.  Moreover, the judge failed to take any account of
    or make any assessment in relation to the  assertion  in  the  evidence
    before him by the guardian that he was no longer in a position to  look
    after the children (as per the letter of 8th December 2014),  that  he
    was greatly concerned about the children's safety, that he did not have
    any more patience for the children to be with him as it was a temporary
    arrangement and no longer had accommodation in his house for  them  (as
    per the letter of 10th December 2015). The judge also  failed  to  take
    account of the fact that the Appellants' mother is also in the UK.  The
    judge failed to make a  proper  assessment  as  to  whether  there  are
    "serious and compelling family or other considerations" which make  the
    exclusion of the Appellants undesirable.

16. Ms Isherwood in her submissions submitted that it was implied that  the
    judge had not accepted the guardian's letter and assertion that he  was
    no  longer  able  to  accept  responsibility  for  the  children.   She
    submitted that in reaching his conclusion at  paragraph  60  the  judge
    must have found that the guardian was able and willing  to  look  after
    the children.  However these are not express findings made by the judge
    and I do not find it possible to imply such findings into the decision.



17. For these reasons I am satisfied that the judge fell into error in  his
    assessment  of  paragraph  297(i)(f).   I  therefore  set   aside   the
    conclusions of the  judge  in  relation  to  paragraph  297(i)(f).   Ms
    Isherwood and Ms Record accepted  that  the  findings  in  relation  to
    Article 8  are  interlinked  with  any  new  findings  in  relation  to
    297(i)(f).

Remaking the Decision

18. I heard submissions from Ms  Isherwood  in  relation  to  remaking  the
    decision.  She relied on the adverse credibility findings  in  relation
    to the Sponsor and submitted that the letter of 10th December 2015  was
    written by the guardian after the decision to refuse the  applications.
    He submitted that the temporary arrangement referred  to  the  guardian
    could still continue.  The guardian had not explained the accommodation
    difficulties that he had, there is a lack of detail in relation to  the
    circumstances of the children in Sierra  Leone.   She  noted  that  the
    Appellants had been cared for by a guardian,  they  had  pursued  their
    education, there was no evidence to indicate that there  had  been  any
    interruption to their schooling.

19. Ms Isherwood submitted that there was a lack of evidence in relation to
    visits by the parents to the Appellants.  She noted that the judge  had
    not accepted the guardian's reason for concern about the Appellants  in
    terms of the Ebola crisis at paragraph 45.  She submitted that  it  was
    not possible to get a full picture of the circumstances and the  weight
    of immigration control needs to be considered.  She submitted there was
    no evidence that the Appellants have been harmed  by  their  separation
    from the parents.  In fact the evidence from the school and the  church
    indicates that they are getting on okay.  The  judge  notes  that  they
    have grown up living apart.  While she accepted that the Appellants may
    have a desire to live with  their  parents  in  the  circumstances  the
    evidence does not show compelling circumstances.   She  submitted  that
    this is a family where  the  parents  decided  to  migrate  to  the  UK
    together.  She submitted that the  evidence  suggests  that  they  have
    actually stayed together, rather than divorced and that they could  not
    meet 297(i)(f) and could not meet Article 8.

20. Ms Record submitted that the Appellants do  meet  the  requirements  of
    297(i)(f).  The father is settled in the  UK,  there  are  serious  and
    compelling reasons making the exclusion undesirable.   The  father  can
    provide a home for the Appellants in the UK and his earnings  have  not
    been challenged and both Appellants were under 18 and  not  leading  an
    independent life at the time of the application.  The mother is not  in
    Sierra Leone, she is in the UK.  The guardian has said that he does not
    want to have the children any more therefore it could  not  be  in  the
    children's best interests to  remain  in  Sierra  Leone.   Arrangements
    would have to be made.  She submitted that when the Appellants' parents
    left  Sierra  Leone  the  guardian  was  put  in  place   whereas   now
    arrangements would have to be made from the  UK.   She  submitted  that
    Article 8 would follow on from the Rule in this case.

21. I have considered the provisions of paragraph 297(i)(f).  The  guardian
    has asserted that he is no longer willing to look after the children. I
    attach particular  weight  to  the  letter  dated  10th  December  2015
    highlighting that the arrangement to look after the  Appellants  was  a
    temporary arrangement and that the guardian no longer has patience  for
    the children to live with them as it is a temporary arrangement and the
    guardian no longer has room  or  accommodation  in  his  home.   It  is
    difficult to challenge this evidence and I accept that the guardian  is
    no longer willing or able to look after  the  children.   I  take  into
    account that the Appellants' mother also remains in the UK.

22. Whilst Ms Isherwood submitted that the Sponsor and  his  wife  are  not
    divorced and in fact remain together  there  is  insufficient  evidence
    either way in relation to this matter.  I do not see how adopting  this
    position helps the Appellants' case; in fact it would  have  been  more
    straightforward had the parents remained together. I take into  account
    the evidence that shows that the Sponsor has a significant role in  the
    life of the Appellants.  I do not accept that any role  played  by  the
    guardian amounts to a significant parental role or  a  shared  parental
    responsibility role.  The evidence does not point  in  that  direction.
    The only other person  who  would  have  a  role  in  relation  to  the
    Appellants is the mother.

23. Taking account of all of the circumstances I am  satisfied  that  there
    are compelling or other  circumstances  which  make  exclusion  of  the
    Appellants undesirable.  There is no evidence of any other guardianship
    relationship which would be in place there.  In light  of  all  of  the
    circumstances I accept that the Appellants have established  that  they
    meet the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f).  In these circumstances I
    need not go on to make any assessment in relation to Article 8.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
in relation to the assessment of paragraph 297(i)(f).

I set aside that part of the decision  and  I  remake  it  by  allowing  the
appeal under the Immigration Rules.


Signed                              Dated: 10th January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because there was  insufficient  evidence  about  the  Appellants'  mother's
whereabouts and role before the ECO.


Signed                              Dated: 10th January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

