
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02400/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 February 2014                           |On 7 March 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                                MRS AMNA BIBI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Bellara, Counsel, instructed by Veja & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, seeking settlement to join  her
    husband, the sponsor, who is a British citizen.

2.   Her application was refused  on  5  December  2012  and  the  appellant
    sought to appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  Her  appeal  came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Thanki on 4 October 2013.   The  sponsor  was
    not in attendance at that time. The appeal was dismissed.  The  grounds
    of appeal contend that the hearing was unfair because  there  had  been
    no notification neither to the appellant or to the sponsor as  to  that
    hearing.

3.   Initially a notice of hearing had been  sent to both  the  sponsor  and
    the appellant on 21 August 2013 notifying them that  the  hearing  date
    would be 8 April 2014.  However on 16 September 2013  notification  was
    sent to the appellant that the hearing had been adjourned and would now
    be heard on 4 October 2013.  In effect therefore, bringing forward  the
    hearing. Not only was the hearing brought forward but the  notification
    period was unduly short particularly to somebody who lived in Pakistan.
     It is expected that there would be 28 days of notice.

4.   It is fully understandable therefore that  neither  the  appellant  nor
    the sponsor would have received the notice in time and that  contention
    was readily accepted by Miss Everett, who represents the respondent  at
    the appeal hearing before me.

5.   It is clear, therefore, that there has been a procedural error such  as
    to affect the  fundamental  fairness  of  the  proceedings.   In  those
    circumstances I have no hesitation in setting aside  the  decision  and
    directing that the appeal be reheard by the First-tier Tribunal.

6.   I stressed, however, to  the  sponsor,  who  attended  at  the  hearing
    before me, that he needed to meet the concerns as expressed by the  ECO
    in the original refusal decision,  namely  that  the  appellant  should
    provide her English  language  test  certificate  and  that  he  should
    provide confirmation  of  his  employment  and  income.  Clearly  those
    matters needed to be addressed at any subsequent hearing  in  order  to
    satisfy the Immigration Rules.  Additionally he would need  to  address
    the concerns as expressed in the determination as to why the continuing
    separation is such as to amount to a breach of Article 8 of the ECHR.

Directions

(1)  The decision shall  be  set  aside  to  be  remade  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


(2)  Any further evidence relating to the  issues  in  the  case  should  be
    served no later than 7 days prior to the date of the hearing, which  is
    scheduled for 12 May 2014.

(3)  Any further directions that are required to be  issued  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.




Signed                                  Date 05.03.2014


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD
