
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02298/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 September 2014                           |On 17 September 2014         |
|Decision given orally                         |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON



                                   Between


                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               SAKALIMA BEGUM

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr C Timpson instructed by Maya Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert  who,  for  reasons  given  in  her
    determination dated 6  January  2014,  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules by the respondent (whom  I  shall  refer  to  as  the
    claimant) against the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  dated  25
    November 2012.  This was to refuse her entry clearance as  the  partner
    of Surukh Miah, a  British  citizen,  the  parties  having  married  in
    Sylhet, Bangladesh on 3 April 2011.  The claimant is a national of that
    country where she was born on 6 September 1988.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application with  reference  to
    the Immigration Rule then in force for married couples,  paragraph  281
    of HC 395. In particular he did not accept that there would be adequate
    accommodation for the parties and furthermore that they would  be  able
    to adequately maintain themselves as required by paragraph 281(iv)  and
    (v).  The Entry Clearance  Officer  was  represented  by  a  Presenting
    Officer at the hearing of the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal  in
    Manchester on 18 December 2013.  She is recorded in  the  determination
    as having conceded that there was no issue in relation  to  maintenance
    and that the requirement of paragraph 281(v) was met.

 3. In respect of accommodation, the judge took account of an accommodation
    report dated 21 December 2012 in terms that the property in  which  the
    sponsor lived had sufficient accommodation for himself  and  his  wife.
    There was also a Land Registry Office copy showing  that  the  property
    which is owned by the claimant's mother-in-law is free of mortgage  and
    on that basis the judge accepted that  the  requirements  in  paragraph
    281(iv) were  met.   Thus  the  judge  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. The complaint made by the Entry Clearance Officer  in  his  grounds  of
    application relates to the admissibility of  the  accommodation  report
    with reference to s.85 and 85A  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Designated Judge Woodcraft in granting permission  to
    appeal observed that the judge ought to arguably have explained why she
    admitted the accommodation report  which  by  the  time  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager's review had been in existence for eleven months  but
    not produced.  He observed that although this was not  a  points  based
    appeal, some explanation why the report was being admitted was arguably
    necessary so that the losing party could understand why they had  lost.



 5. With appropriate candour Mr McVeety acknowledged that according to  the
    Presenting Officer's note, the issue of accommodation had been conceded
    before Judge Lambert and that she had failed  to  record  this  in  her
    determination.  Although  unable  to  concede  the  appeal  Mr  McVeety
    explained he did not pursue the grounds.

 6. The fact that the Presenting Officer conceded the issue is  effectively
    the end of the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal in the Upper  Tribunal.
    Even if that concession had not been made, it is  unarguable  that  the
    judge was entitled to have regard to the accommodation report  pursuant
    to Section 85(A) of the 2002 Act since it related to the  accommodation
    that the claimant referred to in her application when  she  first  made
    application for entry clearance.

 7. Accordingly the appeal by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed and the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Lambert stands.





Signed                                       Date 16 September 2014

[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

