
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02664/2013
                                                               OA/02673/2013
                                                               OA/02676/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th November 2014                           |On 2nd December 2014       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      deputy upper Tribunal JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                             1) MISS SARA MARINO
                             2) MISS KIRIA NSAMA
                               3) KUMA MARINO
                           (anonymity not directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.  The  appellants  are  citizens  of  Angola  whose  dates  of  birth  are
   respectively (i) the 20th April 2000, (ii) the  19th  January  1997,  and
   (iii) the 14th September 1997. They appeal with  permission  against  the
   decision of First-tier Tribunal Baker,  promulgated  on  the  10th  March
   2014, to dismiss their  appeals  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
   refuse their applications for entry clearance, with a view to settlement,
   as the putative children of Mr Bope Marino  (hereafter,  "the  sponsor").
   The sponsor has indefinite leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom  as  a
   refugee.

2. As anonymity was not directed in the First-tier Tribunal, little  purpose
   would be served by ordering it now.

Background

3. The background to these appeals is complicated but may be  summarised  as
   follows.

4. The sponsor was born in Cabinda, which, though part  of  Angola,  aspires
   to sovereignty. For reasons connected to the fact that the sponsor shares
   that aspiration, he fled with his parents to the Democratic  Republic  of
   Congo (DRC) in 1975. He returned to Cabinda  in  1992.  However,  he  was
   forced to flee again in August 2007.  He  subsequently  claimed  and  was
   granted asylum in the United Kingdom due  to  his  well-founded  fear  of
   being persecuted in Angola on  account  of  his  political  opinion.  The
   appellants and the other  children  (listed  below)  remained  in  Angola
   until, on the 22nd September 2009, they moved to  Kinshasa  in  the  DRC,
   where they have remained (illegally) ever since.

5. Prior to his departure from  Cabinda,  the  sponsor  lived  in  the  same
   household as his five putative children. Albeit that in some case he  was
   unaware of it at the time of their births, none of these young people are
   in fact his biological children.

6. It is perhaps convenient at this stage to list all five of the  sponsor's
   putative children. I have placed an asterisk  against  the  name  of  the
   appellants.

           i) Piema Marino, born the 12th April 1994. He is  the  sponsor's
              brother.

          ii) Kuma Marino*, born on the 14th September 1996. He is also the
              appellant's brother.

         iii) Kiria Nsama*, born on the 19th January 1997. She is the niece
              of the sponsor's partner, Maria Buidi. She  is  unrelated  to
              the sponsor.

          iv) Bope Marino (junior), born on the 8th April 1997. He  is  the
              son of the sponsor's former partner,  Anna.  Although  he  is
              related to the sponsor, he is not his son.  DNA  testing  has
              not revealed the exact degree of consanguinity.  However,  it
              is likely  that  he  is  the  sponsor's  nephew.  It  is  the
              sponsor's case that he  believed  until  relatively  recently
              that his namesake was his son.

           v) Sara Marino*, born on the 8th April 1997.  She  is  also  the
              daughter of the sponsor's former partner, Anna. Although  she
              is related to the sponsor,  she  is  not  his  daughter.  DNA
              testing has not revealed the exact degree  of  consanguinity.
              However, it is likely that she is the sponsor's niece. It  is
              the sponsor's case that he believed until relatively recently
              that she was his daughter.

   For purposes of clarity and convenience, I shall  collectively  refer  to
   these young people as "the children".

7. The four younger children first applied  for  entry  clearance  in  2011.
   Those applications were refused, on the 20th April 2011. This was because
   the appellants were found to have falsely claimed that  the  sponsor  was
   their father, although it is of course possible that this was an entirely
   innocent misrepresentation. The  appellants'  further  applications  were
   refused on the 15th and 16th days November 2012, and it is these refusals
   that form the subject-matter of the current appeals. For reasons that are
   not entirely clear, the application of Bope Marino (which was made at the
   same time as his putative siblings) was rejected as invalid by the  Entry
   Clearance Officer.

Grounds of appeal against the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  and  response
under Rule 24

8. There are two grounds of appeal, which may be summarised as follows:

           i) The judge assessed the appeals by reference to  the  ages  at
              the date of the hearing  rather  than  at  the  date  of  the
              Immigration Decision.

          ii)  The judge failed to make any findings as  what  was  in  the
              best interests of the children and thereafter to treat  those
              interests as a primary consideration.

9. Before turning to consider those grounds,  it  is  first  appropriate  to
   mention a concern that is expressed in the respondent's 'Rule 24' Notice.
   This states that the judge failed "to grapple with the claimed and actual
   relationships of two of the appellants" and the fact that they  had  been
   refused entry clearance on the basis of false documents "in  addition  to
   other aspects" [paragraph 6]. The respondent's concerns are summarised at
   paragraph 7 -

         There is no clear finding as to whether all  the  parties  were  in
         total ignorance of their actual parentage or whether there has been
         a deliberate and sustained attempt to evade immigration control.

10. First of all, it is pertinent to note  that  none  of  the  applications
   were refused under the mandatory requirement to  refuse  entry  clearance
   where there has been proven deception or submission of  false  documents,
   whether by reference  to  paragraph  320  of  the  Immigration  Rules  or
   otherwise.

11.  Nevertheless,  it  is  fair  to  observe  that  there  was  an  obvious
   discrepancy between the sponsor's claimed paternity of the appellants, as
   was apparently supported by their supposed birth certificates, and  their
   actual  relationship  as  confirmed  by  DNA   testing,   Moreover,   the
   respondent's suspicions were understandably heightened by the  children's
   apparent "lack of contact" with the sponsor over the  years.  There  were
   thus reasonable grounds to suspect (at the very least)  that  he  sponsor
   may have had an ulterior motive in sponsoring the current applications.

12. Mrs Petersen confirmed that the concern  which  lay  behind  the  issues
   raised in the Rule 24 Notice was that the children are or  were  intended
   to become victims of human trafficking. However, that possibility was  in
   my view dealt with by the judge at paragraph 14 of his determination -

    Accordingly, I find I  accept  that  an  ongoing  genuine  relationship
    exists which might be characterised as a quasi family life,  despite  a
    near 7 year physical dislocation of same (discounting  the  short  2010
    visit). Almost daily phone contact is ongoing as  well  as  the  fiscal
    provision supplied to "the children".

   The judge thereafter went on to decide  the  appeal  on  the  basis  that
   genuine family life existed between the  appellants  and  their  sponsor.
   That finding was in my view sufficient to dispose of the possibility that
   the  sponsor  had  an  ulterior  motive   in   sponsoring   the   current
   applications. The judge did therefore 'grapple' with the issue  of  prior
   deception, albeit that he did so in a similarly indirect manner  to  that
   in which the respondent had raised the issue in the first place. I  would
   merely  add  that,  as  Ms  Khan  pointed  out,  the   children's   birth
   certificates were  issued  by  the  Cabindan  'government'.  This  is  an
   authority that is not recognised by the Angolan government.  It  is  thus
   entirely  feasible  that  they  were  issued  upon  nothing   more   than
   information that had been supplied, in good faith, by the sponsor.

Error of law

13. Following on from the passage that I quoted in the  previous  paragraph,
   Judge Baker said this -

    I so must examine the Article 8 application, no per  Appendix  FM,  but
    rather using the Razgar criteria as urged by Ms Khan. Accordingly,  are
    the Respondent's decisions an interference with  such  from  of  family
    life as exists and has done for some time in its present form? It seems
    to me by the same token, that there would be no change, save for a lack
    of reunification. The two oldest "children" are now already adults, the
    Third Appellant is  very nearly aged 18 in a few months  and  only  the
    Second Appellant is really very young at aged almost 14 years.

14. It is clear from this passage that the judge was  considering  the  ages
   of the children at the date of the hearing of the appeal. However, at the
   date of the decision (the 15 and 16th days of November 2012), only  Piema
   was aged 18 years; Kuma had recently turned 16 years, Kiria and Bope were
   both 15 years, and Sara was only 12 years.  In  the  case  of  an  appeal
   against refusal of entry clearance, Section 85A(2)  of  the  Nationality,
   Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 requires the Tribunal to  "consider  only
   the circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision". It was  thus
   an error of law for the judge to undertake his  Article-8  assessment  on
   the basis of the ages of the child at the date of the hearing.  Moreover,
   it is clear from his observation  that  "only  the  Second  Appellant  is
   really very young at aged almost 14 years",  that  the  judge  considered
   that the relative maturity and ages  of  the  children  were  a  material
   factor in his overall assessment of their appeals. It is thus appropriate
   to set aside his decision on this ground alone. The extent to which I  do
   so is considered below.

15. I do not however accept that the judge failed to make  any  findings  as
   to what was in the best interests of the  children,  or  that  he  failed
   thereafter to treat  those  interests  as  a  primary  consideration.  At
   paragraph 14, he said this -

    I recognise that their respective status in the DRC is probably illegal
    with all therein implied, but since they have lived and been brought up
    together, it could be thought of as almost curel to split them  up  and
    treat them each differently, even if one was minded to do so  and  even
    if the very sketchy description of  their  apparent  vulnerability  and
    relative deprivation might seem to  justify  different  treatment.  The
    course is told that hospital treatment  has  been  accessed  for  blood
    pressure and hernia treatment when needed  and  it  seems  to  me  that
    despite the passage of 7 years, the group of them  have  not  undergone
    extreme hardship or experienced the  most  compassionate  circumstances
    which might trigger the relief sought.

16. It is clear from the above  passage  that  the  judge  considered  that,
   whilst there were some contra-indicators, it  was  in  the  overall  best
   interests of the children (including those who are not appellants in  the
   current proceedings) to  remain  together,  and  that  the  only  way  of
   achieving this was to refuse the applications of those who  were  seeking
   to enter the United Kingdom. At paragraph 16(v) of her grounds of appeal,
   Ms Khan argued that the judge had failed to, "start with the premise that
   the Appellants best interests are actually served by being cared  for  by
   Mr Marino Sr and Ms Vuidi given the findings he makes". However,  neither
   the law nor the logic of the judge's findings are (or were)  such  as  to
   require him to start with this premise.  In  my  judgement,  the  judge's
   assessment of the appellants' best interests was one that was  reasonably
   open to him; in other words, it cannot be described as either  irrational
   or perverse.

17. I  shall  therefore  re-assess  the  appellant's  Article  8  rights  by
   substituting the ages of the children at the date  of  the  decision,  as
   referred to  at  paragraph  14  above.  However,  I  shall  preserve  the
   remainder of Judge Baker's findings.

Article 8 assessment

18. Other than to remove the qualification  that  is  implied  by  the  word
   "quasi", I adopt Judge Baker's finding concerning the existence of family
   life [see paragraph 14 of his determination, as quoted  at  paragraph  11
   above]. I also accept, as did Judge Baker, that the consequences  of  the
   decision are such as to engage the potential operation of  Article  8  of
   the 1950 European Convention for  the  Protection  of  Human  Rights  and
   Fundamental Freedoms.

19. All parties agree that the decisions  were  'in  accordance  with  law';
   that is to say, they were made  in  accordance  with  immigration  rules.
   Moreover, they serve the  legitimate  end  in  a  democratic  society  of
   maintaining the economic well being  of  the  country.  It  is  at  least
   doubtful that the sponsor would be able to maintain and  accommodate  the
   appellants without recourse to public funds. Whilst it is said  that  the
   appellants' best interests require them to enter the  United  Kingdom  in
   order to enjoy the benefits of an education  [see  paragraph  37  of  the
   sponsor's witness statement dated the 4th February 2014]  the  appellants
   are not  British  citizens  and  are  not  therefore  entitled  to  a  UK
   education. The fact that the appellants  would  be  educated  at  the  UK
   taxpayers' expense is thus a factor that increases  rather  than  reduces
   the public interest in their continued exclusion from the UK.

20. The suggestion by the sponsor  that  the  female  appellants  "could  be
   raped" if they remain in the DRC, and that their male  'siblings'  "would
   also be in danger" if they tried to defend them,  is  nothing  more  than
   speculation.

21. The welfare  of  children  is  in  general  best  served  by  preserving
   continuity of care  within  an  emotionally  secure  environment  and  in
   surroundings that are familiar to them.  I  therefore  agree  with  Judge
   Baker that, despite the existence of some contra-indicators, the  overall
   best interests of the appellants were served by them continuing  to  live
   with their 'siblings'. At the date of the decision,  the  appellants  had
   not lived with the sponsor for a  period  of  some  5  years.  I  am  not
   therefore satisfied that it would at that stage have been in  their  best
   interests to separate them from their siblings with  a  view  to  placing
   them with putative 'parents' with whom (albeit by force of  circumstance)
   they have had limited contact in recent years,  and  into  a  social  and
   cultural environment that would  be  alien  to  them.  In  reaching  that
   conclusion, I am well aware, as was Judge Baker, that it may be the  case
   the appellants' residence in the DRC was and is  unlawful.  Nevertheless,
   as Judge Baker also observed, there is no evidence that this fact (if  it
   be a fact) has had a significantly adverse impact upon the daily lives of
   the appellants. Their lack of attendance at school may or may  not  be  a
   consequence of illegal residence. However, just as  the  National  Health
   Service is unable to be a hospital to the world, so too is the  publicly-
   funded UK education system unable to provide a school for the world.

22. I am therefore satisfied that the appellants' exclusion from the  United
   Kingdom is  justified  and  proportionate  in  seeking  to  maintain  the
   economic well being of the country through the consistent application  of
   immigration controls.

Notice of Decision

23. Having set aside the decisions of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  have
   remade them in accordance with the circumstances appertaining at the date
   of the immigration decisions, I have decided to dismiss these appeals.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly




