
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/02458/2014
                                                               OA/02459/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|on 25 January 2017                   |on 02 February 2017                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                           M SAID ALI & M TAHA ALI
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by Drummond
                    Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                DETERMINATION

 1. By determination promulgated on 5  January  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Handley  dismissed  these  appeals  against  refusal  of   entry
    clearance.

 2. The FtT and UT refused permission to appeal.

 3. The appellants' solicitors wrote to the UT on 30 August 2016,  advising
    that the decision of the UT, refusing permission, had been  reduced  by
    the Court.  They supplied a copy of the joint minute  leading  to  that
    outcome, which says that there was error of law by the FtT, set out  in
    agreed terms.

 4. On 13 September 2016 the Vice President of the UT granted permission to
    appeal, in light of the Court's interlocutor.

 5. The case came before me on 28 October 2016, and a decision  was  issued
    on 31 October 2016, including the following paragraph.

 6. The UT finds, as agreed by the parties, and as adapted from their joint
    minute, as follows:

      The FtT erred in law in that it failed  to  consider  the  appellants'
      article 8 claims with reference to the family  unit  as  a  whole.  In
      particular, the FtT:

      (a) failed to make any express findings of fact  as  to:  (i)  whether
      there existed family life between the sponsor and his wife, and if so,
      to what extent; (ii) whether the sponsor's wife  could  reasonably  be
      expected to leave the appellants behind in Sudan, in  order  to  enjoy
      any such family life with the sponsor  in  the  United  Kingdom;  (ii)
      whether there existed family life between the sponsor's wife  and  the
      appellants, and if so, to what extent; or, (iv) the impact on any such
      family life, should the sponsor's wife leave the appellants behind  in
      Sudan and [move] to the United Kingdom;

      (b) failed to consider whether  the  appellants'  exclusion  from  the
      United  Kingdom  would  interfere  disproportionately  with:  (i)  the
      sponsor's right to respect for family life with his wife; or (ii)  the
      sponsor's wife's right to respect for family life with the appellants.

 7. Directions were given for further hearing.  There was an adjournment at
    the request of the appellants, following which the case before me on 25
    January 2017.  Both representatives filed  helpful  outlines  of  their
    updated positions. There are intricacies arising from the statutory and
    transitional provisions, but it became common ground that the UT is  to
    consider only  the  circumstances  appertaining  at  the  date  of  the
    decisions by the ECO, but may also have  regard  to  further  evidence,
    even if arising after that date, provided that it serves to show  light
    on the circumstances appertaining at that  date.   Further  documentary
    evidence was admitted, although none of it was eventually  said  to  be
    significant.  The sponsor and his wife both gave oral evidence.   Final
    oral submissions were made, and I reserved my decision.

 8. I next outline the facts, to the extent that they are  not  in  serious
    dispute, in context of the procedural history.

 9. The first appellant was born on 11 May 1999 and the second on  1  March
    2000.  They are both citizens of Sudan, living at  the  time  of  their
    applications and at present in or near Khartoum.

10. The appellants are both brothers  of  Mohammed  Youssouf  Ali,  also  a
    citizen of Sudan, born on 3 December 1981, their "sponsor" for purposes
    of these proceedings.

11. The wife of the sponsor is Masouda Abdallah  Bahar  Mohammed,  again  a
    citizen of Sudan, born on 2 January 1989.  They married on 28  November
    2003.

12. All individuals involved in the case say that they are from Hashaba,  a
    small village in  Darfur  which  was  subject  to  vicious  attacks  by
    Janjaweed militia.

13. The sponsor's account is as follows.  He fled from an attack  in  early
    2004 during which the village was set on fire. He spent some  years  in
    Libya but came to fear for his life there after the fall of the Gaddafi
    regime. He travelled by way of Tunisia and various  European  countries
    and arrived in the UK in February 2012.   He  sought  and  was  granted
    refugee status. Until that time, he had no knowledge of the fate of his
    wife or of any member of his family. A friend of a friend, named Souad,
    told him that his wife was alive and living near Khartoum, and provided
    her telephone number. Souad also ascertained that the two  youngest  of
    his eight brothers (the appellants; he also had one sister) were living
    in dire circumstances in West Darfur, and arranged for them to join his
    wife in Khartoum.

14. The sponsor's wife and the two appellants  sought  entry  clearance  to
    join  the  sponsor  under  cover  of  a  letter  from  the  appellants'
    solicitors dated 30 April 2013. It was accepted that the appellants did
    not fall within the requirements of the immigration  rules,  but  their
    position was  urged  on  the  basis  of  compassionate  and  compelling
    circumstances, general policy regarding family reunion,  article  8  of
    the ECHR, and the best interests of the appellants, being children.

15. The sponsor's wife was granted entry clearance.  The  ECO  refused  the
    applications of the appellants by notices dated 22 January 2014.

16. The appellants and the sponsor's wife lived together  from  early  2013
    until September 2015.

17. In that month, the sponsor's wife used her entry clearance to travel to
    the UK and join her husband.  (They now have a child, born on  16  June
    2016.)

18. The paragraph of the rules under reference to  which  the  applications
    were refused is 319X:
      Requirements for leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom as the
      child of a relative with limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the
      United Kingdom as a refugee or beneficiary of humanitarian protection.
      The requirements to be met by a  person  seeking  leave  to  enter  or
      remain in the United Kingdom as the child of a relative  with  limited
      leave to remain as a refugee or beneficiary of humanitarian protection
      in the United Kingdom are that:
      (i) the applicant is seeking leave  to  enter  or  remain  to  join  a
      relative with limited leave to enter or remain as a refugee or  person
      with humanitarian protection; and:
      (ii) the relative has limited leave in the United Kingdom as a refugee
      or beneficiary of humanitarian protection and there  are  serious  and
      compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion of  the
      child undesirable and suitable arrangements have  been  made  for  the
      child's care; and
      (iii) the relative is not the parent of the child who is seeking leave
      to enter or remain in the United Kingdom; and
      (iv) the applicant is under the age of 18; and
      (v) the applicant is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and
      is not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent family unit;
      and
      (vi) the applicant can, and will, be accommodated  adequately  by  the
      relative the child is seeking to join without recourse to public funds
      in accommodation which the relative in  the  United  Kingdom  owns  or
      occupies exclusively; and
      (vii) the applicant can, and will, be  maintained  adequately  by  the
      relative in the United Kingdom without recourse to public funds; and
      (viii) if seeking leave to enter, the applicant holds a  valid  United
      Kingdom entry clearance for entry in  this  capacity  or,  if  seeking
      leave to remain, holds valid  leave  to  remain  in  this  or  another
      capacity.

19. The ECO was  not  satisfied  that  there  were  such  circumstances  as
    required by (ii) of the rule; that accommodation and  maintenance  were
    available as required by (vi)  and  (vii);  or  of  relationship,  with
    reference to (i).

20. Relationship was conceded in the FtT, on production of DNA reports.

21. The appellants accept that they fail on (vi) and (vii).  The issues  at
    (ii) remain relevant, overlapping with and informing the outcome  under
    article 8.

22. The appellant's argument, very briefly  summarised,  is  that  all  the
    questions set out in the agreed error of law finding should be answered
    in their favour; and that they should also succeed by reference  to  AA
    (Somalia) v ECO [2014] Imm AR 540 as the de facto adopted  children  of
    the sponsor, whose rights on entry to the UK were to be equiparated  to
    those of any other children of a family sundered by  the  flight  of  a
    refugee, even if the rules did not so provide.  It was  said  that  the
    latter argument had been advanced in the FtT, although not reflected in
    the proceedings in the Court or in the agreement on error of law.

23. Against that background, I turn to resolving, as far as  possible,  the
    area of dispute about the history and circumstances of the appellants.

24. The evidence derived now through the sponsor and his wife is  that  the
    appellants when aged no more than 4 and 5 were separated from all other
    family members in the attack on the village in 2004;  that  by  unknown
    means they ended up living from hand to mouth in or  around  a  refugee
    camp; that contact was re-established through Souad;  and  that  little
    information is forthcoming from the  appellants,  so  that  nothing  is
    known to this day about the rest of the family (or about  most  of  the
    birth family of the sponsor's wife; the house, or shack, near  Khartoum
    was provided by her brother).

25. The ECO was not impressed by photographic evidence  said  to  show  the
    appellants outside their makeshift home; thought that at  the  time  of
    the sponsor's screening interview, given the age then of the appellants
    and the references to other family members, that they would  have  been
    in the care of adult relatives; and noted that the sponsor was not sure
    why he said the appellants were in Chad.

26. Those were all reasonable points to make.

27. Judge Handley, having heard the evidence of the sponsor, explained  why
    he concluded that the appellants had likely been in Chad and under  the
    care of an unknown individual or individuals (paragraph 23); found that
    the sponsor gave a vague account, amounting to no explanation, for  his
    alleged lack of contact with them (paragraph 24); had doubt  about  the
    claimed level of contact since its resumption, and of financial support
    (paragraphs 25-28); thought it likely that the appellants  had  support
    from other sources, which could be family members (paragraph 27); based
    on the evidence,  or  dearth  of  evidence,  thought  it  unlikely  the
    appellants  were  living  alone  as  claimed,  and  likely  they   were
    "receiving care and financial support from unknown adult(s)" (paragraph
    31); and finally concluded that they had been "cared for and  supported
    by adults in Chad and in Sudan", so that there were no  "compelling  or
    compassionate circumstances" (paragraph 35).

28. Those were all findings open to the judge, for which  legally  adequate
    reasons are given, and no error of law has been found which  apparently
    should lead to their being revisited.

29. In view of the way the case has  developed,  and  the  introduction  of
    further evidence, I have kept an open  mind  on  matters  still  to  be
    decided, which I think are questions of mixed fact and law.  I  resolve
    them not only on the implications of the  conclusions  reached  by  the
    FtT, but on the further evidence led in the UT.

30. That might have led to some theoretical difficulty, as  the  appellants
    through the evidence of the sponsor and his wife  in  effect  tried  to
    reassert and improve on the factual case which the  FtT  rejected;  but
    having heard the further evidence, and looked at it all afresh, I  have
    come to the same broad view.

31. Mr Matthews founded on some apparent discrepancies between the evidence
    from the sponsor and from his wife, chiefly around the extent to  which
    the appellants have  been  able  and  willing  to  talk  about  events,
    including  the  fate  of  their  parents.   However,  I  preferred  the
    submission by Mr Devlin that there was no significant difference.

32. There is no escaping the reality that the account of what  happened  to
    the appellants and others in the family from 2004 to 2013, and  of  the
    resumption of contact, remains inconsistent and very vague.

33. The question is what is to be made of that.

34. Some confusion and uncertainty would be unsurprising even in  the  most
    honest accounts, emerging from the chaos of a civil war  waged  against
    civilian families, and when some of those affected were infants.

35. I also note that the appellants are not likely to be in any substantial
    way the authors of any information provided, which essentially has come
    through the sponsor, and to a lesser extent from his wife.

36. As Mr Matthews  pointed  out  in  submissions,  the  application  forms
    provided to the ECO include information that the appellants were living
    with their family members continuously until 2013. I have accepted that
    immaculate accuracy of  detail  cannot  be  expected  in  tracking  the
    history of the family fleeing from  a  war  zone,  but  that  does  not
    explain away the particular shortcomings in the evidence.  The  sponsor
    in his evidence at the hearing  said  that  he  was  relying  on  vague
    information from another villager that some of those dispersed from the
    village fled to Chad, and he assumed that might  include  some  of  his
    family.  That sounds  reasonable,  and  was  intended  to  explain  the
    apparent discrepancy arising from his screening interview. However,  on
    reference to that form I see that he was more specific. At item 6. 6 he
    is recorded as saying that his mother is in Chad, "I think";  that  his
    father's whereabouts are unknown; that his sister [named] is  in  Chad;
    and that of his 8 brothers, one [named] is in Sudan;  "the  2  youngest
    brothers [unnamed] are in Chad"; one [unnamed] was killed  by  militia;
    and the others [also unnamed] are in Sudan".  He distinguishes  between
    those who situation he knows and those he does not.  This does not read
    like complete guesswork.

37. The sponsor has lived with his brothers only for the first few years of
    their infancy, when he was one older sibling  among  many,  all  living
    with their parents.  He has never lived with  the  appellants  in  loco
    parentis.  He has provided  support  by  way  of  telephone  calls  and
    remittances over a few years.  It is not a criticism to say he has done
    no more, as he says he has done all he could; but those are  the  facts
    in evidence.

38. By the evidence of the  sponsor  and  his  wife,  she  lived  with  the
    appellants for under a year, up to the date of decision (and  for  just
    over 3 years, in all).

39. The relationship between a wife and her brothers-in-law, even  if  they
    are not yet adult, and even if living in the same household, would  not
    usually fall within the core protection  which  article  8  affords  to
    family life.  It might do so, where particular circumstances have given
    the relationship the nature of one between mother and child.

40. Each case turns ultimately on its  own  facts  and  circumstances,  but
    contrary to submissions for the appellants,  the  evidence  here  about
    formation of a core family is not as strong as in AA.  That is not only
    (or even mainly) because of the short period involved.  It  is  because
    the appellants failed to establish their contention of no  other  adult
    support.

41. Even on a broad  approach  to  recognition  of  adoptive  children  for
    refugee reunion purposes, unconstrained by definitions of  adoption  in
    the rules or elsewhere, the evidence falls short of  demonstrating  the
    de facto adoption of the appellants by the sponsor or by his wife.

42. As well as the rules, I must have regard also to Part 5A  of  the  2002
    Act, introduced by section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014 and in  force
    since 25 July 2014, after the decisions of  the  ECO,  but  before  the
    decision of the FtT.

43.  Under  the  heading  "Article  8  of   the   ECHR:   Public   Interest
    Considerations", section 117A, so far as relevant, provides:


     (1)   This Part applies where a  court  or  tribunal  is  required  to
     determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-
              (a) breaches a person's  right  to  respect  for  private  and
          family life under Article 8, and
                       (b) as a result would be unlawful under section 6  of
the Human Rights Act 1998.


       (2) In  considering  the  public  interest  question,  the  court  or
       tribunal must (in particular) have regard-
          (a) in all cases, to the considerations listed in section 117B ...


       (3) In subsection (2),  "the  public  interest  question"  means  the
       question of whether an interference with a person's right to  respect
       for private and family life is justified under Article 8(2).


      Section 117B, so far as relevant, provides:


      (1) The maintenance of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
public interest.

     (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
     of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
     seek to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
     English, because persons who can speak English-
        (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
        (b) are better able to integrate into society.

     (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
     of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
     seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
     independent, because such persons-
        (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
        (b) are better able to integrate into society.

     ...

44.  The  appellants  speak  no  English.  They  do  not   have   financial
    independence, and being uneducated, their prospects of attaining it are
    realistically quite far off.  As Mr Matthews  submitted,  the  lack  of
    adequate accommodation and maintenance in terms of  the  rules  and  of
    financial independence in terms of statute are clear matters of  public
    policy which count against the appellants.

45. The immigration rules provide a scheme for  reunion  of  refugee  "pre-
    flight families" without accommodation, maintenance or other  financial
    restrictions.  The rules provide  for  entry  of  post-flight  children
    (319R) and for extended relatives (319X), but they are subject to  such
    restrictions.  The lines drawn are designed  to  produce  rational  and
    proportionate outcomes.

46. A right to enter the UK outside the requirements of the rules may arise
    for some  relatives,  but  that  is  not  likely  to  go  beyond  cases
    disclosing core relationships not catered for by the rules.

47. The situation of the appellants is an  undoubtedly  compassionate  one,
    but the evidence falls short of demonstrating such  core  relationships
    as to bring about a disproportionate outcome.

48. The points in the minute of agreement are therefore resolved thus:

          a) (i) family life between the sponsor and his wife exists, being
             undisputed, to the usual full extent between husband and wife;
             (ii) on the facts found by the FtT, and as  revisited  by  the
             UT, the sponsor could reasonably  be  expected  to  leave  the
             appellants in Sudan in order to enjoy  family  life  with  the
             sponsor in the UK;  (iii)  family  life  existed  between  the
             sponsor's wife and the appellants only in the  usual  extended
             sense of family life among in-laws, and not to the  extent  of
             being assimilated to family life between mother and child,  so
             as  to  attract  the  core  protection  of  article  8;   (iv)
             consequently,  the  impact  on  family  life  of  leaving  the
             appellants behind in Sudan through the sponsor's moving to the
             UK is proportionate;

          b) the exclusion of the appellants from the UK does not interfere
             disproportionately with (i) the sponsor's right to family life
             with his wife or (ii) the sponsor's wife's  right  to  respect
             for family life with the appellants.

49. The decision of the FtT is set aside for error  of  law,  as  explained
    above.  After reconsideration, the decision substituted is as  follows:
    the appeals, as originally brought to the FtT, are dismissed.

            [pic]

            1 February 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman

