

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02971/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 14 June 2016                               |On 01 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                           gitaben morarbhai patel
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       entry clearance officer, mumbai
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Bhachu, instructed by Bassi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 12 January 2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert  granted  the
    appellant permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Graham that was promulgated on 31
    October 2015.   Judge  Graham  had  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision  of  24  January  2014
    refusing to  grant  entry  clearance  to  the  appellant  as  an  adult
    dependent relative.

 2. Although various  grounds  of  appeal  were  submitted,  Judge  Lambert
    limited permission to one issue, whether Judge Graham  was  correct  to
    exclude post decision evidence  in  light  of  DR  (ECO:  post-decision
    evidence) Morocco * [2005] UKIAT 00038?  Ms Bhachu was not  aware  that
    the grant of permission was limited as she had not been provided with a
    copy when she was instructed.  She prepared a skeleton argument on  all
    issues but after seeing a copy of the grant relied solely on the issues
    in relation to that permitted by the grant.   It  is  unfortunate  that
    this happened since it was clear to me that she had put much  time  and
    effort into prepare the case as if all issues were live  and  it  is  a
    reflection  of  her  professionalism  that  she  adapted   her   course
    immediately.

 3. The principles in DR (Morocco) are well known and do  not  need  to  be
    rehearsed.  The  appellant  complains  that  at  paragraph  21  of  her
    decision and reasons statement Judge Graham discounted medical evidence
    merely because it post-dated the date  of  decision.   The  grounds  as
    originally settled argue that the judge should have inferred  from  the
    medical letters written in February 2014 what the situation had been in
    January 2014.  The letters did not make reference to new medical issues
    but recorded the appellant's pre-existing conditions.   Although  other
    medical letters were only issued after March 2014, they  too  reflected
    the appellant's long term medical conditions.

 4. Ms Bhachu pointed me to three documents that were  available  to  Judge
    Graham  that  made  specific  reference  to  the  appellant's   medical
    condition prior to the date of decision.  Judge Graham referred to only
    one of these at paragraph 21.  The other two documents were to be found
    at pages 52 and 123 of the appellant's bundle.  Mr Mills conceded these
    documents were available to Judge Graham.

 5. Mr Mills responded to the general submission by suggesting that even if
    Judge Graham had admitted the medical evidence it would not  have  been
    enough to satisfy the adult  dependent  relative  requirements  because
    there was nothing to show that suitable care provision was  unavailable
    in  India.   The  medical  evidence  showed  that  the  appellant   had
    difficulty walking and that she needed help with  domiciliary  matters.
    Even if all the medical evidence had been admitted, Judge Graham  could
    only have found that  the  requirements  of  paragraphs  33  to  37  of
    appendix FM-SE were not met.

 6. In reply Ms Bhachu pointed me to the affidavit of  Ms  Rupa  Parekh,  a
    paralegal  working  for  the  instructing  solicitors,  regarding   the
    unavailability of care for the appellant in India.  She also pointed to
    the letter at page 48B of the appellant's  supplementary  bundle  which
    indicated that the appellant required the support of her  close  family
    and was from a medical practitioner.

 7. Having considered all the  arguments,  I  have  reached  the  following
    conclusions.

 8. I have concerns regarding  the  way  Judge  Graham  has  expressed  her
    findings in paragraph 21 of her decision and reasons statement.  In the
    first part of that paragraph she identifies she had one document  which
    related to the appellant's condition  prior  to  the  date  when  entry
    clearance was refused.  It is evident  from  the  appeal  bundles  that
    there were in fact  three  documents  that  described  the  appellant's
    medical condition as it was before and at the date of refusal of  entry
    clearance.  Failure to consider relevant evidence is an error of law.

 9. In the second part of paragraph 21 Judge Graham  refers  to  the  other
    medical evidence and it would appear she intended only to exclude  that
    evidence which post-dated  the  refusal  decision.   The  way  this  is
    expressed suggests that she was  excluding  the  bulk  of  the  medical
    evidence simply because it had not been available  to  the  respondent.
    Because of the way it is expressed, this amounts also to  an  error  of
    law.

10. The third part of paragraph 21, comprising  the  last  five  lines,  is
    somewhat different in nature.  In that  part  Judge  Graham  identifies
    that she has no evidence to show that the requirements of  appendix  FM
    relating to adult dependent relatives  had  been  met.   Although  that
    finding might be considered  suspect  given  the  first  two  parts  of
    paragraph 21, even if all the medical evidence had  been  admitted  and
    considered, Judge Graham could only have come to the same conclusion.

11. The medical evidence as a whole fails to show that it  is  more  likely
    than not that the  appellant's  condition  was  such  as  to  meet  the
    stringent test in paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 of appendix FM, bearing in  mind
    the specified evidence requirements of appendix  FM-SE.   The  evidence
    shows the appellant has received  medical  treatment  for  a  range  of
    issues but at no juncture does any medically qualified person or  other
    suitable person indicate that  the  appellant  "as  a  result  of  age,
    illness or disability requires  long  term  personal  care  to  perform
    everyday tasks."

12. The nearest any document comes to doing  so  is  the  certificate  from
    Rajarkar Orthopaedic Hospital which indicated that the appellant needed
    "an attendant round the clock to take care of her daily (c)hores."  But
    this was issued following the  appellant's  fall  in  August  2012  and
    related to her recovery from a fracture of her left  femur.   There  is
    nothing to indicate this was not limited to the period of recovery  and
    the further certificate from the same hospital issued in February  2014
    suggests that the appellant had regained significant  mobility  because
    there is no longer  any  reference  to  her  needing  round  the  clock
    attendance.

13. The only other document that refers to the appellant's need for care is
    the document at page 48B.  It  does  not  specify  that  the  appellant
    needed the care of her close relatives  because  of  her  inability  to
    perform everyday tasks.  In  fact  it  refers  only  to  needing  moral
    support and therefore is not evidence to suggest the  appellant  needed
    help performing everyday tasks.

14. The fact that the judge made legal  errors  weakens  her  decision  and
    reasons statement.  However, because the evidence failed  to  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules, there is no reason  to  set  the
    decision aside and remake it.  The only possible  outcome,  taking  the
    evidence at its highest, is that which Judge Graham stated at  the  end
    of paragraph 21.

15. Of course, the other grounds initially pursued  are  not  open  to  the
    appellant as permission  was  not  granted  on  them.   Therefore,  the
    failure of the appellant to persuade me that the errors are material to
    the outcome means that I must dismiss her appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

16. Before concluding this decision, however, I should comment on one other
    matter.  Even if the evidence were sufficient to satisfy  paragraph  E-
    ECDR.2.4 of appendix FM, there remains no evidence  that  care  is  not
    available to the appellant.  The affidavit from the paralegal,  however
    well-meaning, cannot comply with paragraph 35 of appendix  FM-SE  which
    provides an exhaustive list of sources of such evidence.

17. For all these reasons, I find although there  is  legal  error  in  the
    decision and reasons statement, they are not such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.



Decision

Although there are legal errors in the decision  and  reasons  statement  of
Judge Graham, they are not such as to require the decision to be  set  aside
and therefore her decision is upheld.




                               Signed                     Date


                               Judge McCarthy
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
