
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02237/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 April 2016                     |On 11 May 2016                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [F A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fijiwala (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Akomolede, Nathan Aaron Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Claimant whose date of birth is [ ] 2013 is a citizen  of  Nigeria.
    This is an appeal by the Secretary of State (who I shall  refer  to  as
    "the respondent" and to the appellant  as  "the  Claimant")  against  a
    decision and reasons of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge D Ross)  ("FTT")
    promulgated on 28 September 2015 in which the FTT allowed the appeal on
    immigration and human rights grounds.   The  FTT  determined  that  the
    Claimant met the provisions under  paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and under Article 8 ECHR.

FTT Decision and Reasons

2.   The FTT considered a DNA report that concluded that  "the  most  likely
    relationship" between the sponsor  and  Claimant  was  that  they  were
    related either as aunt or grandmother.  The  FTT  found  that  the  DNA
    evidence showed that they were  "probably"  related  in  that  capacity
    although the evidence was not decisive [16].The  decision  and  reasons
    contained an error in that it recorded the conclusion as being the most
    "unlikely" relationship [12].  It noted that the DNA evidence was weak.
     There was in addition  evidence  of  financial  support  sent  by  the
    sponsor to a neighbour taking care of the claimant  and  oral  evidence
    from the Claimant's aunt [11].  The Claimant's birth certificate showed
    her mother as [BA] and the birth certificate of [BA] showed the sponsor
    was her mother.  It was accepted that the Claimant's  mother  had  died
    (evidence by a death certificate) and that her father  was  playing  no
    role in the child's  upbringing  [17].   The  FTT  concluded  that  the
    sponsor was related to the  Claimant's  grandmother  [16].   There  was
    additional evidence  of  visit  stamps  to  Nigeria  in  the  sponsor's
    passport [17] on which the FTT placed weight.

Application for Permission to Appeal

3.   The Respondent contended that the FTT misapplied the standard of  proof
    required, the balance of probabilities, in its assessment  of  the  DNA
    report and in finding that the sponsor was "probably" the  grandmother.
    It was contended that the DNA evidence was contradictory  and  provided
    only weak evidence of the claimed relationship.

4.   The FTT failed to make any findings as to the relationship between  the
    Claimant and  sponsor  notwithstanding  there  was  evidence  from  the
    sponsor and a witness.

5.   The FTT failed to resolve a conflict in the evidence  as  to  the  date
    the sponsor first came to the UK.  She stated she had entered  in  1974
    but yet the birth certificate showed that her daughter (the  Claimant's
    mother) had been born in January 1978 in Nigeria.

6.   The FTT failed to make any finding regarding the  lack  of  photographs
    despite the numerous visits to Nigeria made by the sponsor.

Permission to Appeal

7.   Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  M
    Holmes on 18 March 2016.  Permission was granted on the basis that;

         "The true nature of the  relationship  between  the  appellant  and
         sponsor was in dispute and their bold assertions to the effect that
         they were related could carry little weight.  It is  arguable  that
         the judge failed to accurately record the content of the  DNA  test
         and, failed to give consideration to the evidence that the  sponsor
         could not have been the mother of the  appellant's  mother  because
         she was in the UK at the date that  this  lady  had  been  born  in
         Nigeria.  Arguably the judge left out of account material  evidence
         and misread or misunderstood  the  true  nature  of  the  DNA  test
         result.  Arguably these matters went to the heart of  the  decision
         upon the key disputed issue of fact in the appeal."

The Hearing

8.   I heard submissions from both representatives.

9.   Ms Fijiwala relied on the grounds in support of  the  application.   At
    the outset she acknowledged that the decision and reasons had misquoted
    the DNA report stating that the most  "unlikely  relationship"  whereas
    the report in fact states  the  most  "likely"  relationship.   It  was
    submitted that overall the FTT failed to take  into  account  the  weak
    evidence as to the relationship, had not made findings of fact  on  the
    evidence given by witnesses and failed to resolve the  conflict  as  to
    the date of entry of the sponsor  to  the  UK  which  was  relevant  to
    whether or not the sponsor was the claimant's grandmother.

10.  Mr Akomolede produced the DNA report and confirmed that it  stated  the
    most  likely  relationship  was  grandmother,  aunt  or  other  distant
    relative.  He submitted that the sponsor came to the  UK  in  1979  and
    returned to Nigeria in 1984.  He submitted that there was an  error  in
    the dates which arose as a result of a  mistake.   There  was  adequate
    evidence to show the relationship established between the Claimant  and
    her grandmother.

Discussion and Decision

11.  I am satisfied that the FTT applied the correct burden and standard  of
    proof in assessing all of the evidence of the relationship between  the
    Claimant and the sponsor [14].   The  DNA  report  confirmed  that  the
    relationship was 2.0 times  more  likely  that  they  were  related  as
    grandchild/grandmother than not.  It stated that the DNA  evidence  was
    weak, but it noted that grandparent analysis was not as  conclusive  as
    testing both parents. The FTT found that the relationship was  probably
    grandchild and grandmother and further found that they were related. In
    addition to the DNA report was a document signed by the father  of  the
    Claimant  appointing  the  sponsor  to  be  her  legal  guardian,   and
    certificates in the form of birth certificates and death  certificates,
    the authenticity of which has not been challenged.   The  FTT  accepted
    the oral evidence of the sponsor that she had travelled to Nigeria  for
    her daughter's funeral and she had sent money to pay for the Claimant's
    care since she was born.  The FTT accepted the sponsor's evidence which
    was supported by documentary evidence including passport stamps showing
    visits to Nigeria in 2013 for one month, ten weeks in 2014,  a  further
    three months from March to June 2014, one month between  November  2014
    and December 2014 and one month  between  August  and  September  2015.
    There was also evidence of money transfers  to  the  neighbour  looking
    after the child in the period from August 2014. The evidence before the
    FTT went beyond mere bald assertions of a familial relationship, and it
    is clear that the FTT considered all of the evidence in  the  round  to
    the correct standard of proof.

12.  Whilst  accepting  that  the  FTT  did  not  specifically  resolve  the
    conflict in evidence as to the dates of entry to the UK by the sponsor,
    I am satisfied that the sponsor provided an explanation  that  she  was
    uncertain about the precise dates. The FTT relied on  her  evidence  as
    broadly credible save for inconsistencies as to the whereabouts of  the
    father [17].  In any event this failure does not in my view render  the
    decision unsound. It is not material to the decision and reasons  given
    the weight of the evidence found  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    credible and found to establish that the requirements of the Rules were
    met.  Further there is no suggestion that the failure to make  findings
    on the evidence of [MA] is in any way material  to  the  outcome.  That
    evidence is recorded in the decision and reasons and  it  confirms  the
    Sponsor's account.  The ground that the FTT erred by failing  to  place
    weight on the absence of photographs was not pursued and in  any  event
    this does not amount to an error of law.

Notice of Decision

13.  I find no material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.
    The decision shall stand.

14.  The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 5th May 2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
as a hearing was needed in order to resolve issues.


Signed   Date 5th May 2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

