
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/02986/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 June 2016                              |On 7 July  2016               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                          ms ozelia borges da cruz
                       (anonymity direction NOT mAde)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - RIO DE JANEIRO

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. D. Chirico, Counsel instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Rowlands, promulgated on 23 September 2015, in which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse entry clearance as a dependant relative.


 2. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that all of  the  grounds
    presented were arguable.  Ground 1 submits that the First-tier Tribunal
    misdirected itself as to the case which was put before it and/or failed
    to engage with the case before it, failed to determine matters  put  to
    it and had regard to  matters  which  were  not  put  to  it  and  were
    irrelevant.   In  paragraph  15  of  the  grounds  of  appeal   seeking
    permission from the First-tier Tribunal it states  that  the  statement
    that the Appellant had conceded her case under  the  Immigration  Rules
    was wrong.


 3. At the hearing I heard submissions on this ground,  following  which  I
    announced that I found that the decision contained an error of law  and
    should be set aside.  My reasons are set out below.


Error of law


 4. In paragraph 14 of the decision the judge states:


    "So far as the requirements to  show  the  unavailability  of  care  in
    Brazil, clearly that has not been met.   In  fact  the  representations
    seem to accept that was the case.  I am satisfied that they have failed
    to show that the required  level  of  care  is  either  unavailable  or
    unaffordable in Brazil.  I am satisfied that this  Appellant  does  not
    fulfil the immigration rules so  far  as  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom as the parent of a person present and  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom."


 5. I was referred by Mr. Chirico to the skeleton argument from the hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal.  At paragraph 14 it set  out  the  relevant
    immigration rule.  There then  follow  submissions  under  the  heading
    "Submissions in respect of the immigration rules".  In paragraphs 17 to
    19 the skeleton  argument  sets  out  how  it  is  submitted  that  the
    Appellant meets the requirements of the immigration rules.  It is clear
    from this skeleton argument, which was before the First-tier  Tribunal,
    that the Appellant  did  not  concede  that  she  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the immigration rules.  At paragraph 19 of the skeleton
    argument it states: "The Tribunal is invited to allow this appeal under
    the Immigration Rules".  No such submission would have  been  made  had
    the Appellant conceded that she did not meet the  requirements  of  the
    rules.


 6. In the decision of the First-tier Tribunal there is no  record  of  the
    submissions, but it is clear that in reliance on the skeleton  argument
    the  Appellant  submitted  that  she  met  the  requirements   of   the
    immigration  rules.   As  a  result  of  wrongly  considering  that   a
    concession had been made, the judge did not fully consider  whether  or
    not the Appellant could meet the requirements of the immigration rules.
     The only discussion of the immigration rules is in  relation  to  care
    arrangements, paragraph 13.  The notice of decision  also  refused  the
    application with reference to the financial requirements, which was not
    conceded  in  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's  review.   There  is  no
    consideration of this aspect of the immigration rules.


 7. I find that the judge misdirected himself by stating that the Appellant
    had conceded that she did not meet the requirements of the  immigration
    rules.  He therefore did not go on  to  consider  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant met the requirements of the immigration rules.   Even  if  he
    had found that she could not meet these  requirements,  the  extent  to
    which she met them would have  been  relevant  to  the  proportionality
    assessment under Article 8.


 8. It was helpfully accepted by Ms Ahmed at the hearing that, were I to be
    in agreement with Mr. Chirico that  no  concession  had  been  made  by
    reference to the skeleton argument, and that the judge had  misdirected
    himself, she could go  no  further  with  her  submissions.   She  also
    accepted that the Rule 24 response had been drafted  without  sight  of
    the grounds of appeal seeking permission to appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and without sight of the file.   It was therefore of  limited
    use.


 9. I find that the decision involves the making of an error of law by  way
    of the judge's misdirection that a concession had been made in relation
    to the appeal under the immigration rules.  As a result,  I  find  that
    inadequate reasons have been given for why the Appellant does not  meet
    the requirements of the immigration rules.  As  set  out  above,  these
    findings would also have been material  to  the  consideration  of  the
    appeal under Article 8.


10. Given that I found there to be an error  of  law  in  respect  of  this
    ground such that the decision should be set aside, I have not proceeded
    to consider the other grounds.

11. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I note that there was no Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.   Given  the  nature
    and extent of the fact-finding necessary to enable this  appeal  to  be
    remade, and having regard to the overriding objective, I find  that  it
    is appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier  Tribunal,  as  was
    agreed by Ms Ahmed and Mr. Chirico at the hearing.


Notice of Decision


12. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  a
    material error of law and is set aside.  No findings are preserved.


13. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.


Directions


 1. Given that the application was made in 2013, as accepted by  Ms  Ahmed,
    the appeal should be listed for hearing as soon as possible.


 2. The appeal is remitted to Taylor House.  Judge Rowlands is excluded.


 3. The availability of Mr. Chirico is to be confirmed in advance with  his
    clerk on [ ].

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 6 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
