
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02379/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 October 2015                    |On 20 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                          emada adam abaker mohamed
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - abu dhabi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss V Delgado of Cardiff Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan who was born on 1 January 1985.  On
    4 October 2013, she applied for entry clearance under para 319L of  the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended) to settle in the UK as the spouse
    of the sponsor, Ahmad Abdul Rahman Abaker, who is a recognised  refugee
    in the UK.

 2. On 15 January 2014, the Entry Clearance Officer refused the appellant's
    application. The ECO was not satisfied that the appellant  and  sponsor
    had met as required by para 319L(ii) or  that  they  intended  to  live
    permanently with each other and that their marriage was  subsisting  as
    required by para 319L(iii).

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. In a  determination  promulgated  on  6  January  2015,  Judge  Britton
    dismissed the appellant's appeal under para 319L.  Like the ECO,  Judge
    Britton was not satisfied that the appellant and  sponsor  had  met  or
    that they intended to live together permanently and that their marriage
    was subsisting.  However, he allowed the appellant's appeal under Art 8
    of the ECHR.

The Appeals to the Upper Tribunal

 5. Both parties appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

 6. The Secretary of State's grounds argue that the judge had erred in  law
    in allowing the appellant's appeal under Art 8 on the basis that he had
    done so on  facts  that  post-dated  the  ECO's  decision  contrary  to
    s.85A(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("NIA  Act
    2002").

 7. On 17 February 2015, the First-tier Tribunal (UTJ Martin)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

 8. In addition, the appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    judge's decision to dismiss the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The grounds challenge the judge's adverse factual findings on the basis
    that he failed properly to take  into  account  post-decision  evidence
    relating to contact between the appellant and sponsor contrary  to  the
    approach set out in Naz [2012] UKUT 0040 (IAC) and Goudey  [2012]  UKUT
    00041 (IAC).

 9. The appeal was initially listed before me on 24 June  2015,  however  I
    adjourned the hearing as no decision had been made on  the  appellant's
    application for permission to appeal.

10. Subsequently, on 8 July 2015 the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Pooler)
    granted the appellant permission to appeal on the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge had failed properly to  consider  post-decision
    evidence and had required the appellant to produce specific evidence of
    contact prior to the decision.

11. On 14 July 2015, the ECO filed a Rule 24  notice  submitting  that  the
    judge's decision was properly open to him including  his  finding  that
    the post-decision meeting of the sponsor and appellant in October  2014
    in Egypt was arranged specifically as a result of the ECO's refusal.

12. Thus, the appeal came before me.



The Hearing

13. At the hearing, Miss Delgado represented the appellant and relied  upon
    a skeleton argument submitted at the previous  hearing  which  reflects
    the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal.   In  essence,  she  made  three
    arguments.

14. First, she submitted that the judge had failed to take into account the
    whole of the evidence including evidence of contact prior to the  ECO's
    decision  dating  from  March  2013.   This,  Miss  Delgado  submitted,
    included  the  evidence  post-dating  the  decision,  namely  that  the
    appellant and sponsor had met in Egypt between 1 October  2014  and  28
    October 2014 and as a result of that meeting, the appellant had  become
    pregnant.  Miss Delgado pointed me to  the  relevant  evidence  in  the
    appellant's bundle in relation to those matters.

15. Secondly, Miss Delgado submitted that the judge had been wrong to  take
    into account that the  appellant  had  failed  to  produce  documentary
    evidence of contact before 2013 including photographs  of  the  sponsor
    and appellant together before their marriage.  She  submitted  that  it
    was not necessary for  the  appellant  to  produce  specific  evidence.
    There was the evidence of the parties together with the other  evidence
    of contact.

16. Thirdly, Miss Delgado raised a point not addressed in the  grounds  nor
    indeed in her skeleton argument based upon  the  Secretary  of  State's
    guidance on "Spouses: SET03" published on 13 November 2013 at  para  13
    which states that:

         "If, after an initial refusal on the grounds of not having met, the
         couple can satisfy the ECO that a meeting in the sense  of  'making
         the acquaintance of' has since taken place, the ECO must review the
         original decision and consider whether refusal is still maintained.

         This review can take place after an appeal has been lodged ...."

17. Miss Delgado submitted that in the light of the evidence concerning the
    appellant and sponsor meeting in October 2014 in  Egypt,  the  ECO  had
    failed to apply this guidance by reviewing his  original  decision  and
    conclusion that they had not "met" as required by para 319L(ii).

18. In relation to the ECO's appeal in  respect  of  Art  8,  Miss  Delgado
    accepted that if the judge's findings in relation  to  the  Immigration
    Rules stood, then the appellant could not succeed  under  Art  8  based
    upon the post-decision facts.

19. On behalf of the ECO, Mr Richards accepted that post-decision  evidence
    was capable of throwing light on a matter at the date  of  decision  in
    applying the Immigration Rules.  He submitted, however, that the  judge
    had taken that evidence into account but had simply found it not to  be
    persuasive.  The judge had found that the meeting in October  2014  was
    contrived given the ECO's refusal based, in part, on the fact that they
    had not met.  Mr Richards pointed out that the  judge  had  taken  into
    account that the sponsor had not sought to visit the appellant  earlier
    despite having a valid travel  document,  namely  a  Sudanese  passport
    issued to him on 15 February 2012.   Mr  Richards  submitted  that  the
    judge was entitled to find that the appellant and sponsor had  not  met
    and had not established that their marriage  was  subsisting  and  that
    they intended  to  live  together  permanently.   Those  findings  were
    adequately reasoned and were not irrational.

20. In relation to the decision under Art 8,  Mr  Richards  submitted  that
    that decision was wholly, and wrongly, based upon post-decision  facts,
    namely the meeting in October 2014 and the fact that the appellant  had
    become pregnant.  The judge was, Mr Richards submitted, not entitled to
    take those matters into account by virtue of s.85A(2) of  the  NIA  Act
    2002.

Discussion

21. The basic facts are not in dispute.  The sponsor left Sudan in 2006 and
    came to the UK where he claimed asylum and was granted ILR on  16  June
    2014.  On 16 December 2011, the appellant and sponsor married by proxy.



22. The appellant and sponsor claim that they are first cousins (which  the
    judge did not accept) and that they came from the same area  in  Sudan,
    and had attended school together.

23. It is also accepted that the sponsor and appellant met in Egypt between
    1 October 2014 and 28 October 2014 where, as a  result,  the  appellant
    became pregnant: the sponsor being the father.

24. Before the judge, the sponsor gave oral evidence and  a  statement  was
    produced.  The sponsor's evidence was that he had left  Sudan  in  2006
    and travelled via a number of countries before arriving in  the  UK  in
    September 2008.  He had had limited contact with  his  parents  and  he
    only started contact  with  his  wife  after  they  were  married.   In
    October/November 2011 the sponsor's father asked him by telephone if he
    was happy to marry the  appellant.   The  sponsor  agreed  and  it  was
    decided that his brother  should  stand  in  for  him  as  proxy.   The
    sponsor's evidence was that he first spoke to his wife on the day  that
    they were married.  He used calling cards, Viber and Skype to  keep  in
    contact with her.  There was evidence before  the  judge  of  financial
    support but the only evidence of  contact  between  the  appellant  and
    sponsor (apart from what he said in his oral evidence) dated from March
    2013.

25. In his evidence, the sponsor said that he had first obtained  a  travel
    document valid from 11  July  2009  until  March  2014.   His  Sudanese
    passport was issued on 15 February 2012.

26. The sponsor explained in his evidence that the reason why  he  and  the
    appellant had not travelled to meet one another  earlier  than  October
    2014 was that the sponsor was enrolled in an  English  language  course
    for one and a half years.  He also said that his  travel  document  did
    not allow him to go to Sudan and when it was  renewed  he  needed  some
    time to arrange a visit and he had not visited  Egypt  early  as  there
    were lots of things to arrange.

27. At paras 17-21 the  judge  considered  the  evidence  and  reached  his
    adverse findings as follows:

         "17. It is accepted that the sponsor cannot travel to  Sudan.   The
             appellant and sponsor entered into  an  arranged  marriage  by
             proxy.

         18.  In the appellant's skeleton argument it was pointed  out  that
             the sponsor applied for  a  Home  Office  travel  document  to
             travel to Egypt on  29  September  2014.   What  the  skeleton
             argument  failed  to  point  out  was  that  the  sponsor  had
             previously been granted a travel document from 11 July 2009 to
             5 March 2014.  It was not a case of the sponsor having to wait
             for a travel document before travelling to Egypt  to  see  the
             appellant.  Further the appellant's Sudanese passport is valid
             from 15 February 2012 to 14 February  2017  (page  23  of  the
             appellant's bundle).  I find there is no  satisfactory  reason
             why the appellant and sponsor could not have met in Egypt from
             15 February 2012.  The  sponsor  is  employed  and  was  in  a
             position to fund the appellant and his travel to and  stay  in
             Egypt in 2012.

         19.  Further there is no satisfactory evidence  why  the  appellant
             and sponsor could not have met in Egypt before  October  2014.
             It is noted it was only after the ECO in  the  refusal  notice
             dated the 15 January 2014 stated that there was no evidence of
             the appellant and sponsor having met that  the  appellant  and
             sponsor went to Egypt.  It  is  accepted  that  post  decision
             visits by the sponsor are admissible to show the  marriage  is
             subsisting and to throw light on circumstances  in  contention
             but the evidence was not in  existence  at  the  time  of  the
             decision as they had not  travelled  to  Egypt  until  October
             2014.

         20.   The  sponsor's  explanation  for  the  delay  in  seeing  the
             appellant was that the appellant had to take English  language
             courses that lasted for about  11/2  years.   However,  as  Mr
             Howells on behalf of the respondent pointed out at the hearing
             the appellant  would  not  have  been  attending  her  English
             language courses for 52 weeks of the year.  There  would  have
             been times between terms when the appellant could  have  found
             time to travel to Egypt to meet the sponsor.  Also there is no
             documentary evidence of contact  between  one  another  before
             March 2013.  There is evidence since  March  2013  of  contact
             between the sponsor and appellant.  No photographs showing the
             sponsor and the appellant together before the  date  of  their
             marriage have been produced.  I find if there had been contact
             before the date of the marriage,  documentary  evidence  would
             have been produced.  The sponsor said that  phone  cards  were
             used before the date of marriage.  I accept that  evidence  of
             telephone cards is  capable  of  being  corroborative  of  the
             parties being in communication with one another.  Also  it  is
             not necessary for the parties also  to  write  and  text  each
             other.  However as the sponsor and appellant claimed  to  have
             both lived in Al Fashir, are cousins and they went to the same
             school, there would be evidence of the appellant  and  sponsor
             together before the date of marriage.

         21.  Therefore on the evidence before me I am  not  satisfied  that
             the sponsor and appellant are cousins  as  claimed.   Even  if
             they are cousins I am not satisfied they had met before  2014.
             I find that the  parties  to  the  marriage  by  proxy  on  16
             December 2011 had not met.  I am not satisfied at the date  of
             decision  the  parties  to  the  marriage  intended  to   live
             permanently with one another and the marriage was subsisting".

28. Miss Delgado drew attention to the final sentence in para 19 where, she
    submitted, the  judge  had  accepted  that  post-decision  visits  were
    admissible to show the marriage was subsisting but had then, in effect,
    rejected it as it was not in existence at the time of decision  because
    the visit to Egypt was in October 2014.  Further,  the  judge  had  not
    fully taken into account the evidence of contact since March 2013.

29. By virtue of s.85A(2) of the NIA  Act  2002  in  an  appeal  against  a
    refusal to grant entry clearance:

         "... the Tribunal may consider only the circumstances  appertaining
         at the time of the decision".

30. It was common ground that evidence appertaining to the date of decision
    even if it related to post-decision events was admissible  if  it  cast
    light upon facts at the date of decision (see  DR  (ECO:  post-decision
    evidence) Morocco*  [2005]  UKIAT  0038).   Evidence  of  post-decision
    visits and more generally of "intervening devotion"  is  admissible  as
    evidence that a marriage is subsisting  (see  DR  and  Naz  (subsisting
    marriage - standard  of  proof)  Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT  00040  (IAC)).
    Evidence of phone calls or other contact  falls  within  this  category
    (see Goudey (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan  [2012]  UKUT  00041
    (IAC)).

31. In my judgment, Judge Britton did not fail to take into account all the
    relevant evidence.  He specifically referred  to  the  evidence  "since
    March 2013 of contact between the sponsor and appellant" (see  para  20
    of the determination).  Further, the appellant specifically  relied  on
    the fact that the appellant and sponsor had met  in  October  2014  and
    that as a result the appellant had become pregnant (see para 14 of  the
    determination).   Judge  Britton  specifically  reminded  himself  that
    evidence of contact, for example through phone cards,  was  capable  of
    supporting the appellant's claim (see para 20 of the determination).

32. It is clear to me that the Judge  recognised  the  relevance  of  post-
    decision events in para 19  -  in  the  passage  to  which  Ms  Delgado
    referred me - and his comment was simply that it could  not  have  been
    taken into account by the Entry Clearance Officer: he was not saying he
    should ignore it.  That would be inconsistent with other parts  of  his
    determination.

33. Reading the determination as  a  whole  and  fairly,  I  am  unable  to
    conclude that the judge failed to take all  the  relevant  evidence  as
    required by the case law into account.

34. Further, I do not accept Miss Delgado's submission that the judge erred
    in law by observing that the sponsor  and  appellant  had  produced  no
    photographs before the  date  of  their  marriage  and  no  documentary
    evidence of contact between them before March  2013.   The  appellant's
    case was, at least in part, that they had known one another as children
    growing up in the same area.  The judge's observation was no more  than
    one born of common sense, namely that in assessing the totality of  the
    evidence the absence of documentary evidence prior to March 2013 was  a
    relevant factor.

35. The judge gave a number of reasons why  he  did  not  accept  that  the
    sponsor and appellant  could  not  have  met  earlier  than  they  did.
    Despite having a travel document from July 2009 and a Sudanese passport
    valid from 15 February 2012, the sponsor  and  appellant  had  not  met
    until over two years later in October 2014.  The judge was entitled  to
    reject the explanation offered by the  sponsor  which,  primarily,  was
    that the appellant had undertaken an English language course which  had
    occupied her for one and a half years and so could not  visit  or  meet
    the sponsor.

36. In my judgment, the judge's reasoning was adequate, having  had  regard
    to all the evidence, and his finding that the appellant and sponsor had
    not established that  at  the  date  of  decision  their  marriage  was
    subsisting or that they intended to live together permanently.

37. For those reasons, the judge was entitled to find  that  the  appellant
    had failed to satisfy the requirement in para 319L(iii).

38. As regards the requirement that  they  had  "met",  the  only  evidence
    before the judge was that they were cousins, had lived in the same area
    and had gone to school together.  They had not seen one  another  since
    the sponsor left Sudan in 2006.

39. The requirement to have "met" is not a  requirement  that  they  should
    have met in  the  context  of  their  marriage  (see  Meharban  v  ECO,
    Islamabad [1989] Imm AR 57).  However, it is not  sufficient  that  the
    parties met when both parties were infants and so could not be said  to
    have "made one another's acquaintances"  (see  Raj  v  ECO,  New  Delhi
    [1985] Imm AR 151).

40. Whether it was established that they had "met" was a question of  fact.
    The judge was entitled to find, in my view,  on  the  limited  evidence
    before him that the appellant and sponsor  had  not  established  on  a
    balance of probabilities that they had "met" despite the fact that they
    claimed to live in the same area, were first cousins and  had  attended
    the same school.  There was no supporting evidence and  the  judge  was
    entitled to  conclude,  in  effect,  that  they  had  never  "made  the
    acquaintance" of the other in the sense required by the word  "met"  in
    para 319L(ii).   It  cannot  be  said  that  the  judge's  finding  was
    irrational or perverse on the basis of the evidence.

41. For that reason also the appellant failed to meet the  requirements  of
    para 319L.

42. Turning now to Miss Delgado's final submission made for the first  time
    at the hearing, she cannot in my  judgment  establish  that  the  ECO's
    decision was unlawful, relying upon the guidance in SET3.13.   Even  if
    the ECO should have reviewed the original decision in the light of  the
    subsequent evidence that the appellant and sponsor met in October  2014
    in Egypt, failure to follow that guidance would not make  the  original
    decision challenged in this appeal unlawful.  Rather,  that  submission
    would, if successful, support a public law challenge by way of judicial
    review against the ECO for failing to make a further and new  decision.
    That failing cannot, in any way,  reflect  upon  the  legality  of  the
    decision already made.

43. For these reasons, the judge did not  err  in  law  in  dismissing  the
    appellant's claim under the Immigration Rules, namely para 319L.

44. Turning now to the ECO's appeal, the judge dealt with Art 8 at para  22
    of his determination as follows:

         "22. In relation to Article 8 the respondent has not dispute albeit
             nearly 3 years after the marriage by proxy that the  appellant
             is pregnant.  The appellant went to Egypt on  1  October  2014
             and left  on  28  October  2014.   It  was  confirmed  by  the
             appellant she was pregnant on 4 November 2014.  It is accepted
             the appellant cannot travel to Sudan to be with the appellant.
              It is unrealistic for the appellant to  live  anywhere  other
             than Sudan or the United Kingdom.  The sponsor is in full time
             employment in this country.  A young child should  be  brought
             up by both parents preferably.  In the circumstances  of  this
             case it  will  be  an  interference  with  the  appellant  and
             sponsor's family life to live apart.  I find it would  not  be
             proportionate not to allow the appellant to join  the  sponsor
             under Article 8 of ECHR".

45. The fact that the judge was  considering  whether  the  ECO's  decision
    breached Art 8 did not entitle  the  judge  to  consider  post-decision
    events not relevant to the decision to refuse entry  clearance  at  the
    date of that decision, namely 15  January  2014.   At  that  date,  the
    appellant and sponsor had not met and the appellant was  not  pregnant.
    Those matters were not matters "appertaining to the date  of  decision"
    within s.85A(2) of the NIA Act 2002 and consequently the judge was  not
    entitled to consider  them  in  applying  Art  8.   Given  his  factual
    findings in relation to the Immigration Rules, namely that, in  effect,
    the parties' marriage was not genuine at  the  date  of  decision,  the
    appellant had no proper claim to enter the UK on the  basis  of  Art  8
    relying on any family or private life.

46. Consequently, the judge erred in law in allowing the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 based upon inadmissible post-decision facts.

Decision

47. For the  above  reasons,  the  judge  erred  in  law  in  allowing  the
    appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.  That decision is set aside
    and I remake the decision dismissing the appellant's appeal  under  Art
    8.

48. Accordingly, the ECO's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

49.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  err  in  law  in  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules, namely para 319L.  That
    decision stands.

50. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is payable.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
