
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02857/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25th July 2016                   |On 8th August 2016                    |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                  Fred [O]
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   Entry Clearance Officer - accra, ghana
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Lanlehin, Counsel appearing by Direct Access
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse him entry clearance as a returning resident.   The
    respondent refused his application with  reference  to  paragraphs  18,
    320(7A) and 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules HC 395.





Background

 2. The applicant is a Ghanaian citizen who is now 54  years  old  and  has
    lived in the United Kingdom since he was 25 years  old.   He  has  been
    living in Scotland, where he has a son by a former relationship, now 21
    and studying at Dundee University, and  a  daughter  with  his  current
    partner, who is 5 years old.  His partner, to whom  the  appellant  has
    been engaged since 2004, is not a well person: she has  panic  attacks,
    travel anxiety and depression.  Both the appellant's  partner  and  his
    daughter miss him.

 3. The appellant initially trained as a psychiatric nurse and worked for 4
    years as staff in the Royal London Hospital and Haringey NHS  Trust  in
    Tottenham. On 28 November 1997, the appellant  was  granted  indefinite
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom and thereafter he was entitled to
    leave the United Kingdom for periods of up to two years and return as a
    returning resident, subject to certain provisos. The  appellant  has  a
    degree in criminology, for which he studied in the United Kingdom.   He
    also has a post-graduate qualification in Information Technology.

 4. In the 29 years the appellant has spent in  the  United  Kingdom,  more
    than half his life, he has returned to Ghana only 3  times,  the  final
    time in July 2012, when his parents were ill.  They  have  since  died.
    On 9 January 2014, the appellant made an  application  to  the  British
    Embassy in Accra, Ghana, for entry clearance as a  returning  resident,
    with a planned return date of 30 March 2014.  It is not suggested  that
    he had been out of the United Kingdom for longer than 2 years when  the
    present application was made.

 5. The appellant's uncontested evidence is  that  when  he  was  ready  to
    return in January 2014, after his parents'  deaths,  he  completed  the
    documentation for his entry clearance application as he had done  twice
    before, disclosing his previous criminal history, then  travelled  from
    his home in Akpafu Mempeasem to Accra to  make  the  application.   The
    journey took 6 hours and was expensive for him.  On arrival,  he  found
    that the forms had changed: he could  not  present  the  forms  he  had
    completed, nor was it practical for him to undertake  the  expense  and
    time to return to Akpafu Mempeasem and then  come  again  to  Accra  to
    submit the new forms.

 6. The appellant obtained help from a man outside the Embassy to  complete
    the new forms online, answering questions which  the  man  posed.   The
    application gave details of  the  appellant's  partner  in  the  United
    Kingdom, that she was a British citizen, that they were living together
    and that he had two dependent children in the United Kingdom.

 7. The man who assisted the appellant to complete the online form did  not
    ask him whether he had  any  criminal  convictions  and  the  form  was
    incorrectly completed. The appellant signed the form, which  failed  to
    disclose his previous criminal history, consisting of two  offences  of
    shoplifting in 2002, and one of failure to surrender to custody, all of
    which were dealt with by caution or  conditional  discharge;  a  1-year
    driving disqualification for failure to provide a  breath  specimen  in
    1997, and a breach of the  peace  on  5  January  2011,  for  which  he
    received a fine and which was not a spent conviction.

 8. The appellant says that he  would  not  have  failed  intentionally  to
    disclose his criminal convictions, as  he  knew  from  his  criminology
    degree that  the  Home  Office  would  have  immediate  access  to  the
    information on its computer.   The  omission  was  an  oversight:   the
    information had been correctly filled in on the old  forms  he  brought
    with him, which the Embassy in Ghana had not accepted.



The Entry Clearance decisions

Entry Clearance Officer's decision

 9. The Entry Clearance Officer's Notice  of  Immigration  Decision  states
    that no interview was required but that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    took account of the financial and employment information provided,  the
    appellant's passport and travel history, his family circumstances,  and
    the supporting documents provided. The  supporting  documents  included
    bank statements, a tax return, birth certificates for his  partner  and
    their daughter, his return  ticket,  and  a  copy  of  the  appellant's
    passport.

10. The Entry Clearance Officer accepted that the appellant qualified as  a
    returning resident under paragraph 18 of the Rules.

11. The basis of the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal was twofold:  first,
    that the appellant's application fell to  be  refused  under  paragraph
    320(7A) of the Rules for false representations  made,  whether  or  not
    material to  the  application  and  whether  or  not  to  the  person's
    knowledge.  The false statement in the application that  the  appellant
    had no previous criminal  convictions  entailed  automatic  refusal  of
    entry clearance.  The Entry Clearance Officer indicated that any future
    applications may also be refused under paragraph 320(7B) of the Rules.

12.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  also  refused  the  application  under
    paragraph 320(18B) of the Rules, which states that entry  clearance  or
    leave to enter should normally be refused  where  either  the  person's
    offending has caused serious harm or they are  'a  persistent  offender
    who shows a particular disregard for the  law'.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer considered the appellant to be a persistent offender  as  there
    described.

13.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  did   not   consider   the
    proportionality of refusal of entry clearance,  having  regard  to  his
    Article 8 ECHR private and family life in the United  Kingdom,  or  the
    best interests of his daughter pursuant to section 55 of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.







Entry Clearance Manager review

14. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In response to that
    appeal, the Entry Clearance Manager in Accra reviewed the decision  but
    upheld it.  In relation to Article 8 ECHR, the Entry Clearance  Manager
    stated:

         "I have noted that the appellant did not  raise  any  human  rights
         concerns in their application [for  entry  clearance]  and  no  new
         evidence has been provided with the  grounds  of  appeal  that  may
         relate to this allegation.  I am satisfied that the Entry Clearance
         Officer has assessed this application with human rights concerns in
         mind at the initial stage.  I have reviewed  this  again  today  in
         light of the  appellant's  allegation,  but  there  is  nothing  to
         suggest any interference in his family life or that  it  exists  in
         the United Kingdom.  In the alternative even  if  such  rights  are
         engaged the refusal is proportionate  for  legitimate  reasons  for
         fair and firm immigration control and the economic  well  being  of
         the country."

    It is difficult to see how that conclusion could have been reached  had
    the Entry Clearance Manager had the application form before him or her.



Relevant provisions of the Immigration Rules

Rule 18 - returning residents

15. Rule 18 of the Immigration Rules sets out the basis on which  a  person
    may be admitted as a returning resident:

         "18. A person seeking leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         returning resident may be  admitted  for  settlement  provided  the
         Immigration Officer is satisfied that the person concerned:
             (i)  had indefinite leave to enter or  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom when he last left; and
             (ii)     has not been away from the United  Kingdom  for  more
             than 2 years; and
             (iii)    did not receive assistance from public funds  towards
             the cost of leaving the United Kingdom; and
             (iv)     now seeks admission for the  purpose  of  settlement.
             ...

         19.  A person who does not benefit from the preceding paragraph  by
         reason only of having been away from the United  Kingdom  too  long
         may nevertheless be  admitted  as  a  returning  resident  if,  for
         example, he has lived here for most of his life."

16. For the Secretary of State, Mr Walker accepts that the appellant  meets
    the requirements of paragraph 18, as did the Entry Clearance Officer.

Rule 320  -  mandatory  and  discretionary  reasons  for  refusal  of  entry
clearance

17. Paragraph 320(7A) of the Rules is a mandatory ground  for  refusal,  as
    follows:

         " 320(7A)     Where false representations have been made  or  false
         documents or  information  have  been  submitted  (whether  or  not
         material to the application and whether or not to  the  applicant's
         knowledge), or material facts have not been disclosed  in  relation
         to the application ... ."

18. Paragraph 320(7B), so far as relevant, is as follows:

          "320 (7B) Where the applicant has  previously  breached  the  UK's
         immigration laws (and was 18 or over at the time of his most recent
         breach) by: ...
         (d)  using Deception in an application for entry  clearance,  leave
         to enter or remain, ... (whether successful or not);
         unless the applicant: ...(iii) left the UK voluntarily, not at  the
         expense (directly or indirectly) of the Secretary  of  State,  more
         than 12 months ago;"

    Contrary to the statement in the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision,
    paragraph 320(7B)  was  inapplicable  to  this  application  for  entry
    clearance, both because the deception involved was  unintentional,  and
    because the appellant had left the United Kingdom in 2012  at  his  own
    expense, more than 12 months before his application.

19. Paragraph 320(18B) says this:


         "Grounds on which entry clearance or  leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom should normally be refused
         (18B) in the view of the Secretary of State:
         (a) the person's offending has caused serious harm; or
         (b) the person is a persistent  offender  who  shows  a  particular
         disregard for the law."

First-tier Tribunal decision

20. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant produced a  bundle  which
    included a witness statement  from  the  appellant  and  one  from  his
    partner; a copy of his indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom
    document; his academic qualification certificates  and  the  daughter's
    birth certificate; family photographs; a tenancy agreement dating  back
    to May 2007; Tesco bank statement and pay review letter.

21. The appellant's statement dated  4  July  2015  set  out  his  personal
    history in the United Kingdom, his studies in  criminology  at  Abertay
    University; his post-graduate degree in Information Technology; and the
    job he obtained as a Customer Service  Manager  for  Tesco  in  Dundee,
    where his new partner was working.  He had been in a relationship  with
    his partner for 7-8 years before 2010, when they  had  their  daughter.
    The partner had depression due to his absence.  His daughter  had  been
    registered with the surname [McO], which had made the Registrar  laugh.
    His son by his first  marriage  was  a  splendid  child,  of  whom  the
    appellant was very proud, who was now studying in Dundee University.

22. The appellant's parents were dead now: he had gone to Ghana  for  their
    final illnesses but his family was in the United  Kingdom  and  he  had
    nobody left in Ghana.  He  had  travelled  for  6  hours  to  make  his
    application, which had taken months to prepare carefully.  He could not
    return and reapply, but a gentleman  outside  the  Embassy  helped  him
    apply  online.   While  completing  the  form  online,  the  man  asked
    questions, but none about his  criminal  record,  which  surprised  the
    appellant.  However, he went ahead and submitted the form.  He had  the
    original forms available to show his lack of intention to deceive.

23. His partner could not join him in Ghana: she was too anxious to  travel
    on a plane and their continuing separation was a breach  of  Article  8
    ECHR.  The appellant had good job prospects,  both  with  Tesco's,  and
    failing that, in his previous work as a psychiatric nurse, or using his
    IT and customer  service  qualifications.   He  was  not  a  persistent
    offender with a particular disregard for  the  law:  on  the  contrary,
    despite some mistakes he had made in the past, he was a changed man who
    had studied, obtained qualifications, worked and founded  a  family  of
    his own in Scotland. He asked the Tribunal to have  mercy  on  him  and
    allow his appeal.

24. The First-tier Tribunal  had  before  it  a  letter  from  The  Erskine
    Practice, the partner's general  medical  practitioner,  recording  the
    stress being experienced by the appellant's partner as a result of  him
    being 'stuck in Ghana'.  She was started on anti-depressants, but  they
    were quickly stopped because of side effects.   She  was  having  panic
    attacks. The partner's statement confirmed that they are engaged to  be
    married, confirmed her mental health and anxiety problems, and how much
    she and the child missed him. She  was  working  full  time  and  other
    family members had stepped in to help care for the child, who was about
    to start primary school.  Her daughter needed both parents: the parties
    kept in touch electronically, but that was not enough, and she did  not
    wish to continue to rely on family members  for  child  care  when  her
    child had two parents who loved her and wanted to look after her.   The
    partner stated that it was her intention to be at the hearing but  that
    she had serious health problems and might be unable to do  so.  In  the
    event, the partner did not attend the hearing.

25. The First-tier Tribunal noted that the appellant did not dispute having
    omitted  his  previous  convictions  from  his  application  form   and
    therefore, that he had made a false representation  engaging  paragraph
    320(7A).  The Judge at paragraph 18 considered that  paragraph  320(7B)
    was not relevant since the respondent had not proved  to  the  required
    standard of balance of probabilities that the applicant  made  a  false
    statement deliberately for the purpose  of  securing  an  advantage  in
    immigration terms.

26. The dismissal of the appellant's  appeal  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    turns upon paragraph 320(7A) deception, in  that  the  application  the
    subject of the refusal letter omitted the appellant's previous criminal
    convictions. The First-tier Tribunal's decision thereon is set  out  at
    paragraph 17:

         "17. The appellant accepts that his  application  did  not  contain
         details of his previous convictions.  The fact that the response to
         questions 36 and  37  on  his  application  form  relating  to  his
         previous  record  states  'no'  is  a  false  representation  under
         paragraph 320(7A).  The appellant claims that the application  form
         was completed on his behalf by an  agent.   It  matters  not  under
         paragraph 320(7A) which applies whether  the  false  representation
         was made by the appellant  or  another  and  with  or  without  the
         appellant's  knowledge.   Refusal  under   paragraph   320(7A)   is
         therefore mandatory and the appeal has to fail on that ground".

    And at paragraph 22:

         "22. The appellant argues that the  decision  breaches  his  rights
         under Article 8.  He has not  however  made  an  application  under
         Article 8 family and private life which  is  now  provided  for  in
         Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  The decision under paragraph
         320(7A) does not apply to an application made on grounds of  family
         and private life under the Immigration Rules and the  appellant  is
         not prevented from making such an application.  I  have  considered
         the circumstances of the appellant, his partner and children in the
         United Kingdom which I find are adequately covered  under  Appendix
         FM of the Immigration Rules.  At this stage there are  no  arguably
         good reasons or exceptional circumstances to justify  consideration
         of Article 8 outside the Rules".

    The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

27. The Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal, summarising the  three
    relevant grounds as follows:

         "2.  The grounds requesting  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
             Tribunal argue that the judge erred in:

             (1)  making inconsistent findings as to deception on the  part
                  of the appellant, paragraphs 17 and 18;
             (2)  having found that the appellant meets the requirements of
                  long residence should have allowed the appeal;
             (3)  the consideration of Article 8 and Section 55, grounds 4,
                  5 and 6 in the application".

Rule 24 Reply

28. The respondent filed a Rule 24 Reply, in which she  contended  that  it
    had been open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that there was a false
    representation and an assertion of  incorrect  information.  The  Reply
    continued:

         "4.  The Judge was clearly alert to the family dynamics  -  see[4]-
         [9].  While there is no explicit reference to s.55,  the  appellant
         left the United Kingdom when [the child] was 2 years  of  age  [9],
         and [she] has been cared for in his absence  by  her  mother.   The
         child's mother has been the primary care giver  [and]  has  ensured
         that all her needs are being met.  The Judge did make findings that
         the appellant's family life were [sic] suitably cared  for  in  the
         Rules but that they were not met, nor was there  an  arguably  good
         reason to consider  it  outside  of  those  provisions  [22].   The
         appellant could make an application in the future,  disclosing  all
         requisite information. "

29. The respondent requested an oral hearing.

Upper Tribunal hearing

30. The appellant produced a bundle of documents  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,
    comprising those which were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  and  in
    addition, the application on the wrong form which he brought  with  him
    to the Embassy in Accra and intended to submit, which clearly disclosed
    his criminal history.

31. In submissions for the appellant, Ms Lanlehin accepted that  the  error
    in question had been made, but not that it amounted  to  paragraph  320
    Deception.  She relied on the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in  AA
    (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA  Civ
    773 at [74]-[76] in the judgment of Lord Justice Rix,  with  whom  Lord
    Justices Longmore and Jacob agreed, that  even  in  paragraph  320(7A),
    there is a requirement  of  an  intention  to  deceive,  such  that  an
    incorrect answer with no  such  intention  behind  does  not  entail  a
    mandatory refusal of entry clearance.

32. In addition,  Ms  Lanlehin  relied  on  Shen  (paper  appeals:  proving
    dishonesty) [2014] UKUT 236 (IAC), and on paragraphs (1) and (2) of the
    judicial headnote thereto:

         "(1) In terms of the approach that a tribunal should adopt  towards
         decisions  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  which  dishonesty  or
         deception is alleged against an applicant for leave to remain,  the
         starting point should be,  as  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Adedoyin
         (formerly AA (Nigeria) v SSHD) [2010] EWCA Civ 773 have made clear,
         that pursuant to  paragraph  322  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  the
         reference to "false" means "dishonestly" false.

         (2) Where an application form etc is false in a material way,  this
         may be relied on by the Secretary of State as prima facie  evidence
         establishing dishonesty. The inference of deliberate deception  can
         be strengthened by other facts: eg if a  criminal  conviction  (not
         disclosed in an application) occurred shortly before completion  of
         the application form. Here, the conviction must have been  high  in
         the applicant's mind and any explanation based on  oversight  would
         carry little weight. But it is  always  open  to  an  appellant  to
         proffer an innocent explanation and if  that  explanation  meets  a
         basic level of  plausibility,  the  burden  switches  back  to  the
         Secretary of State to answer that evidence. At the end of  the  day
         the Secretary of State bears the burden of proving dishonesty."

33. Mr Walker for the respondent accepted the  effect  of  AA  (Nigeria)  ,
    Adedoyin, and Shen but relied on the respondent's Rule 24  Reply.   The
    appellant had signed the incorrectly completed application  form  as  a
    true record, and had not produced the original  form  until  the  Upper
    Tribunal hearing.  The form now  produced  did  disclose  his  criminal
    history but the First-tier Tribunal had not erred in  law  or  fact  by
    failing to have  regard  to  materials  not  before  it.   The  witness
    statement from the appellant's partner  should  not  carry  significant
    weight as she had not attended to be cross-examined before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

34. He continued to argue that there was no material error of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.





Discussion

35. As regards ground (1),  there  is  no  apparent  inconsistency  in  the
    deception findings in paragraphs 17 and 18, which deal  with  different
    provisions of the Rules.  I find that the appellant made an  inaccurate
    statement, inadvertently, in his application, which  engaged  paragraph
    320(7A).  However, in the light of the decision of the Court of  Appeal
    in AA (Nigeria), reinforced by that of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Shen,
    there is a requirement even under rule 320(7A) for  the  respondent  to
    show that the error was made intentionally, that  is,  that  there  was
    intent to deceive.  The finding by the First-tier Tribunal at paragraph
    18 clearly is that 'the respondent  has  not  proved  to  the  required
    standard that the appellant himself deliberately used deception'.

36. In any event, paragraph 320(7B) would not  have  applied,  despite  the
    erroneous statement to the contrary in the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    refusal, because the applicant had left the United Kingdom voluntarily,
    not at public expense, and more than  12  months  before  applying  for
    entry clearance.  The effect of  that  error  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer is that the appellant has spent 4 years away  from  his  family
    instead of 2 years, time with his partner and child which can never  be
    recovered.

37. The Entry Clearance Officer also erred in finding that the  appellant's
    criminal history  was  that  of  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a
    particular disregard for the law: on the contrary,  there  were  a  few
    offences  dealt  with  in  2002  by  a  caution  and  two   conditional
    discharges; a driving offence in 2007, and a breach  of  the  peace  in
    2011.  None of these attracted a custodial sentence. Paragraph  32(18B)
    was not correctly applied to this application.

38. Ground (2), that the appellant meets the requirements of  paragraph  18
    of HC 395, the returning residence provision, because he had  not  been
    outside the United Kingdom for more than two years,  is  not  disputed.
    At paragraph 20 the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the respondent
    accepted that the appellant had proved  his  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom and at the date of decision had not  been  out  of  the  United
    Kingdom  for  two  years,  and  that  the  admission  sought  was   for
    settlement.

39. The failure by the Entry Clearance Officer and Entry Clearance  Manager
    to engage with Article 8 ECHR and section 55 is  also  a  concern.  The
    First-tier Tribunal failed to engage with Article 8 on the  basis  that
    the appellant should had made a separate  application  under  paragraph
    276ADE but if this application  had  been  correctly  considered,  that
    would not have been necessary.

40. In the result, the appellant has spent 2�  years  more  away  from  his
    partner and child than should have been the case.  He was  entitled  to
    have been granted entry clearance in January 2014, at which time he had
    been out of the United Kingdom for less than 2 years.  He has now  been
    out of the United Kingdom for over 4 years, but that is  by  reason  of
    the respondent's error  and  that  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    respondent has discretion under paragraph 19  of  the  Rules  to  grant
    entry clearance even if a person has been outside  the  United  Kingdom
    for longer than 4 years.

41. The respondent has not  discharged  the  burden  upon  her  of  showing
    intentional deception in  relation  to  this  appellant's  omission  to
    mention his criminal history.  The First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law,
    having regard to the decisions in AA (Nigeria) and Shen, in  concluding
    that the appeal fell  to  be  dismissed  under  paragraph  320(7A)  for
    Deception.

42. I set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  substitute  a
    decision allowing this appeal.

Consequential directions

43. I direct that entry clearance be granted forthwith.


     Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Date:        5 August 2016
              Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson
