



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                Appeal Number: OA/02631/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 24 June 2014                            |On 25 July 2014            |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before
                           DEPUTY JUDGE DRABU CBE

                                   Between
                               MRS FIAZ BEGUM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Representation:
   For the  appellant:       Mr  Z  Nasim  of  Counsel  instructed  by  Eden
   Solicitors
   For the Respondent: Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. She  was  born  on  1  January
    1940. She was refused entry clearance to come to the UK as  an  elderly
    dependant parent. Her appeal against the decision brought under Section
    82 of the nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  was  heard  by
    Judge M A Khan at Hatton Cross on 3 February 2014. In his determination
    promulgated on 13 February, the Judge gave his reasons  for  dismissing
    the appeal. The Judge upon analysing the oral and documentary  evidence
    produced before him concluded  that  she  did  not  qualify  under  the
    Immigration Rules - requirements of paragraphs EC-DR.1.1(d) E- ECDR 2.4
    (E.ECDR 2.5) and E-ECDR 3.1) Appendix FM of the Rules. The  Judge  also
    considered the claim under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  and  came  to  a
    conclusion adverse to the appellant.

 2. The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal by Judge Brunnen , a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 7 May
    2014.

   3. In his decision to grant permission Judge Brunnen said,  "The  grounds
      on which permission to appeal is sought submit that the judge erred in
      law  in  that  he  misunderstood  the  chronology  relating   to   the
      preparation of the medical evidence; made no adequate findings  as  to
      whether and to what extent the Appellant needed long -  term  personal
      care to perform everyday tasks; gave no adequate reasons  for  finding
      that the appellant's daughter was not willing to care for her; gave no
      adequate reasons for finding the evidence of the Appellant's witnesses
      to  be  exaggerated  and  inconsistent;  and  failed  to  analyse  the
      Appellant's Article 8 claim. These grounds are arguable" Judge Brunnen
      also  went  on  to  say,"  It  may  also  be  pointed  out  that   the
      Determination makes no  mention  of  the  evidential  requirements  in
      Appendix FM - SE paragraphs  34  and  35  elating  to  the  nature  of
      evidence required to satisfy Appendix FM E-ECDR 2.4 and E-ECDR 2.5."

   4. At the hearing I heard arguments from Mr Nasim for the  appellant  and
      Mr Jarvis for the respondent. Mr Nasim  argued  that  Judge  Khan  had
      considered the medical evidence under a misapprehension. He  had  also
      failed to give reasons for adverse credibility findings and lastly  he
      had not engaged with the appellant's claim under Article 8.  He  asked
      that the determination be set aside as being in material error of law.

   5. Mr Jarvis argued that the date of the medical report is  not  material
      or even relevant. The contents of the report do not suggest  that  the
      appellant cannot function without  assistance.  He  pointed  out  that
      Judge Khan had found as a fact that the sponsor in this case could not
      maintain the appellant and that finding had not been challenged in the
      grounds seeking permission and nor had permission been  granted  which
      could somehow allow the appellant at this late stage to argue that the
      finding of Judge Khan was  factually  unfounded  or  that  it  was  in
      material error of law. Mr Jarvis relied on the  judgement  in  A  A  O
      [2011] EWCA Civ 840 and drew my particular attention to  paragraph  49
      thereof. Mr Nasim had nothing further to say.

   6. I have looked at the determination of Judge Khan  with  care.  I  have
      exercised the same care in considering  the  assertions  made  in  the
      grounds advanced to seek permission to appeal. In Paragraph 42 of  the
      determination, Judge Khan states, "The sponsor was regularly overdrawn
      six months prior to the application. It may well be the case  that  he
      has been spending money on himself and that he has a  regular  income,
      he has to be able to demonstrate that he has the funds to  support  an
      elderly grandmother without recourse to public funds. With the  states
      (sic) of affairs with regard to his overdrawn  bank  account,  I  find
      that the sponsor is not in a position, willing and  able  to  maintain
      and accommodate the appellant without recourse to public funds."

   7. In respect of the grounds seeking permission to appeal I note that the
      grounds are quite lengthy in that they are spread over three pages  of
      typewritten material. Nowhere in these grounds is there a challenge to
      the finding made by Judge Khan regarding  the  sponsor's  ability  and
      willingness to maintain  the  appellant  without  recourse  to  public
      funds. This absence of challenge is fatal to this appeal as,  whatever
      be the merits of the grounds upon which permission has been granted, I
      cannot be satisfied that the decision of Judge Khan  was  in  material
      error of law.

   8. In the circumstances I do not find a material  error  of  law  in  the
      determination of Judge Khan and  hence  his  decision  dismissing  the
      appellant's appeal must stand.


ANONYMITY DIRECTION
None has been sought and circumstances of the case do not warrant such
direction.




Judge Drabu

Judge of the First Tier Tribunal sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper
Tribunal.
22 July 2014













