
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02569/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 November 2016                   |On 16 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            miss tanjira benjalux
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent/Claimant:    Mr M Sowerby, Counsel instructed by Wimal &
                           Co, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The claimant, Miss Benjalux,  is  a  citizen  of  Thailand  born  on  3
    December 1996.  She appeals against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department made on  22  December  2014  refusing  to
    grant her entry clearance for the purposes of settlement in the  United
    Kingdom with her father under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

2.   That appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingam  on  22  April
    2016.  Essentially the one live issue in the appeal was whether or  not
    her father, the sponsor, had sole  responsibility  for  her  upbringing
    under paragraph 297(i)(f).  It was not in issue  that  there  would  be
    suitable accommodation for her upon arrival in the United Kingdom.

3.   The Judge allowed the appeal both under the Immigration Rules and  also
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

4.   The Secretary of State has sought to appeal against  that  decision  on
    the basis that in terms of assessing "sole  responsibility"  the  Judge
    fell into error having regard to paragraphs 45 to  46  of  TD  (Yemen).
    Permission to appeal was granted and thus the matter comes before me to
    determine that issue.

5.   Mr Melvin, on behalf of the Secretary of State,  sought  to  amend  the
    grounds of challenge to include a challenge to the  approach  taken  by
    the Judge to Article 8.  Notification that such  amendment  was  to  be
    sought was set  out  a  written  application  for  permission  dated  3
    November 2016.

6.   I refused permission to amend such grounds.  Such grounds are late  and
    in any event in my view academic.  Were I to find an error  of  law  in
    the approach taken under the Immigration Rules it  would  of  necessity
    involve the evaluation of all matters and the judgment as a whole would
    be set aside.  If however I upheld the finding of the Judge in relation
    to the Immigration Rules then to a large extent the approach to Article
    8 of the ECHR is substantially irrelevant.

7.   The determination is, as I  so  find,  a  detailed  one  in  which  the
    evidence both of the sponsor (the claimant's father),  and  her  mother
    are considered.

8.   In general terms her mother and two sisters and herself lived  together
    at her father's house in Thailand.  There came a time however when  she
    left that home and went to live with her father's father.  On his death
    she then went to live with an uncle.  More recently she  has  lived  in
    separate accommodation.

9.   The Judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor's  stepfather  and  from
    the sponsor himself.  The Judge took notice of the interview which  was
    conducted with the mother.

10.  It was noted from  that  interview  in  particular,  that  it  was  the
    decision taken by the sponsor that the claimant should leave the family
    home and live with her grandfather.  Seemingly he was lonely and it was
    also the view of the sponsor that where the grandfather lived was  more
    suitable for the claimant's education.  It was also the decision of the
    sponsor following the death of the grandfather that the claimant should
    remain in the same area with her paternal uncle.  The Judge found  that
    the sponsor took the overriding decisions in  the  appellant's  welfare
    and  interest  and  continues  to   exercise   his   overall   parental
    responsibility in her best interests.  He took the  decisions  relating
    to her education.

11.  Significantly the Judge noted that the claimant's  mother  appeared  to
    have no role in these decisions, the sponsor reserving to  himself  the
    core decision making role on the claimant's  education,  interests  and
    wellbeing.

12.  The Judge considered the role of the mother and  that  is  set  out  in
    paragraph 36 of the determination.  She is a concerned,  caring  parent
    who remains in touch with the claimant although that direct contact  is
    irregular.  She is more involved in caring for her other  two  children
    and her ailing father.  The  conclusion  of  the  Judge  was  that  her
    evidence suggests that, aside of discussing general  matters  with  the
    claimant, the ultimate decisions affecting the  claimant's  educational
    development rest with the sponsor.  The Judge found  that  the  contact
    between the claimant and her mother was more social than otherwise  and
    that overall it was the sponsor who had the overall responsibility  for
    the claimant's upbringing.  Thus this led to the finding therefore that
    he had the sole responsibility as defined in TD  (paragraph  297(i)(e):
    "sole responsibility" (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 00049.  The Judge set out  a
    number of considerations as to what amounted to sole responsibility for
    the purposes of the Immigration Rules.

13.  Mr Melvin relies upon paragraphs 45 to 46 of TD  (Yemen)  which  adopts
    as the starting point that both parents share responsibility for  their
    child's upbringing:

         "In  order  to  conclude  that  the  UK-based  parent   had   'sole
         responsibility' for the child, it will be necessary  to  show  that
         the parent abroad had abdicated any responsibility  for  the  child
         and was merely acting on the direction of the UK-based  parent  who
         was otherwise totally uninvolved in the child's upbringing.

14.  It was submitted that on that basis the contact  with  the  mother  did
    not permit the interpretation of sole responsibility for  the  sponsor.
    However it is also necessary to consider paragraph 52 of  the  judgment
    which set out how a decision maker  should  approach  the  question  of
    "sole responsibility".

15.  The court stressed that it was a factual matter to be  decided  on  the
    evidence and was a practical one as  to  who  was  in  fact  exercising
    responsibility for the child.  The Court indicated that if both parents
    are said not to be involved in  the  child's  upbringing,  one  of  the
    indicators for that will be that the other has abandoned  or  abdicated
    his responsibility.  That however is merely an  indication  and  not  a
    requirement.   The  test  is  emphasised  that  whether  a  parent  has
    continuing control and direction of the  child's  upbringing  including
    making all important decisions in the child's life.

16.  It was the finding of the judge, after  careful  consideration  of  all
    the evidence, that the sponsor had that degree  of  responsibility  and
    that the mother's influence was very irregular and reduced.  Indeed  it
    was more social than the responsibility for controlling and  direction.



17.  Mr Melvin submits that  such  a  finding  was  not  only  unlawful  but
    perverse in the context of the evidence that was presented.  I  do  not
    agree.

18.  It was clear that throughout the Judge had in mind the proper  approach
    to sole responsibility and made sustainable findings of fact leading to
    the conclusion that the sponsor had sole responsibility.  I  detect  no
    error or illogicality in the reasoning that has been adopted.

19.  I therefore do not find there to be an error  of  law  in  the  finding
    made that the claimant's appeal succeeds under the Immigration Rules.

20.  In those circumstances the appeal by the Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department is dismissed.  The decision  of  Judge  Lingam  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 16 November 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge King TD

