
IAC-TH-LW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02975/2013
                                                               OA/02977/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29th October 2014                      |On 10th December 2014            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                           DESIGNATED JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Gana Prasad Rai (First appellant)
                         suna rai (Second appellant)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Jesurum, Counsel for Howe & Co Solicitors,
Brentford


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in these proceedings is the Secretary of  State,  however
    for convenience I shall now refer to the parties as  they  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellants are citizens of Nepal born on 30th August 1941 and  26th
    February 1950 respectively.  They appealed against the decision of  the
    Respondent dated  5th  December  2012  refusing  to  grant  them  entry
    clearance to settle in the United Kingdom as an ex-Ghurkha and his wife
    under the Immigration Directorate Instructions IDI Chapter  15  Section
    2A, Annex A.  Their appeals were  heard  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal R G Walters and dismissed in a  determination  promulgated  on
    16th May 2014.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    refused by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Landes on  2nd  July  2014.
    Permission was however granted by Judge of the Upper  Tribunal  Perkins
    on 16th September 2014.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed  the  appeal
    of the Appellants being a former Ghurkha and his wife on the basis that
    the Ghurkha had had two periods of military detention which  the  judge
    found amounted to adverse information  of  a  serious  nature  and  the
    Ghurkha had previously  attempted  to  register  his  daughter  with  a
    fraudulent date of birth.   The  grounds  state  that  the  Appellant's
    daughter was not a dependant on the application and no  false  date  of
    birth was put forward for her in it, so the application should  not  be
    refused under paragraph 320 as this referred only to a  failed  attempt
    to deceive that led to  nothing.   The  grounds  also  state  that  the
    reasons for the two periods of military detention  did  not  reach  the
    threshold of adverse information of a serious nature.  The  IDI  states
    that in cases where there is evidence of serious criminal activity  the
    normal threshold has to be met in order for the case to  be  considered
    for refusal of settlement ie a custodial sentence of  at  least  twelve
    months if the offence was committed in the UK or if  committed  outside
    the UK the offence would have been punishable by a  custodial  sentence
    of at least twelve months if it had occurred within the UK.

 4. This is an error of  law  hearing  and  I  shall  refer  to  the  First
    Appellant being the ex-Ghurkha, as "the Appellant" throughout.

The Hearing

 5. Counsel for the Appellant  submitted  that  this  is  not  an  ordinary
    application for settlement in the United Kingdom.  This application  is
    based on a clear policy and this policy imposes a threshold  which  has
    to be met.  He submitted that what has to be  decided  is  whether  the
    threshold was reached or not reached by the actions of the Appellant.

 6. Counsel submitted that he is not challenging the judge's findings.   He
    submitted that Ghurkhas are victims of historic injustice.  Until  1997
    they had no opportunity to apply for settlement in the  United  Kingdom
    and from 2004 until 2008 there was a restrictive policy about this.   I
    was referred to the case of Limbu & Others [2008]  EWHC  2261  (Admin).
    He submitted that all service  men  are  entitled  to  recognition  but
    Ghurkhas are in a separate category.  He submitted  that  in  the  said
    case of Limbu it is stated that ex-Ghurkhas can  apply  for  indefinite
    leave to enter the United Kingdom following their discharge  in  Nepal.
    He submitted that the service of the Ghurkhas exceeds the service of  a
    normal member of the forces and so is worthy  of  greater  weight.   He
    submitted that Ghurkhas made greater sacrifices and I was  referred  to
    the case of R (Purja & Others) v Ministry of Defence  [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    1345.  At paragraph 17 of that case it is explained that  Ghurkhas  had
    much more severe conditions attached  to  their  service  than  British
    soldiers.  He submitted  that  Ghurkhas  discharged  before  1997  were
    wronged and that is why the policy was put into place.  He referred  me
    to the IDI and the discretionary settlement criteria.  This  states  it
    is only where adverse information of a serious nature is received about
    the applicant, for example evidence of any serious  criminal  activity,
    that the application will normally be refused.  He submitted  that  the
    Appellant in this  case  is  eligible  for  settlement  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  He submitted therefore that this case turns on the  threshold
    which has to be met in order for a case to be considered for refusal of
    settlement.  He submitted that in this case that threshold has not been
    reached.  He submitted  that  there  is  a  presumption  in  favour  of
    admission to the United Kingdom and what  is  understood  is  that  any
    criminal activity which results in a custodial  sentence  of  at  least
    twelve months may be considered as adverse  information  of  a  serious
    nature.  He submitted that that is not the  case  here.   He  submitted
    that the threshold for admission to be refused has not been met.

 7. Counsel referred to the Appellant's  attempt  to  mislead  the  Records
    Office by giving an incorrect date  of  birth  for  his  daughter.   He
    submitted that this went no further.  No application was granted  based
    on this evidence.  He submitted that the Appellant's daughter is not  a
    party to this application.

 8. In this case the Appellant was detained on one occasion for 24 days and
    on one occasion for seven days.

 9. I was referred to paragraph 39 of the determination of Judge Walters in
    which it is stated that the Entry Clearance Officer  was  justified  in
    finding that these two periods of detention could be  seen  as  adverse
    information of a serious nature.  This paragraph refers  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer being of  the  view  that  if  he  were  to  exercise
    discretion in the Appellant's favour he would not be carrying  out  the
    intentions of the scheme and would bring the scheme into disrepute.  He
    submitted that the wrong test has been applied by the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer and the judge.  He submitted that the actions of the  Appellant
    and his punishment fall well short of what is required  by  the  policy
    under the definition, adverse information of a serious nature.

10. Counsel referred to paragraph 40 of  the  determination  in  which  the
    judge states that he  does  not  find  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
    reasoning to be sound.  He states that he does not agree that  the  two
    periods of military detention would have disqualified the Appellant  at
    the date of discharge of 20th August 1970, but he goes on to find  that
    the Appellant's attempt to fraudulently register his daughter's date of
    birth of 14th December 1993 is adverse information of a serious  nature
    and it justifies the Entry Clearance Officer's decision to  refuse  the
    Appellant's settlement.  He submitted that what has to be considered is
    whether this action of the Appellant would have led to  twelve  months'
    imprisonment in the United Kingdom.  He submitted  that  it  is  likely
    there might not have been any conviction or any  prosecution  for  this
    action and I was asked  to  look  at  the  nature  of  the  Appellant's
    service.  He served for over ten years from 21st October 1958  to  29th
    August 1970.  He was promoted to  Lance  Corporal  and  was  honourably
    discharged.  He served the Crown in conflict.  He submitted  that  this
    man should have been entitled  to  settlement  when  he  completed  his
    service, but because of the injustice done to Ghurkhas he did  not  get
    settlement.

11. He submitted therefore that the determination cannot be sustained.   He
    submitted that this is not a normal  case.   This  is  the  case  of  a
    Ghurkha and Ghurkhas were wronged.  He submitted that the judge has not
    given a proper explanation of why he  finds  the  Appellant  trying  to
    alter his daughter's date of birth brings his claim over the  threshold
    required for settlement not to be granted.

12. The Presenting  Officer  made  his  submissions  submitting  that  what
    Counsel appears to be saying is that whatever lies a Ghurkha tells  the
    authorities, because he is a Ghurkha that is acceptable and  he  should
    be granted settlement.

13. The Presenting Officer submitted that the Entry Clearance Officer found
    that the Appellant had deliberately misled the authorities for  a  gain
    for his family and he submitted that in the United Kingdom  this  could
    well have led to a twelve month sentence.  He submitted that this was a
    factual point taken by the Entry Clearance Officer and  upheld  by  the
    judge and there is therefore no reason for the determination to be  set
    aside.  He submitted that the judge gave his reasons for dismissing the
    appeal.  He  refers  to  discrepancies  in  the  Appellant's  interview
    relating to his first detention and also contradictions in his evidence
    about his daughter's date of birth.  He did not believe the Appellant's
    evidence that the Welfare Officer advised him to do this.  He submitted
    that the facts are not different to what was considered  by  the  Entry
    Clearance  Officer  and  the  judge.   The  Appellant  entered  into  a
    deliberate fraud and he submitted that the judge was  well  within  his
    discretion to find his fraud a serious matter.  He submitted that  this
    issue points directly to the character of the Appellant.  He  submitted
    that it is clearly in his character to deceive the authorities and that
    I should find that the judge was correct in his decision.  He submitted
    that Counsel cannot balance this against any injustice suffered by  the
    Ghurkhas.  The Appellant was a civilian when he  applied  and  military
    law does not apply.  He submitted that the judge's decision is correct.

14. The Appellant's representative submitted that he is not trying  to  say
    that lying is alright and that a Ghurkha can do whatever he likes,  but
    any lie given by the Ghurkha must take the matter over  the  threshold.
    He submitted that the judge finds the deception to be deliberate but he
    submitted that the deception was not sufficiently serious to  take  him
    over the threshold.  He submitted that for the fraudulent act it  would
    be difficult to say that the Appellant would  have  been  sentenced  to
    twelve months or more in prison.

15. He asked me to look at the word "only" in that the policy states it  is
    only where adverse information of a serious nature  is  received  about
    the applicant, for example evidence of any serious  criminal  activity,
    will the application normally be refused.  He asked me to look  at  the
    nature of the offence,  the  fact  that  the  attempt  to  defraud  was
    unsuccessful and the fact that there was no immediate  financial  gain.
    He submitted that the Appellant was awarded the General  Service  medal
    and he served in the conflict and he submitted that  all  these  issues
    have to be taken into account.  He again referred me to paragraph 40 of
    the determination in which the judge states that  the  Appellant  would
    not have been disqualified for the two periods of  military  detention,
    but he goes on to state that because  of  the  Appellant's  attempt  to
    fraudulently register his daughter's date of  birth  as  14th  December
    1993 thus justifies the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  to  refuse
    settlement.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  draw  logical
    conclusions from the evidence and that the  determination  should  have
    been overturned.

Determination

16. The determination makes it clear that the judge was aware  of  all  the
    facts of the  case.   He  used  the  correct  standard  of  proof.   At
    paragraph 19 the judge finds that the Entry Clearance Officer  did  not
    properly exercise his discretion when he  found  that  the  Appellant's
    behaviour, while in  service  amounted  to  adverse  information  of  a
    serious nature.  He gives reasons for this finding.

17. He then goes on to deal with the false details given by  the  Appellant
    so that his daughter would be  seen  as  a  minor  dependant  and  thus
    eligible for settlement in the UK.  At paragraph 25 he  refers  to  the
    comment made by the official in charge of the "kindred  roll"  and  the
    appellant's request for registration of his daughter Santoshi, (date of
    birth 14th December 1993) which was rejected due to  the  lack  of  the
    verification of the gap period and her NPP.  He goes on to refer to the
    telephone call between the Entry Clearance Officer and the Appellant in
    which the appellant admits that he gave  a  false  date  of  birth  for
    Santoshi and states "I thought I was doing what would help her to get a
    United Kingdom visa, but I was scolded by the Ghurkha  officer  telling
    me it is wrong and I withdrew the request".  In  the  Visa  Application
    Form Santoshi Rai's current date of birth is given as 11th June 1981.

18. The judge then refers to his witness statement and the contradiction in
    his previous evidence compared to this  statement.   The  judge  states
    that the Appellant suggests that it was the Welfare Office who  advised
    his wife to fraudulently alter Santoshi's date of birth so she would be
    eligible  for  UK  settlement  but  the  judge  does  not  accept   the
    Appellant's  evidence  about  what  occurred   during   the   telephone
    interview.  At interview the appellant admitted  that  it  was  he  who
    sought to register Santoshi with a  different  date  of  birth,  twelve
    years  younger  than  she  actually  is.   The  judge  finds  that  the
    Appellant's attempt to register Santoshi with a false date of birth was
    clearly an act preparatory to obtaining settlement for her in  the  UK.
    He states "Obviously the First Appellant must have taken the view  that
    this would not succeed as he had been 'scolded' by the Ghurkha  officer
    telling him it's wrong".  The judge weighed this up  and  decided  that
    this evidence is adverse information of a serious nature.

19. The judge finds that the Entry Clearance Officer  was  right  to  state
    that this conduct falls well short  of  the  standards  envisaged  when
    referring to the unique nature of the service given by the  Brigade  of
    Ghurkhas.  He refers to the Entry Clearance Officer stating that if  he
    were to exercise discretion in the  Appellant's  favour  it  would  not
    carry out the intentions of the scheme and if he  exercised  discretion
    in the First  Appellant's  favour  he  would  "bring  the  scheme  into
    disrepute".  The judge clearly has in his  mind  that  the  scheme  was
    designed to right a historical wrong, but although he would  have  been
    prepared to allow the appeal in spite of  the  military  detentions  he
    finds that because of this Appellant's attempt to fraudulently register
    his daughter Santoshi with a date of birth of 14th  December  1993,  on
    the kindred roll, this is adverse information of a serious nature which
    justifies  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  to  refuse   the
    Appellant's settlement.

20. The judge has clearly considered all the evidence before  him  and  has
    explained why and how he came to his decision.  It is  not  known  what
    sentence would have been conferred on the Appellant had  he  made  this
    fraudulent attempt but the judge found that it  could  be  as  much  as
    twelve months in prison.

21. The judge has reasoned his decision properly and there is no  error  of
    law.  He in fact finds that to allow this appeal would be  against  the
    intentions of the scheme and the exercise  in  the  Appellant's  favour
    would bring the scheme into disrepute.

Notice of Decision

22. There is no error of law in the judge's determination.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed        Date 29th October 2014


Judge Murray
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

