
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02894/2013
     OA/02896/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 August 2014                             |On 01 September 2014         |
|Prepared 22 August 2014                       |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                       hamza shabbir (First appellant)
                      Faisal Shabbir (second appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr H Sarwar, of Counsel instructed by Messrs Marks &
                  Marks Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Pakistan.  The first,  Hamza,  was  born
    on 8 March 1996 and the second, Faisal, was born on  24  January  1995.
    They appeal against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Mayall who in a determination promulgated on 10  April  2014  dismissed
    their  appeals  against  decisions  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
    Islamabad made on 12 December 2012 to refuse them  entry  clearance  as
    the child of a parent present and settled in Britain.   They  have  the
    same mother, Saima but while Hamza is the son of the sponsor Faisal  is
    not.

2.   The decisions stated it was not accepted  that  the  sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility for them and they were therefore refused under paragraph
    297(i)(e) of HC 395.

3.   The appellants had made previous applications which  had  been  refused
    in November 2010.  Their appeals had been considered by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Lingard who in a determination  promulgated  on  22
    August 2011 had dismissed their appeals.  Judge Lingard had  considered
    evidence from the sponsor and set out her findings and  conclusions  in
    paragraph 42 onwards of the determination.  She found that the  sponsor
    had not  proved  that  he  was  settled  in  Britain  at  the  date  of
    application and moreover she questioned the nature of the  relationship
    between  the  appellants  and  the  sponsor.   She   stated   that   no
    satisfactory explanation had been put forward about the  delay  between
    the appellants' births and the registration of their births  in  August
    2009 and stated that she was bound to give at least some weight to  the
    well-documented  ease  with  which  forged  or  fraudulently   obtained
    documents could be  obtained  within  Pakistan.   She  noted  that  the
    sponsor had stated that he had left before the  younger  appellant  was
    born in March 1996 and had not returned to Pakistan  until  2006.   She
    went on to say that there was no  evidence  as  to  the  situation  and
    circumstances of the appellant's mother who  it  was  intended  was  to
    remain in Pakistan.  She found that the  sponsor's  evidence  had  been
    inconsistent concerning where his wife in  Pakistan  had  been  living,
    noted there was  no  satisfactory  evidence  to  show  money  had  been
    transferred to Pakistan  and  concluded  that  there  was  insufficient
    evidence of maintenance and  accommodation  available.   She  therefore
    dismissed the appeals on immigration grounds and made the comment  that
    there was no realistic prospects of the appellants succeeding in  their
    respective appeals on the basis of Article 8 argument.

4.   In his determination Judge Mayall noted that although  there  had  been
    no DNA evidence before Judge Lingard at the appeal there  had  in  fact
    been DNA evidence in existence as there were results dated January 2011
    as well as further DNA results dated October 2011.  He considered  that
    the sponsor had been less than  frank  in  his  evidence  before  Judge
    Lingard who recorded that there was no DNA  evidence  before  her.   He
    noted that Judge Lingard had questioned the issue of  the  registration
    of the birth certificates.

5.   In paragraph 12 he stated:-

         "Both representatives agreed that the issues for  me  were  whether
         the sponsor had  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  children  and
         whether, in any event, Faisal could succeed despite not  being  the
         biological son of the sponsor."

6.   He then set out  in  very  considerable  detail  the  evidence  of  the
    sponsor before setting out his assessment of the evidence in  paragraph
    61 onwards.  He did not find the  sponsor  to  be  credible  or  honest
    pointing to the fact  that  the  sponsor  had  said  that  he  was  the
    biological father of both boys despite the fact that DNA  evidence  had
    already  been  obtained  showing  that  that  was  not  the  case.   In
    particular he did not believe the sponsor's statement that despite  his
    solicitors having had the results since January 2011 he  had  not  been
    aware of them until September that year.  He went on to state  that  he
    placed weight on the fact that the sponsor had claimed that he had  not
    seen the boys for ten years and had never seen the younger child before
    he returned to Pakistan in 2006 and said that he did  not  accept  that
    the sponsor's evidence as to when his wife had remained in  the  family
    home and the boys and the grandfather who had been living  there  moved
    out nor his evidence that his wife had gone to live with her  father  -
    the sponsor's uncle - although he had earlier denied they had any uncle
    still alive.  The judge e stated that he could not place weight  on  an
    affidavit from the children's mother nor did he  accept  her  assertion
    that during the period she had been living with  the  sponsor's  father
    the  sponsor  had  taken  all  general  decisions  including  decisions
    relating to which college the appellants would attend.

7.   The sponsor had also said that his wife continued to deny that  he  was
    not the father of the appellants but that was not a matter that she had
    referred to in her affidavit.  The sponsor  had  appeared  to  indicate
    that his father was dead but that was not referred to in  the  mother's
    affidavit.

8.   In paragraph 69 he stated:-

         "Judge Lingard was not satisfied as to the explanation  as  to  why
         the birth certificates had only been produced at such a late stage.
          No further evidence in that respect has been adduced."

9.   Although he accepted the grandfather died he stated that was  a  "post-
    decision fact".  He went on to say that he accepted  that  the  sponsor
    was the biological father of Hamza and that both boys had been  brought
    up together and that the sponsor had a relationship with both boys.  He
    stated that he accepted that the sponsor and his  current  partner  had
    visited on many occasions.  However that was the only evidence which he
    accepted.  He went on to say in paragraph 73 of the determination:-

         "I am satisfied that I have not been given an accurate  picture  of
         the circumstances in which these boys were living  in  Pakistan  at
         the date of the decision.  It seems to me extremely  likely  indeed
         that the responsibility for the boys' upbringing was shared between
         the mother, grandfather and sponsor.  What I am sure  of,  however,
         is that the appellants have not satisfied me,  on  the  balance  of
         probabilities, that the sponsor had sole responsibility."

     He therefore found that the appellants had not met the requirements  of
    the Rules.

10.  In paragraph 75 he went on to say:-

         "It was no seriously suggested that, were I to make  this  finding,
         the appeals could succeed on the basis of Article  8.   Given  that
         they are boys who have lived all of  their  life  in  Pakistan  and
         their mother lives in Pakistan I find, like  Judge  Lingard  before
         me,  that  there  is  no  realistic  prospect  of  the   appellants
         succeeding on the basis of Article 8."

     He therefore also dismissed the appeals on Article 8 grounds.

11.  The grounds  of  appeal  assert  that  the  judge  had  gone  behind  a
    concession which was that  the  only  issues  in  the  case  were  sole
    responsibility and Article 8 and  that  other  matters  raised  in  the
    previous hearing were no longer in  contention  and  further  that  the
    judge had erred in his consideration of the Article  8  rights  of  the
    appellants alleging that  this  was  not  a  case  where  there  was  a
    precarious family life and that  there  was  established  jurisprudence
    that there might be an infringement of an individual's Article 8 rights
    notwithstanding that family members are present in another country.  It
    was stated there was no proper analysis of  the  Article  8  rights  of
    these appellants.  Moreover it was argued that it was not reasonable to
    expect the sponsor to go to live with the appellants in Pakistan.

12.  At the hearing before me  Mr  Sarwar  first  argued  that  although  no
    concession had been recorded what Judge Mayall had written in paragraph
    12 was correct and therefore the judge should not have gone on to  make
    the comments  which  he  made  in  paragraph  69  regarding  the  birth
    certificates.  That he argued formed part  of  the  assessment  of  the
    credibility of the sponsor and that was not a matter on which the judge
    had been entitled to rely.  Mr Sarwar  was  unable  obviously  to  give
    evidence on this point as he had been  the  appellants'  representative
    before Judge Mayall but he stated that this point has been noted in the
    skeleton argument which he had put before me.   He  argued  that  where
    there has been a concession the judge should not go behind it.

13.  I find that there is no merit whatsoever in that argument: the  reality
    is that Judge Mayall in paragraph 12 correctly stated what  the  issues
    were before him.  He considered the evidence and part of that evidence,
    although it appears not to be a factor on which he relied,  related  to
    the late production of the birth certificates.  I do not consider  that
    he went behind any concession.  The issue of the birth certificates was
    peripheral to that of sole responsibility and the  judge  who  properly
    referred to the determination of the  Tribunal  in  TD  (Yemen)  [2006]
    UKAIT 00049 properly applied the law to the facts and gave  very  clear
    and cogent reasons for finding that he could not find that the  sponsor
    was credible - not least because the sponsor had not told Judge Lingard
    that he was already aware that there was DNA evidence which showed that
    Faisal was not his son.

14.  Mr Sarwar went on to argue there was  clear  established  jurisprudence
    that notwithstanding that the parties had not lived together there  was
    a potential for family life which should be respected.  Moreover  there
    should have been a clear analysis of the family life which should  have
    been approached in the appropriate structured way.

15.  Again I find that there is no merit in  that  submission.   This  is  a
    case where these appellants were born in Pakistan at a  time  when  the
    first appellant was aged around 1 and his half-brother (who, of course,
    is not a child of the sponsor) was not yet born.  The sponsor  did  not
    see them for ten years and although it was accepted that he had  shared
    responsibility for their upbringing their  whole  lives  have  been  in
    Pakistan and they are now adults and indeed were 16  and  17  when  the
    applications were made.  It  is  difficult  to  see  how  the  decision
    interferes with their family life with the sponsor  but  even  if  that
    were accepted the reality is that the interference  would  be  entirely
    proportionate given that the sponsor has not  had  sole  responsibility
    for them and their age and the fact that  they  have  lived  all  their
    lives in Pakistan and only met the sponsor on  occasions  when  he  has
    visited in Pakistan.  Moreover their mother is in Pakistan.   For  them
    to come to Britain now would break their family life  with  the  mother
    with whom they have lived since birth.  There could be no way in  which
    a judge could have found  that  the  decision  was  a  disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's family lives.

16.  I therefore find that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal.   His  decision
    shall therefore stand and these appeals are dismissed.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

