
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/02869/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8th December 2015                 |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Biswas Pun
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Staunton,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, NC Brothers & Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Respondent is a national of Nepal born on the 8th July  1983.  On
       the 28th May 2015 Judge Andrews of the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed
       his appeal, on human rights grounds, against a decision to refuse  to
       grant him entry clearance as an adult dependent relative.  The  Entry
       Clearance  Officer  now  has  permission  to  appeal   against   that
       decision[1].

    2. The basis of the  Respondent's  claim  is  set  out  in  his  witness
       statement dated 3rd November 2014.  He wishes to come to live in  the
       UK with his father, Mr Tikajit Pun, an ex-Gurkha  who  has  now  been
       granted British citizenship.  Tikajit Pun came to live in the  UK  in
       2006 after being granted Indefinite Leave to  Enter.  The  Respondent
       and his mother applied to come to settle with him, but were  refused.
       The family were without funds to pursue an appeal.  The  Respondent's
       mother was subsequently granted leave to enter and came here to  join
       her husband in 2008. The Respondent states that since his mother left
       Nepal he has been suffering from depression and has  had  to  receive
       hospital treatment in respect of his mental health.  His parents, and
       sometimes friends, contribute to paying for his medical  bills.   The
       Respondent has always been financially dependent on  his  father  and
       until his mother came to the UK, had never lived alone. He has  never
       worked  or  been  independent  of  his  parents.    When  his  mother
       discovered that he was suffering from mental illness she returned  to
       Nepal to be with him.  She continues to look after him.

    3. The Entry Clearance Officer noted that the  Respondent  was,  at  the
       date of the application, 30 years old. He had not  demonstrated  that
       he could meet the requirements of the Rules as set  out  in  Appendix
       FM; nor had he shown there  to  be  exceptional  circumstances  which
       would justify his admission on Article 8 grounds.

    4. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal  Mr  Tikajit  Pun
       attended to give oral evidence.  It does not appear that his evidence
       was materially challenged by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  the
       determination proceeds on the basis that it is true.  The  First-tier
       Tribunal finds

        a) That there continues to be a family life between the  Respondent
           and his mother, and he remains financially  dependent  upon  his
           father. That dependency is in part because of his illness and in
           part because this is the 'cultural norm' in Nepal;

        b) There is a family life between the Respondent's parents;

        c) The only reason that she is in Nepal, rather than in the  United
           Kingdom  with  her  husband,  is  because  of  the  Respondent's
           illness;

        d) Apart from his mother the Respondent has no relatives to whom he
           can turn in Nepal;

        e) In the circumstances the decision is not proportionate.

       The appeal is allowed on Article 8 grounds.

       Error of Law

    5. The Entry Clearance Officer  now  complains,  in  essence,  that  the
       determination did not contain a complete Article 8 assessment.

    6. It is a complaint with justification.  Although I find  that  it  was
       open to the Tribunal to find that  this  31  year  old  man  remained
       dependent on his parents due to a combination of social, personal and
       economic factors, this determination does not  contain  even  passing
       reference to the public interest or to Part  5  of  the  Nationality,
       Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.    Paragraph  21  reads:  "I  am
       satisfied that there is more than the usual  emotional  ties  between
       the Appellant, the sponsor and the Appellant's mother  and  as  such,
       they enjoy a family life together. Given this I am satisfied that  on
       the  facts  of  this  case  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  is  a
       disproportionate one". The Tribunal has here failed to give  reasons.
       The finding that there is a family life does not  make  the  decision
       disproportionate.

    7.  I  am  satisfied  that  the  proportionality  assessment   in   this
       determination is incomplete.  The  findings  of  fact  are  otherwise
       preserved.

       The Re-Making

    8. For the avoidance of doubt I find that there is a family life between
       the Respondent and his parents. He has produced some medical evidence
       of mental illness and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  for
       cultural, social and economic reasons he remained  heavily  dependent
       on both his mother and father, albeit both performing different roles
       in his life.

    9. I am satisfied that the decision to refuse entry clearance is capable
       of  engaging  Article  8  in  that  it  was  result  in  an   ongoing
       interference with, or lack of respect for,  the  Respondent's  family
       life with his parents, and they with each other.

   10. The decision is taken in pursuit of the legitimate  policy  objective
       of protection of the economy and it is one that was lawfully open  to
       the Entry Clearance Officer to take.

   11. I now address proportionality.

   12. In his submissions Mr Howells  relied  squarely  on  the  'historical
       injustice' suffered by Gurkha servicemen who were  not  permitted  to
       settle in the United Kingdom upon discharge from  the  British  Army.
       He relied on the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in  Gurung  [2013]
       EWCA Civ 8 and that of the Upper Tribunal in Ghising  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:
       historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT  00567  (IAC),  the  headnote  of
       which reads:

         (1)      In finding that the weight to be accorded to the  historic
         wrong in Ghurkha ex-servicemen cases was not to be regarded as less
         than that to be accorded the historic  wrong  suffered  by  British
         Overseas citizens, the Court of Appeal in Gurung and others  [2013]
         EWCA Civ 8 did not hold that, in either Gurkha or  BOC  cases,  the
         effect of the historic wrong is to reverse or otherwise  alter  the
         burden  of  proof  that  applies  in  Article   8   proportionality
         assessments.

         (2)      When an Appellant has shown that there  is  family/private
         life and  the  decision  made  by  the  Respondent  amounts  to  an
         interference with it, the burden lies with the Respondent  to  show
         that a decision to remove  is  proportionate  (although  Appellants
         will, in practice, bear the  responsibility  of  adducing  evidence
         that lies within their remit and about which the Respondent may  be
         unaware).

         (3)      What concerned the Court in Gurung and others was not  the
         burden  of  proof  but,  rather,  the  issue   of   weight   in   a
         proportionality assessment. The Court held that, as in the case  of
         BOCs, the historic wrong suffered by Gurkha ex-servicemen should be
         given substantial weight.

         (4)      Accordingly, where it is found that Article 8  is  engaged
         and, but for the historic wrong,  the  Appellant  would  have  been
         settled in the UK long ago,  this  will  ordinarily  determine  the
         outcome  of  the  Article  8  proportionality  assessment   in   an
         Appellant's favour, where the matters relied on by the Secretary of
         State/  entry  clearance  officer  consist  solely  of  the  public
         interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.

         (5)      It can therefore be seen that Appellants  in  Gurkha  (and
         BOC) cases will not necessarily  succeed,  even  though  (i)  their
         family life engages Article 8(1); and (ii) the evidence shows  they
         would have come to the United Kingdom with their  father,  but  for
         the injustice that prevented the latter from settling here earlier.
          If the Respondent can point to matters over and above  the  public
         interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy, which  argue  in
         favour of removal or the refusal of leave to enter,  these  matters
         must be given appropriate weight in the balance in the Respondent's
         favour. Thus, a bad immigration history and/or  criminal  behaviour
         may still be sufficient to outweigh the powerful factors bearing on
         the Appellant's side of the balance.

   13. Mr Howells referred me to the witness statement of Mr Pun wherein  he
       confirms that he was discharged from the British Army  in  1991  when
       his son was only eight years old. Mr Pun avers that had he been  able
       to do so, he would have come to live in the United Kingdom then,  and
       brought his wife and son with him. That this is so is demonstrated by
       the fact that as soon as he was granted indefinite leave to enter  he
       did so, and sought permission for his wife and son to join him  here.
       The  Respondent  was  a  minor  at  the  time  that  his  father  was
       discharged, and I am satisfied that Mr Pun would have brought him  to
       the UK with him.

   14. Mr Staunton relied on the Notice  of  Refusal  and  made  no  further
       submissions.

   15. The ECO took the view that the applicant, as he  then  was,  had  not
       demonstrated that his  father  would  have  availed  himself  of  the
       opportunity to settle in the UK upon discharge  from  the  Army,  had
       that opportunity been available  to  him.  I  am  satisfied,  on  the
       evidence before me, that this has been shown. Mr  Pun  has  sworn  an
       unchallenged witness statement to that effect,  and  as  Mr  Staunton
       rightly states, illustrated his desire to move to the UK as  soon  as
       he was able to do so by getting on a plane.  I am satisfied that  but
       for the historic wrong, the Respondent would have been  settled  here
       as a child.  As Gurung and Ghising [2013] note, this will  ordinarily
       be  sufficient  to  outweigh  the  public  interest  in   maintaining
       immigration control.   Mr Staunton did not seek to persuade  me  that
       there was any countervailing  factor,  such  as  a  poor  immigration
       history or criminality, that would  be  capable  of  displacing  that
       presumption.  For those reasons the appeal must be allowed.

       Decisions

   16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law
       and it is set aside.

   17. I re-make the decision by allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

   18. I was not asked to make an anonymity direction and on the facts I see
       no reason to do so.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           8th December 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 20th August 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Ransley

