
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: oa/02188/2013
                                                               oa/02190/2013
                                                               oa/02195/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th January 2015                          |On 12th January 2015          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                               (1) mr H Diallo
                               (2) MR m Diallo
                              (3) mISS a DIALLO
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, accra
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Dinh  (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (HOPO)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Lobo promulgated on 30th September 2014, following a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 4th September 2014.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeals of Mr H Diallo, Mr M Diallo,  and  Miss  A  Diallo.
    The Respondent, Entry Clearance Officer, applied for, and was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are all citizens of  Guinea,  they  were  born  on  20th
    September 1995, 1st April 1995 and 1st March 1996  respectively.   They
    appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  27th  November
    2012 refusing them leave to enter the United Kingdom as  the  relatives
    of a person present and settled in this country under paragraph 297  of
    HC 395 (as amended).

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants' claim is that they are the siblings of their sponsoring
    brother, Mr Fido Diallo, who is a British citizen, who had entered  the
    UK and applied for asylum, and had subsequently been granted indefinite
    leave to remain on legacy grounds.   When subsequently the Sponsor,  Mr
    Fido Diallo, discovered that his siblings were still alive  in  Guinea,
    he assumed responsibility for them through  the  Savane  brothers,  and
    sent them  monies  and  arranged  for  their  schooling,  and  was  now
    sponsoring their entry to the UK to join him here.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge considered paragraph 297 of HC 395 and focused on  the  "sole
    responsibility" test.  Under a heading "conclusions" the judge observes
    (at paragraph 21) that:

         "Their parents are dead, they have a relative who is settled in the
         United Kingdom who they wish to join.  That relative has  had  sole
         responsibility for their upbringing and in any event  for  them  to
         remain in Guinea would  be  dangerous  as  there  are  serious  and
         compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  makes   their
         exclusion undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made  for
         their care in the United Kingdom" (paragraph 21).

    The judge went on  separately  to  consider  also  the  requirement  of
    "compelling circumstances" and observed that:

         "Because their lives are in danger, as  evidenced  by  the  letters
         from  the  Savane  brothers,  I  find  that  there  are  compelling
         circumstances, not sufficiently recognised under  the  Rules  which
         enable consideration of the Article 8 rights of the Appellant to be
         considered under Razgar" (paragraph 23).

    The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law in finding
    that the Appellants could succeed under the "sole responsibility"  test
    or that they could succeed because there were "serious  and  compelling
    considerations", or that they could succeed under  Article  8,  because
    insufficient findings had been made  with  respect  to  each  of  these
    matters. On 14th  November 2014, permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 6. At the hearing before me on 6th December 2015, Mr Tufan,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent, Entry Clearance Officer, had two  fundamental
    submissions to make.  First, that paragraph 297 had been  misunderstood
    by the judge.  This was because if one looks at  paragraph  297  (which
    appears at page 785 of Phelan &  Gillespie),  it  is  clear  that  only
    paragraphs 297(1)(a) to (c) deal with the situation where the parent is
    the person being joined in the United Kingdom by the  children.   This,
    however, was a case where it was not the parent who was settled in  the
    UK.  This was a case  where  it  was  a  "relative".   In  that  event,
    paragraph 297(1), paragraph (f) refers to:

         "One parent or a relative is present  and  settled  it  the  United
         Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for  settlement  and
         there are serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations
         which make exclusion of the child undesirable ....".

 7. There was no reference in this provision to the  requirement  of  "sole
    responsibility".  The only reference here was to there  being  "serious
    and compelling family or other considerations".  Even if the judge  had
    allowed the appeal also on the  basis  that  there  were  "serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations" he had failed to demonstrate
    in the determination how this was the case.

 8. Second, the refusal letter referred to the  absence  of  evidence  with
    respect to maintenance and accommodation.  The judge did not deal  with
    these two aspects at all.  One reason  for  the  judge's  failure  here
    could be that the core bundle only refers to page 1, and  then  page  3
    without any reference  to  page  2.   The  intervening  page  has  been
    remitted from the copying of the bundle.

 9. On his part, Mr Dinh submitted that he would have to concede the  judge
    did not deal with  the  maintenance  and  accommodation  basis  of  the
    refusal by the Entry Clearance Officer.  The failure here was  of  such
    magnitude that the only proper course of action was for  this  Tribunal
    to made a finding of an error of law, and then to remit the matter back
    to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined again.  Second,  the  judge
    had allowed the appeal  specifically  on  the  basis  that  there  were
    "serious and compelling family or other considerations which make their
    exclusion undesirable" (para. 21).

10. The judge had then explained why this was the case because he had  said
    that, "because their lives are in danger, as evidenced by  the  letters
    from  the  Savane  brothers,  I  find   that   there   are   compelling
    circumstances not sufficiently recognised under the Rules which  enable
    consideration of Article 8 rights ..." (paragraph 23).  If  it  is  the
    case that no separate consideration was  given  to  how  there  was  in
    existence here "serious and compelling family or other considerations",
    then the matter should be remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    again for this to be properly determined.

11. Third, and in any event, findings with respect to all these matters are
    essential because they go to  the  determination  of  the  question  of
    whether the Appellants' Article 8 rights were infringed, a matter which
    the judge considered, but which was inevitably flawed given the lack of
    proper findings on the initial matters.  Mr  Dinh  submitted  that  the
    proper course of action was for this matter  to  be  remitted  back  to
    another judge in the First-tier Tribunal.

12. In reply, Mr Tufan submitted that  evidence had not been placed  before
    the judge on the core aspects, so the proper course of action  was  for
    this appeal to be dismissed.

Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of  law  (see  Section  12)  of  TCEA
    (2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  First, the judge had
    wrongly  placed   emphasis   on   the   satisfaction   of   the   "sole
    responsibility" test when this was not an issue.

14. Second, there are no clear findings on why this appeal could be allowed
    on the basis that there are "serious and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations" save for the judge to say that "because their lives are
    in danger, as evidenced  by  the  letters  from  the  Savane  brothers"
    (paragraph 23).

15. Third, the determination of these questions  directly  feeds  into  the
    determination of  Article  8  infringements  by  the  Respondent  Entry
    Clearance Officer, which issue cannot in itself be properly determined,
    without an initial priori determination.

16. I am satisfied that the errors are such that the only proper course  of
    action is for this  matter  to  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under practice statement 7.2, to  be  determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Lobo, notwithstanding the fact that in other  respects
    the determination by the judge had been a  well-crafted  determination,
    for these matters to be determined afresh.

Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  This matter is remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Taylor House, where it will be heard on 11th June 2015 over
    a period of one and a half hours.  I direct that all necessary evidence
    must be filed three weeks before the date of the hearing on 11th  June.
    Such evidence should include  any  necessary  witness  statements,  and
    supporting evidence, together with her skeleton argument from the legal
    representative on  behalf  of  the  Appellants.   This  appeal  by  the
    Respondent Entry Clearance Officer is allowed to the extent that it  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. No anonymity order is made.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                        12th January 2015

