
[pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02752/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2015                      |On 15 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISTANBUL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     sA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Brooksbank, agent Solicitor for YICS
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, SA, was born in 1996 and  is  a  citizen  of  Iran.   He
    sought to enter the United Kingdom for settlement as the child  of  his
    mother (hereafter referred to as the sponsor) who is a British citizen.
     His application was refused by the decision  dated  26  November  2013
    (reviewed by the Entry Clearance Manager on  8  September  2014).   The
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Atkinson) which, in a decision
    promulgated  on  21  January  2015,  allowed  the  appeal   under   the
    Immigration Rules (paragraph  297(f)).   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    Istanbul now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.  I  shall
    hereafter refer to the appellant as the respondent and  the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).

 2. The sponsor was born in Iran and married in 1992.  She had two children
    by that marriage.  She  and  her  husband  divorced  in  2002  and  the
    appellant's father obtained custody of both children.  The sponsor  had
    contact with the children at lunch times between Thursday  evening  and
    Friday evening each week.  The sponsor travelled to the United  Kingdom
    in 2006 and claimed asylum.  Her application was  never  considered  by
    the respondent but she  was  eventually  granted  indefinite  leave  to
    remain under the "legacy" programme in  October  2010.   She  became  a
    British citizen in 2011.  There is a Power of Attorney dated 4  January
    2014 (registered 4 February 2014) together with a  translation  in  the
    bundle of papers produced by the  appellant.   Judge  Atkinson  records
    that  the  "appellant's  father  granted  the  sponsor   a   right   of
    guardianship and ancillary powers in relation to the  appellant."   The
    appellant is now aged 19 years.

 3. The judge in the First-tier Tribunal found in favour of  the  appellant
    in respect of maintenance and accommodation.  Those  findings  are  not
    challenged by the Entry Clearance Officer.  However,  the  judge  found
    [23] that the sponsor, notwithstanding the guardianship agreement  "via
    a Power of Attorney" had not exercised sole responsibility  as  regards
    the appellant's upbringing.  Sole responsibility had  remained  in  the
    hands of the husband.  The appellant has not challenged that finding.

 4. The judge went on to  consider  paragraph  297(i)(f)  ("...  There  are
    serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  make
    exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable arrangements have  been
    made for the child's care.").  He noted that the

         "... appellant had been placed in the custody of his father at  the
         age of 6 following his parent's divorce albeit  with  some  contact
         arrangements with his mother.  He has been brought  up  within  his
         father's household and has limited direct contact with the  sponsor
         since she left Iran when he was age 10." [26]

    The judge then went on to find as follows:

         "27. I shall take into account the  sponsor's  circumstances.   The
             sponsor has experienced  mental  health  difficulties  arising
             from her enforced  separation  from  her  children,  including
             difficulty relating to the thoughts of suicide.  The appellant
             has been engaged in psychological therapies  provided  by  the
             NHS with a view to  enabling  her  to  deal  with  the  trauma
             arising from her circumstances and to manage  her  feeling  of
             suicide.  Granting of leave to the appellant is likely to have
             very significant positive psychological effects  on  both  the
             appellant and the sponsor.

         28.  In these circumstances I find  there  are  serious  compelling
             reasons showing why the  appellant  should  not  be  excluded.
             This is because the appellant has  effectively  been  forcibly
             deprived of the benefits of the true extent of  the  love  and
             affection of his mother over a number of years and his  mother
             has suffered significant psychological trauma as a  result  of
             her experiences."

 5. There are two grounds of appeal.  I find that the second ground has  no
    merit.  The ECO submits  that  "the  Immigration  Judge,  after  making
    findings on the sponsor's mental health, does reconcile a concern  that
    it is in the best interests of the appellant to reside  with  a  parent
    who has suicidal ideation."  There is a letter from Greater  Manchester
    West Mental Health NHS Foundation Trust based in Salford.  Dr C Bashir,
    Chartered Clinical Psychologist has provided a report dated 22  October
    2014.  This notes that the sponsor's "own psychological  wellbeing  has
    significantly improved and she has learnt to manage difficult memories,
    thoughts  and  feelings  since.(sic)".   The  letter  notes  that   the
    sponsor's suicidal feelings had "now diminished and  she  has  come  to
    terms with traumatic life events because she is now  taking  action  to
    focus on re-uniting with her children."  There is nothing in the letter
    (the only medical evidence which was before  both  the  First-tier  and
    Upper Tribunals) which would indicate that the child might be  at  risk
    in the care of a parent "with suicidal ideation."  There is no evidence
    that the sponsor has suicidal ideation at the present time  or  at  the
    date of the immigration decision.  Further, there is no  indication  in
    any of the evidence that the appellant might be at risk in his mother's
    care.  Judge Atkinson did not err in law by failing to  deal  with  the
    matters raised in ground 2.

 6. The first ground of appeal asserts that the judge  was  wrong  to  find
    that there had been a "forced deprivation of  the  appellant  from  the
    sponsor" (sic).  The grounds record the "separation described  was  not
    forced but was the sponsor's choice.  It is  submitted  therefore  that
    the Immigration Judge has erred by making findings that were based on a
    misunderstood premise."

 7. I find that this ground has more merit.  First, it is  clear  from  the
    psychologist's letter that, whilst being separated  from  her  children
    was a major cause of the sponsor's mental disturbance, it was  not  the
    only cause.  Secondly, I am not persuaded that the  judge  has  engaged
    with the nature of the separation of the sponsor  from  the  appellant.
    The suggestion that the separation had been of the sponsor's own making
    it does not occur for the first time in the grounds of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal; the Entry Clearance  Manager  in  her  statement  of  8
    September 2014 noted that:

         "... the sponsor in  the  UK  has  had  mental  health  issues  and
         doctor's notices have stated that this is due to the separation  of
         the sponsor  and  the  appellant;  however  it  was  the  sponsor's
         decision to leave Iran and more importantly to leave the  appellant
         behind for such a protracted period of time."

    That is the same point asserted in the grounds of appeal and the  judge
    has failed to engage with it.  The judge makes it clear at [28] that he
    has found that there are "serious and compelling  reasons  showing  why
    the appellant should not be excluded" because the  appellant  has  been
    "effectively ... forcibly deprived of the benefits of the  true  extent
    of the love and affection of his mother over a number of years."  I not
    persuaded that that finding is justified on the face of the evidence or
    that it provides a  "serious  and  compelling  reason"  justifying  the
    appellant's admission to the United Kingdom.  It is not clear to me why
    re-uniting a teenage child with his mother in the United  Kingdom  when
    he otherwise has no legal reason to reside  here  should  in  some  way
    compensate the appellant for a separation from his mother whilst he was
    a child which was, at least in part, a consequence of his mother's  own
    actions.  Thirdly, I am concerned that the medical  evidence  does  not
    justify the  judge's  finding  that  "the  granting  of  leave  to  the
    appellant is likely to have  very  significant  positive  psychological
    effects on both the appellant and the sponsor."  I  do  not  know  what
    effect it will have on the child at all; Dr Bashir's letter deals  only
    with the mental health of the sponsor.  Moreover, that  letter  records
    that the sponsor's psychological wellbeing has "significantly improved"
    even in the  continuing  absence  of  the  appellant.   Certainly,  the
    psychologist concludes that "it is in the interests of both parent  and
    child to be reunited and spend significant time together" but I am  not
    sure that equates  to  the  "very  significant  positive  psychological
    effects on both appellant and sponsor" which Judge Atkinson found would
    occur if the child comes to live in the United Kingdom.

 8. I also have concerns regarding parts  of  the  sponsor's  evidence.   I
    raised these concerns with Miss Brooksbank,  who  appeared  before  the
    Upper Tribunal as agent's solicitor for the appellant's representative.
     In the sponsor's statement dated 12 November 2014,  she  records  that
    she travelled to Istanbul and there assisted the  appellant  in  making
    his visa application.  She said that her ex-husband who  was  initially
    opposed to the child joining the sponsor in the United Kingdom and that
    it took "nearly two years of fighting and discussions for my ex-husband
    to finally agree to give me custody of our youngest son."  Later in the
    same statement the sponsor says that, "the reason I  could  leave  Iran
    legally with my son was because my ex-husband had given me sole custody
    of [him].  I lost this document however and I travelled to Iran and  my
    ex-husband  gave  me  a  new  document."   The  only  document  in  the
    appellant's papers which remotely  touches  upon  the  custody  of  the
    appellant was a Power of Attorney which  was  certified  on  2  October
    2014.  This Power lists at length the powers arising from the "right of
    guardianship bringing up of the child  [the  appellant]."   It  refers,
    inter alia, to "daily routine of ... education sports requirements etc.
    signing educational commitments ..." At  the  end  of  this  list,  the
    document indicates that the sponsor may  take  "every  measure  to  the
    benefit of the ward in order to remove the necessity for  the  client's
    presence  and  signature."   It  concludes  by  providing   that   "the
    attorney's action and the signature in all matters stated  above  shall
    be of the same effect as those of the client [sponsor's husband] to the
    extent that the client's presence and signature shall not  be  required
    whatsoever."  The document does not appear to have been  issued  by  or
    registered in a family court.  I am not  persuaded  that  the  document
    transfers custody of the appellant from the husband to the sponsor. The
    Power of Attorney simply grants the sponsor the right to take steps for
    and on behalf of the child without  the  requirement  of  the  father's
    presence or signature.  To that  extent,  it  is  similar  to  parental
    responsibility in English family law.  The sponsor's statement, on  the
    other hand, speaks in terms of the transfer of custody from one  parent
    to another.  Such a transfer is not evidenced by the Power of  Attorney
    document.  There was  no  unequivocal  evidence  that  the  father  has
    consented to the appellant leaving his custody and  travelling  to  the
    United Kingdom for settlement.  I am aware that paragraph 297 does  not
    require the consent of the child's other parent but I am concerned that
    the sponsor has produced one document in evidence  and  has  sought  to
    pass it off as another and quite different document, namely  a  custody
    order.  I make these observations being  fully  aware  of  the  obvious
    differences between family law operating in Iran and England and Wales.



Conclusion

 9. I find that Judge Atkinson has misstated the factual basis  upon  which
    he has based his finding that there are "serious and compelling reasons
    showing why the appellant should not be excluded."  I  accept  (as  did
    Judge Atkinson) the sponsor has had serious mental problems and I  also
    find that these have "significantly improved."  I did not  accept  that
    medical evidence supports the judge's findings that there will be "very
    significant positive psychological effects on both  the  appellant  and
    the sponsor" if the appellant comes to the United Kingdom.   I  am  not
    satisfied that the judge fully understood that the sponsor had not been
    forcibly separated from the appellant  in  the  manner  which  she  has
    claimed.  Normally, I would be very reluctant  to  interfere  with  the
    judgment of a First-tier Judge in a matter of this kind but  I  am  not
    satisfied that the judge has  fully  understood  the  true  facts.   In
    consequence, I find that his decision  should  be  set  aside  and  the
    decision remade.  I refer again to the  medical  evidence  and  to  the
    observations which I have made above concerning the sponsor's evidence.
     Viewing that evidence as a totality, I am not satisfied that there are
    "serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  make
    exclusion of  the  appellant  undesirable."   I  note  again  that  the
    sponsor's mental health has improved in the absence  of  the  appellant
    albeit that the prospect of the appellant joining her may have assisted
    her recovery.  She has, however, come to terms  with  other  "traumatic
    life events" other than the separation from her  children.   I  do  not
    doubt Dr Bashir's conclusion that it would be "in the interest of  both
    parent and child to be reunited and spend significant  time  together".
    The same must be true for virtually all parents who are  reunited  with
    children from whom they have chosen  to  separate.   In  my  view,  the
    appeal should be dismissed under the Immigration Rules.  The grounds of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal did not mention human rights (Article
    8 ECHR).  There  is,  therefore,  no  appeal  against  the  immigration
    decision on that ground.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 21  January
2015 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  This  appeal  is  dismissed
under the Immigration Rules.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
