
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02678/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 9th September 2014                           |On 15th September 2014     |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between

                                kamran zafar
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Yaqub, instructed by Yaqub & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals with permission a decision of First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Moore promulgated on 1st May 2014 in which  the  judge  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the refusal of a spousal entry clearance
    on the basis that the Appellant failed to meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration  Rules  at  paragraph  281  HC  395  because  the  evidence
    submitted prior to the decision, as opposed to  subsequently,  did  not
    establish that the Sponsor was free to marry  the  Appellant.   Further
    the judge found that, it being accepted that the requirement to provide
    an English language certificate to a specified  level  applied  to  the
    Appellant, he had not obtained the same.

 2. The Appellant was granted permission on grounds that  assert  that  the
    judge could and should have taken into  account  postdecision  evidence
    establishing that in fact she was free to marry the Appellant, so  that
    the marriage was  valid,  and  further,  that  the  judge  should  have
    accepted that the post evidence decision of the Appellant obtaining the
    requisite certificate on 22 April 2013 was sufficient to establish  the
    position as at the date of decision.

 3. In addition the grounds asserted error  in  terms  of  Article  8  ECHR
    because even though not  raised in the appeal grounds  the  judge  knew
    that  the  Appellant,  who  was  unrepresented  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge, had travelled to  Pakistan  following  the  refusal  in
    December 2012, and had subsequently, on 8th February 2014, given  birth
    to a daughter.  The grounds aver the judge  should  have  taken  it  on
    himself to decide  whether  or  not  the  decision  affected  the  best
    interests of the child, and have conducted an Article 8 ECHR assessment
    to the point that if he had done so a proportionality exercise may have
    resulted in a decision favourable to the Appellant.

 4. The Sponsor attended to support  her  husband's  appeal.   The  hearing
    proceeded on the basis of submissions.  Mr Yaqub relied on the  grounds
    of the application for permission and the grant based on the same.   He
    addressed me at length to the point that postdecision evidence going to
    establish facts as at  the  date  of  decision  could  be  admitted  to
    establish the relevant factual matrix.  In the context of Article 8 the
    Sponsor's position now was that she  was  unable  to  support  a  fresh
    application for entry clearance because of an  inability  currently  to
    meet the maintenance requirements.  As a result the refusal resulted in
    unduly harsh consequences for her.

 5. Mr Nath referred me to the Respondent's Rule 24 response  pointing  out
    that the Appellant did  not  have  a  relevant  English  language  test
    certificate at the date of the  immigration  decision  and  accordingly
    could not satisfy the Immigration Rules.

 6. In response to my seeking to clarify the issues Mr Nath  conceded  that
    the judge could, as the grounds assert, have taken  into  account  when
    considering HC 395  paragraph 281 provisions as  to  the  validity  and
    subsistence of the marriage  taken  into  account   the  late  produced
    evidence in respect of the Sponsor's ability to marry the Appellant, in
    the context of the admissibility of late evidence going to  established
    facts and existence as at the date of decision, but submitted that  the
    failure to do was not material in light of the justified dismissal   on
    the alternative other Rules based grounds .

 7.  In respect of Article 8 Mr Nath reminded me the Appellant  had  raised
    no Article 8 grounds in the Grounds of Appeal, and, relying on the case
    of Sarkar v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 195 submitted the failure of the judge
    to address Article 8 is not an error of law.  Alternatively even if  he
    should have considered Article 8 there was no material error of law  in
    the absence of evidence as to any unjustifiable  harshness  as  at  the
    date of decision in requiring the Appellant to make a new application.

 8. I find that the judge's decision in respect  of  the  English  Language
    requirement to  possess  a  test  certificate  issued  by  an  approved
    provider and to a relevant standard as at the date of decision, in this
    case 3rd December 2012, cannot be  met  by  the  provision  of  a  test
    certificate subsequently awarded. The relevant date for  assessment  in
    out of country entry clearance applications is the  date  of  decision,
    i.e. 3rd  December,  and  the  requirement  for  the  possession  of  a
    certificate cannot intelligently be answered by evidence that they  did
    not possess it at that date but  have  it  now.    In  this  regard  Mr
    Yaqub's submission to  the  point  that  because  the  certificate  was
    awarded on 22nd February  2013  there  was  merit  in  the  Appellant's
    assertion that he had established on a balance of probabilities that he
    had the requisite level of skill to have been able to pass a test as at
    the date of decision is  of  no  avail.   Any  error  in  the  position
    concerning the failure to consider the post decision evidence about the
    sponsor's ability to enter into marriage is not  material  because  the
    appeal would in any event be dismissed on English Language grounds.

 9. In respect of the challenge brought on Article 8 grounds:  this is  not
    a case where a judge has failed to deal with a Ground of  Appeal.   The
    Grounds of Appeal only encompass issues relating to the  refusal  under
    paragraph 281.  I am satisfied that there is no  merit  in  Mr  Yaqub's
    efforts to assert a Robinson obvious point in favour of the  Appellant.
    There was no evidence adduced in  support  of  the  Appellant's  appeal
    capable of supporting the findings  of  fact  necessary  to  enable  an
    Article 8 ECHR ground to succeed in the context of a  failure  to  meet
    the Immigration Rule.  Mr Yaqub prays in aid changes in the Appellant's
    circumstances and in particular an assertion that the Sponsor would  no
    longer be able to provide the necessary evidence to meet the  financial
    requirements of the Rule.  There  was  no  evidence  before  the  judge
    relating to that issue.  The mere  fact  that  the  Appellant  and  his
    Sponsor had had  a  baby  falls  far  short  of  evidence  required  to
    establish significant merit in an Article 8 case so as to  establish  a
    Robinson obvious point, and in any event overlooks  the  position  that
    the assessment is made as at the date of refusal.  On  the  facts  here
    the Appellant at that date had yet to make the trip to see her  husband
    which resulted in the pregnancy. The proportionality issue  as  at  the
    date of refusal was in any event answered  by  the  availability  of  a
    fresh application. Mr Yacub's efforts to equate his  apparent  sympathy
    for the Sponsor, in the context of her current inability  to  meet  the
    financial requirements of the rule, with an error of law  made  by  the
    judge, are misconceived.

10. I dismiss the Appellant's  appeal.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing the Appellant's appeal reveals no material error of
    law requiring it to be set aside and it stands.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
