

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Numbers:
OA/02458/2013

                                                  OA/02461/2013

                                                  OA/02464/2013

                                                  OA/02466/2013

Heard at Field House
Determination Promulgated
On 29 July 2014
     On 8 August 2014



Before

                      DESIGNATED TRIBUNAL JUDGE DIGNEY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               RUSTAM KHAN +3
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the respondent: Mr Nasim
For the appellant:    Mr Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer

                                DETERMINATION

   1. The respondents, citizens of Pakistan, siblings, applied    for  entry
      clearance to this country with a view to settlement with their father.
      The application was refused under the Immigration  Rules  because  the
      appellant was not satisfied that the sponsor had  sole  responsibility
      for his children. An appeal was allowed against the decision  after  a
      hearing on 10 April 2014 when the judge concluded that the sponsor did
      have sole responsibility for the  children.  The  Secretary  of  State
      appeals against that decision.


   2. The grounds  of  appeal  rely  on  the  head  note  of  TD  (Paragraph
      297(i)(e): "sole  responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  00049  which
      states:


             "Sole responsibility" is a factual matter to be  decided  upon
             all the evidence.  Where one parent is  not  involved  in  the
             child's upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned  or
             abdicated responsibility, the  issue  may  arise  between  the
             remaining parent and others who have day-to-day  care  of  the
             child abroad.  The test is whether the parent  has  continuing
             control and direction over the child's  upbringing,  including
             making all  the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.
             However,  where  both  parents  are  involved  in  a   child's
             upbringing, it will be exceptional that one of them will  have
             "sole responsibility".


   3. The head note is based on paragraph  52  (iv)  of  the  determination,
      which reads:


             Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in  the
             upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional  that  one  of
             them will have sole responsibility


   4. The grounds of appeal state that the judge did  not  engage  with  the
      exceptionality test; the oral evidence was that the  appellants  visit
      their mother once in six or seven months  and  these  visits  indicate
      frequent contact with their mother and such are good reason to suggest
      that the mother has been involved in their upbringing  which  suggests
      the exceptionality test detailed above is not satisfied.


   5. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis of those grounds.


   6. I would first say that there is no exceptionality test; it is a matter
      of common sense that if both parents are  involved  in  upbringing  it
      will be difficult for one of then to claim sole responsibility.

   7. Insofar as there is a test it is to be found in paragraph 52 (i) which
      reads:

             Who has "responsibility" for a child's upbringing and  whether
             that responsibility is  "sole"  is  a  factual  matter  to  be
             decided upon all the evidence.


   8. The starting point is to ask  if  there  is  any  evidence  that  both
      parents were involved in the upbringing. The  children  visited  their
      mother about twice a year. That is not evidence of anything other than
      the children's desire to see their  mother.  The  mother  visited  the
      children once or twice since the father came to this country, which he
      did in 2003.  I do not see how two visits  in  about  ten  years  (the
      application was made in November 2012) can be seen as evidence  of  an
      involvement in the upbringing of the children. The grounds  of  appeal
      state that this very modest involvement  is  good  reason  to  suggest
      involvement in upbringing.  I do not agree. There is quite  simply  no
      evidence that the mother had any involvement in the upbringing  during
      those ten years and Mr Nath could point to no  such  evidence.  It  is
      then a simple question of fact as  to  whether  the  father  had  sole
      responsibility, to be decided  "upon  all  the  evidence".  The  judge
      considered all that evidence  and  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
      father did have sole responsibility; that was a conclusion that he was
      entitled to reach on the evidence and his reasoning is not vitiated by
      any error of law.

   9. The original determination did not contain an error of law  and  shall
      stand.

The appeal is dismissed




Designated Judge Digney      Judge of the Upper Tribunal   29 July 2014


