
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02513/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 17th November 2017                    |On 18th December 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 mr anil rai
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Asanovic (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Nepal  born  on  14th  May  1991.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance  as  the  dependent  relative  of
    Bindu Kumari Rai, the widow of an ex-Gurkha soldier.   The  Appellant's
    application was dated on 15th  August  2014  and  the  application  was
    considered by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  as  an  adult  dependent
    relative under paragraph EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and the Home Office Secretary's policy as outlined in IDI chapter
    15 section 2A - 13.2 as amended on 12/03/2010.

 2. That application was refused by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  2nd
    January 2015.  Grounds of Appeal were lodged seeking to argue the Entry
    Clearance Officer had failed to consider the Appellant's  human  rights
    and the historical injustice suffered by  Gurkhas.   The  decision  was
    maintained by the Entry Clearance Manager.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Obhi sitting at  Taylor  House  on  14th  February  2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 15th February 2017 the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed on human rights grounds.

 4. On 14th March 2017 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of  Appeal  in
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds were  considered  by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  Landes  on  14th  September  2017.   Judge  Landes
    granted permission to appeal.  The  judge  noted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge allowed the appeal  of  the  Appellant,  a  national  of
    Nepal, who is the adult dependent son of the widow of a  former  member
    of the Brigade of Gurkhas.  Judge Landes commented that if the  judge's
    conclusions under Article 8 more generally could not be challenged then
    any error in respect of Appendix K of the Immigration  Rules  would  be
    immaterial.  She found that the judge did find that  there  was  family
    life between the Appellant and his mother and sister and  that  it  was
    clearly implicit (as shown in paragraph 23 of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision) that Article 8 was engaged  and  she  considered  the
    reasons to be adequate - emotional dependence and financial  dependence
    - noting in particular that the Appellant's mother is a widow.

 5. Judge Landes did consider that it was arguable however that  the  judge
    had failed to give reasons for considering  the  Appellant's  case  was
    "not directly affected by Sections 117A-C".  On that  basis  permission
    to appeal was given to the Secretary of State.  On  17th  October  2017
    solicitors on behalf of the Appellant lodged a Rule 24 response.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  This is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  However for the purpose of  continuity  throughout  the  appeal
    process Mr Rai is referred to herein as the Appellant and the Secretary
    of State as the Respondent.  The Appellant appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Ms Asanovic.  Ms Asanovic is familiar with this  matter  having
    appeared before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  Secretary  of  State
    appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Duffy.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Duffy does no more than seek to rely on the Grounds of  Appeal.   He
    acknowledges that what has been said by Judge Landes in  the  grant  of
    permission is  a  valid  point  but  he  does  wonder  even  though  he
    represents the Secretary of State in this matter who has  been  granted
    permission to appeal as to whether the  point  made  by  the  judge  in
    granting permission actually takes the appeal anywhere bearing in  mind
    that if there is family life the historic injustice arguments come into
    play and consequently reliance upon paragraph 117 may  not  apply.   In
    such circumstances he does no more than rely on the Grounds of Appeal.

 8. Ms Asanovic seeks to rely on the Rule 24 response.   She  takes  me  to
    paragraphs 55 to 58 of Rai v Entry Clearance Officer New  Delhi  [2017]
    ECWA Civ 320.  Relying on the fact that the key basis of  Section  117A
    and B is that it is a codifying position and consequently the Appellant
    succeeds under Article 8 as a point of  principle  there  would  be  no
    materiality to any error under Section 117.  She submits this  is  also
    borne out by the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Rhuppiah  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 803.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

11. The thrust of the grant of permission is Judge Landes considered if  it
    was simply that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  not  considered  the
    factors in Section 117A to C then it  was  arguable  that  if  she  had
    considered them she may have come to a different conclusion.  That  has
    to be looked against the fact that on the assumption that the Appellant
    succeeds under Article 8 which has been allowed as a point of principle
    then there would appear to be no materiality to any error that may have
    occurred under Section 117.  Rhuppiah is helpful.  Paragraph  49  Sales
    LJ states:

         "Where Parliament has itself declared  that  something  is  in  the
         public interest - see sections 117B(1), (2)  and  (3)  and  section
         117C(1) - that is definitive  as  to  that  aspect  of  the  public
         interest. But it  should  be  noted  that  having  regard  to  such
         considerations does  not  mandate  any  particular  outcome  in  an
         Article 8 balancing exercise: a court or tribunal has to take these
         considerations into account and give them considerable  weight,  as
         is appropriate for a definitive statement  by  Parliament  about  a
         particular aspect of the public interest, but they are in principle
         capable of being outweighed by other relevant considerations  which
         may make it disproportionate under Article 8 for an  individual  to
         be removed from the UK."

12.  That  finding  confirms  the  codifying   effect   of   Section   117.
    Consequently even if there were to have been an error then in any event
    it would not have been material to the decision reached by  the  judge.
    In such circumstances the Secretary of State's appeal cannot succeed as
    I find there is no material error of law in the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge and  for  all  the  above  reasons  the  appeal  is
    dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 12th December 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made


Signed                              Date: 12th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


