
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
             (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/02431/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14th December 2016                  |On 18th January 2017                |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                             Mrs Yara Alkawarit
                       (Anonymity Direction Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr E Ansah Hammond Lloyd Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. I shall refer to the parties as they were referred to in the First Tier
    Tribunal that is Mrs Alkawarit as the appellant and the Entry Clearance
    Officer as the respondent although the application  for  permission  to
    appeal was made by the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Syria and was born on  19th  April  1995.
    Her application for entry clearance dated  5th  November  2014  as  the
    spouse of Mr Mohamad Kheir Bakdaelia (the sponsor), was refused by  the
    ECO on 11th January 2015 on the basis that the marriage was  not  shown
    to be valid.  She appealed and that appeal was allowed  by  First  Tier
    Tribunal Judge R Owens on 24th March 2016 under the Immigration  Rules,
    that is Paragraph 352 A - family  reunion)  only.   The  appellant  had
    appealed on the basis of Article 8 but  the  matter  was  decided  only
    under the Immigration Rules.

 3. The respondent made an application for permission to appeal, and, in an
    error of law  decision promulgated by me on 23rd November  2016  and  I
    found an error of law and set aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    determination.  I also noted that the judge did not address the further
    matter of the appellant's appeal made under Article 8.  The matter  was
    re-listed for hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  and  before  me  on  14th
    December 2016.  Following a direction  for  the  appellant  to  produce
    further evidence, at the hearing in December 2016, the  appellant,  who
    was in the United Kingdom with her Syrian sponsor,  produced  an  Entry
    Clearance visa under the family reunion provisions and also evidence of
    her  pregnancy.   Previously  the  appellant  had  not   been   legally
    represented.

 4. In the circumstances, Mr Whitwell took instructions, and  both  parties
    to the appeal agreed that the  matter  should  be  allowed  with  their
    consent.

 5. The appellant was granted Entry Clearance in May 2016 on the  basis  of
    family reunion, (albeit there was an ongoing challenge) and as a Syrian
    national the appellant  entered the UK lawfully from Egypt,  where  she
    had no right of residence  and  was  now  in  the  United  Kingdom  and
    pregnant. I bear in mind SS Congo  v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  317  and
    Section 117 of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002;  the
    appellant cannot speak English but  it  would  appear  the  husband  is
    working, but even if he were not, , under the family reunion provisions
    there  is  no  maintenance  requirement.   I  indicated  that  in   the
    circumstances I would have allowed the appeal on Article 8  grounds  in
    any event.

 6. That said, I allow the appeal by way of consent under Rule  39  (1)  of
    The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  because,  in  the
    circumstances, I consider it appropriate to dispose of the  proceedings
    in this way.

Order

Appeal Allowed



Signed      Helen Rimington                        Date 14th December 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

