
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: oA/02649/2015
                                                               oa/02650/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 7 June 2016                       |On 10 June 2016                       |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                SIDRA ZUBAIR
                                NASEEM SAIQA
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Raw of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Respondent refused the Appellants'  applications  for  leave  to
       enter as the  child  under  the  age  of  18  and  dependent  spouse
       respectively of a British citizen. The applications  were  found  to
       have been made on 3 September 2014 and were refused on  31  December
       2014. Their appeals were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford
       ("the Judge") following a hearing on 16 October 2015.

The grant of permission

    2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin granted permission to  appeal  (25
       April 2016) to both parties stating that it  is  arguable  that  the
       Judge;

       a) erroneously found that the Appellants were required to provide  7
          months payslips from the Sponsor,

       b) wrongly  concluded  that  the  relevant  date  was  the  date  of
          application, and

       c) erred in allowing  the  first  Appellant's  appeal  as  that  was
          contingent  on  the  second  Appellant's  appeal  as  the   first
          Appellant's father does not have limited leave to remain.

The Judge's determination

    3. The Judge stated;

          "6.    I am considering the circumstances appertaining as at  the
          date of application save where a  date  is  specified  under  the
          Immigration Rules or under legislation.

          12.    I am ... satisfied that  the  first  Appellant  was  still
          under the age of 18 at the date of application  and  consequently
          the decision to refuse her application was not made in accordance
          with the Immigration Rules.

          18.    ... The second Appellant should have provided six  months'
          wage slips for the period prior to date of application, in  other
          words wage slips from and including March 2014 to September 2014.
          A March wage slip was never provided. I  am  not  satisfied  that
          this case falls  within  the  Flexibility  Rules  such  that  the
          Respondent was obliged to call for the missing wage slip and even
          if the Respondent had done so, I am not satisfied that that  wage
          slip was omitted by mistake or oversight. The Sponsor told me  in
          evidence that he had not included the March wage because  he  had
          mislaid it. It was not available to him and could  not  therefore
          have been included with  the  application.  The  provision  of  a
          September wage slip does not remedy the situation  because  as  I
          found, the date of application was not  26th  September  but  3rd
          September.

          21.    I have seen no  English-language  certificates  for  tests
          taken by the second Appellant that would meet the requirements of
          the Immigration Rules, particularly E-ECP.4 relating  to  English
          language requirements as at  date  of  application.  The  English
          language test certificate I have seen postdate  application.  The
          specified evidence rules make it clear that the relevant date  is
          the date of application. As the second Appellant had not even sat
          her English language tests to which the  certificates  relate  by
          the date of application, they cannot be relied  on  to  meet  the
          requirements of the Rules."



Respondent's position

    4. Mr Walker relied on the Rule 24 notice (17 May  2016)  which  stated
       that the Judge was entitled to find that the 6 wage slip requirement
       had not been met and the evidential flexibility  policy  instruction
       is not designed for this situation as the March wage slip was  never
       produced.

Appellants' position

    5. Mr Raw submitted that  in  relation  to  the  first  Appellant,  the
       Immigration Rules should be amended so that  [297  (i)  (c)]  should
       read (my underlining re  the  proposed  amendment)  "one  parent  is
       present and settled in the United Kingdom and the other is  applying
       to be admitted on the same occasion for settlement."

    6. In relation to  the  second  Appellant,  the  Sponsor  had  produced
       payslips covering only 5 months of  the  relevant  period  but  even
       though he had not submitted it for March should have  been  afforded
       the opportunity of  doing  so  through  the  evidential  flexibility
       policy as it was an on line application. The Appellants were told to
       bring papers to the interview on 27 September 2014 and did  so.  The
       missing payslip was not important as he had the salary. The  key  is
       whether he was financially viable. The English-language  certificate
       was provided to the Respondent before  the  date  of  decision.  The
       relevant date for consideration of the evidence was the date of  the
       decision and not the date of  application.  They  were  entitled  to
       submit fresh evidence prior to the substantive consideration of  the
       application.  The  failure   to   consider   exercising   evidential
       flexibility was a material error of law.

Discussion

    7. In relation to the first Appellant and the  submission  that  I  can
       rewrite [297] of the Immigration Rules I set out here  the  relevant
       Immigration Rule.

          '297. The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  indefinite
          leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  the  child  of  a  parent,
          parents or a relative present and settled or being  admitted  for
          settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:

             (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or  join  a  parent,
             parents or a relative in one of  the  following  circumstances:
             ...

                (c) one parent is present and settled in the United  Kingdom
                and the other is being admitted on  the  same  occasion  for
                settlement ...'

    8. I reject Mr Raw's  submission.  I  have  no  power  to  rewrite  the
       Immigration Rules. They are clear, unambiguous, and specific and the
       first Appellant simply does not meet the Rule as her mother was  not
       being admitted for settlement.

    9. In relation to Mr Walker's submission regarding her father's  status
       I set out below the  relevant  part  of  Appendix  FM  (my  emphasis
       applied).

          'E-ECC.1.6. One of the applicant's parents must be in the UK with
          limited leave to  enter  or  remain,  or  be  applying,  or  have
          applied, for entry clearance, as a partner or a parent under this
          Appendix  (referred  to  in  this  section  as  the  "applicant's
          parent"), and ...

          (b) the applicant's parent's partner under Appendix FM is also  a
          parent of the applicant ...

          Section D-ECC: Decision on application for entry clearance  as  a
          child D-ECC.1.1. If the  applicant  meets  the  requirements  for
          entry clearance as a child they will be granted  entry  clearance
          of a duration which will expire at the same  time  as  the  leave
          granted to the applicant's parent ...'

   10. I agree with the submission by Mr Walker that any potential grant of
       leave to enter for the first Appellant is dependent upon the  second
       Appellant being granted entry clearance because the  length  of  the
       grant is to be identical.

   11. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge made a material error of law
       in allowing the first Appellant's appeal. I therefore set aside  the
       decision.

   12. In relation to the second Appellant I set  out  below  the  relevant
       paragraphs from the rules regarding the  production  of  documentary
       evidence and the evidential flexibility policy to  be  found  within
       Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules (my emphasis applied).

          'D     (a) In deciding an application in relation to  which  this
          Appendix states that specified documents must  be  provided,  the
          Entry Clearance Officer or Secretary  of  State  ("the  decision-
          maker") will consider documents that have been submitted with the
          application, and will only consider documents submitted after the
          application where sub-paragraph (b) or (e) applies.

          b) If the applicant:

                (i)    Has submitted:

                  (aa) A sequence of documents and some of the documents in
                  the  sequence  have  been  omitted  (e.g.  if  one   bank
                  statement from a series is missing) ...

            ii) Has not submitted a specified document,  the  decision-maker
                may contact the applicant or  his  representative  ...,  and
                request the document(s) ...

          c) The decision-maker will not request documents where he  or  she
             does not anticipate  that  addressing  the  error  or  omission
             referred to in sub-paragraph (b) will lead to a  grant  because
             the application will be refused for other reasons.

          d) n/a

          e) Where the decision-maker is satisfied that  there  is  a  valid
             reason why a specified document cannot be supplied  ...  he  or
             she may exercise discretion not to apply  the  requirement  for
             the document ... to ... be submitted.'

   13. It is correct to  say  that  pursuant  to  DR  (ECO:  Post  decision
       evidence) Morocco [2005] UKIAT 00038, the Judge has to consider  the
       application as at the date of decision and  is  able  to  take  post
       refusal evidence into account if it was a circumstance  appertaining
       at the date of decision and casts  light  on  the  validity  of  the
       original information.

   14. It is clear that the payslips submitted prior to the application  on
       3 September 2014 did not cover a 6 month period. That is because the
       payslips were dated 30 April 2014, 30 May 2014,  30  June  2014,  31
       July 2014, and  29  August  2014.  That  is  only  5  payslips.  The
       submission of a later payslip for September 2014 does not remedy the
       defect within the application process as that would  not  have  been
       dated until the end of September  2014.  The  application  that  was
       submitted could not therefore have succeeded and asking for a  March
       2014 payslip would have generated nothing because  the  sponsor  had
       lost it. In this regard I bear in mind Gu v SSHD  [2014]  EWHC  1634
       (Admin) which points out [24] that something could not be  'missing'
       from a sequence until the sequence itself existed, which meant  that
       at least the start and end of the sequence had to  be  in  evidence.
       This case is not akin to Mandalia v SSHD [2015] UKSC 59  as  it  was
       not a gap in bank statements but a period of pay slips that was  too
       short, or SSHD v Rodrigues [2014] EWCA  Civ  2  as  the  substantive
       consideration can only be based on the documents submitted with  the
       application as is made clear by the Immigration Rules.

   15. It is equally clear that at  the  date  of  application  the  second
       Appellant had not taken, let alone passed, an English language test.
       The certificate that was subsequently  issued  could  not  therefore
       have been available at the  date  of  application.  The  application
       could not therefore have succeeded.

   16. I therefore am not satisfied that the Judge made a material error of
       law in relation to the  second  Appellant  and  I  do  not  set  the
       decision aside.

   17. Both representatives agreed that, if I found a material error of law
       in relation to the first Appellant, it would not be  appropriate  to
       remit the matter or adjourn the hearing to  a  further  date  as  no
       further evidence was required.

Rehearing

   18. I am satisfied that on the facts as found the second  Appellant  was
       refused entry clearance. Therefore,  the  first  Appellant  did  not
       fulfil the pre-requisites for her own grant of entry clearance.

   19. Accordingly, I dismiss the first Appellant's appeal.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error  on  a  point  of  law  in  relation  to  the  first
    Appellant.

    I set aside the decision in relation to the first Appellant.

    I dismiss the first Appellant's substantive appeal.

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law  in  relation  to  the  second
    Appellant.

    I do not set aside the decision in relation to the second Appellant.




    Signed:
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
    10 June 2016


