
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-VI

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/02306/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 April 2016                               |On 13 May 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                      entry clearance officer - chennai
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MS SUJEETHA SRIHARAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms A Benfield, Counsel instructed by Links Legal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in these  proceedings  is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    ("ECO").  However, I continue to refer to  the  parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. This appeal comes before me following the dismissal of the  appellant's
    appeal to the FtT, by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Iqbal  ("the  FtJ")
    against the respondent's decision dated  31  December  2013  to  refuse
    entry clearance as a partner.  That application for entry clearance was
    refused with reference to Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 3. It is not necessary to set out in detail the basis of  the  refusal  by
    the respondent; suffice it to say that a number of issues  were  raised
    in the notice of decision.

 4. Having considered those issues, the FtJ resolved various matters in the
    appellant's favour.  He thus allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

 5. The Rules that governed the application for entry  clearance  and  thus
    the appeal, are contained within Appendices FM and FM-SE.   So  far  as
    Appendix FM is concerned the more specific requirements  are  contained
    within Section E-ECP, entitled "Eligibility for entry  clearance  as  a
    partner".   Where  specified  evidence  of  financial  requirements  is
    required,  GEN.1.4.  provides  that  "specified"  means  specified   in
    Appendix FM-SE, unless otherwise stated.

 6. Under that Appendix the appellant was  required  to  provide  specified
    evidence of her husband's employment under paragraph 1(l):  that states
    that where the Appendix requires the  applicant  to  provide  specified
    evidence relating to a period which ends with the date of  application,
    that evidence, or the most recently dated part of it, must be dated  no
    earlier than 28 days before the date of application.  Under paragraph 2
    of the same Appendix there  is  a  requirement  for  the  provision  of
    payslips, and under paragraph 2(b) there is the requirement of a letter
    from  the  employer  who  issued  the  payslips  (at  paragraph   2(a))
    confirming the person's employment and  gross  salary,  the  length  of
    their employment, the period over which they had been or were paid  the
    level of salary relied  upon  in  the  application,  and  the  type  of
    employment, whether permanent, fixed-term contract or agency.

 7. In relation to that requirement, the ECO's decision identified the fact
    that the letter in respect of the appellant's husband's employment from
    Commercial Wines  Ltd  did  not  confirm  the  period  over  which  the
    appellant's husband had been  paid  the  level  of  salary  relied  on.
    Furthermore, the letter is dated 1 August 2013 which is not  within  28
    days of the application.

 8. The FtJ at [36] referred to that letter, stating that  because  of  its
    date it is unable to  meet  the  relevant  requirement  of  the  Rules.
    However, he also referred to a letter dated 31 January 2014.  At  [38],
    with reference to that employer's letter  dated  31  January  2014,  he
    stated as follows:

         "Whilst the matter can be dealt with by way of sending it  back  to
         the respondent, to be dealt with in line with the flexibility under
         the rules, I find that in considering the totality of the  evidence
         before me, I am not restricted from  considering  new  evidence  in
         relation to circumstances that were appertaining  at  the  date  of
         decision in accordance with Section 85(5) of  the  Nationality  and
         Immigration Act 2002 [sic].  Therefore I have considered the letter
         from Commercial Wines Limited dated the 31st of  January  2014  and
         note it contains all the relevant evidence.  Whilst Appendix  FM-SE
         requires it to be dated 28 days before  the  application  [sic],  I
         find that given the  letter  demonstrates  the  position  that  was
         appertaining on the 1st of August  2013  through  to  the  31st  of
         January 2014 (the date of the second letter from the employer),  it
         certainly covers the 28 day period before the date of  application.
         Therefore I find I am satisfied on balance that the  Appellant  has
         demonstrated  that  her  sponsor  satisfied  the  requirements   in
         relation to the Immigration Rules."

 9. It is that finding and conclusion which the respondent  challenges.   I
    do however, agree with Ms Benfield who suggested that  the  grounds  of
    challenge are  not  entirely  clear.   The  grounds  contend  that  the
    employer must be the employer who  issued  the  payslips  in  question,
    stating that that must in turn imply that the letter must refer to  all
    of the payslips provided, and that where some of the payslips  postdate
    the letter, this cannot be the case.

10. Taken in isolation that aspect of the grounds is confusing, except when
    one looks at the letter in question, dated 1 August 2013. As  to  time,
    it states that the sponsor is employed as a manager at  the  employer's
    shop from 1 January 2013.  In other words, the argument is  presumably,
    that the letter does not cover the complete  period  of  the  payslips.
    The grounds continue, stating that the defect in that  letter  was  not
    cured by any further letter dated before the decision.  In other words,
    what the grounds seem to be saying is that the letter  dated  1  August
    2013 was not in itself sufficient to comply with the Rules in terms  of
    its detail, and there was no other letter provided before the  decision
    which did comply with the Rules.

11. The grounds do at least refer to the requirement for the evidence to be
    provided within the relevant timeframe, which is the basis on which the
    FtJ purported to apply s.85(5)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act").

12. Ms Benfield relied on a 'rule  24'  response,  which  itself  seeks  to
    summarise the respondent's grounds.  The rule 24 response relies on the
    letter dated 31 January 2014, contending that the FtJ was  entitled  to
    consider it under s.85(5) of the 2002 Act.

13. In  submissions,  Mr  Staunton  relied  on  the  grounds.   So  far  as
    evidential flexibility under the Rules is concerned, he  accepted  that
    it does not appear that  evidential  flexibility  was  applied  by  the
    respondent when considering the application.

14. Ms Benfield's submission, essentially, was that  the  letter  dated  31
    January 2014, the employer's letter, did not fall  foul  of  the  Rules
    because, so the argument goes, it was not dated no earlier than 28 days
    before the date of application.  It was after the date of  application.
    Thus,  it  did  not  fall  foul  of  the  "no   earlier"   requirement.
    Accordingly, the FtJ was entitled to apply s.85 in the way that he did,
    considering  that  the  letter  was  evidence  of   the   circumstances
    appertaining at the date of the  decision,  covering  as  it  does  the
    period from 1 August 2013 to 31 January 2014, the latter date of course
    being the date of the letter.  It is to be noted that this  letter,  in
    contrast to the earlier  one  of  August  2013,  states  the  sponsor's
    employment from 1 January 2013 "to date".

15.  Ms  Benfield's  argument  could  be  said  to  hold  some  superficial
    attraction, until one has regard to other requirements of the  relevant
    Rules.  Appendix FM-SE, paragraph D.(a) states as follows:

         "In deciding an application in  relation  to  which  this  Appendix
         states  that  specified  documents  must  be  provided,  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer or Secretary of State ("the decision-maker") will
         consider documents that have been submitted with  the  application,
         and will only consider documents submitted  after  the  application
         where sub-paragraph (b) or (e) applies."

16. There then follows in sub-paragraph (b) what can be  described  as  the
    evidential flexibility aspect of the Rules in this regard.

17. The flaw in the argument advanced on behalf of the appellant therefore,
    is the assumption that where post-application or post-decision evidence
    relates to the relevant period  in  question,  it  can  be  taken  into
    account under s.85.  However, that contention fails to have  regard  to
    the fact that the Rules require  evidence  to  be  submitted  with  the
    application, which this letter was not.  It post-dated the  application
    and the decision.  It is evidence that should have been submitted  with
    the application, and accordingly s.85 cannot  be  used  to  permit  the
    evidence to be taken into account on appeal.

18. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that  the  FtJ  erred  in  law  in
    concluding that the letter dated 31 January 2014 could  be  taken  into
    account.

19. Ms Benfield did not distinctly rely on evidential flexibility under the
    Rules, although after I had raised the matter she did refer to it  very
    much as a secondary argument, i.e. the appellant would or  should  have
    been entitled to the  benefit  of  evidential  flexibility  within  the
    Rules.

20. It is to be  noted  that  the  FtJ  referred  to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager's ("ECM") having said that evidential flexibility was  employed
    and that the appellant was informed of the issues with her  application
    and invited  to  supply  the  missing  documents  or  provide  suitable
    originals.  That is indeed what the ECM's review says.  At [37] the FtJ
    in fact indicated that there was  nothing  to  reveal  that  evidential
    flexibility was applied.  He set out the relevant  Rule.   At  [38]  he
    said that the matter could be dealt with "by way of sending it back  to
    the respondent, to be dealt with in line with the flexibility under the
    rules".  He then  went  on  however,  to  deal  with  the  matter  with
    reference to s.85, as has been seen.

21. I do not consider that evidential flexibility has any part to  play  in
    the appeal before me, or indeed  had  any  application  to  the  appeal
    before the FtJ.   There  is  in  fact  nothing  to  indicate  that  the
    appellant was contacted in relation to any defect or  omission  in  the
    evidence provided.  More to the point, I am not  satisfied  that  there
    was any need for the respondent so to do.  Apart  from  anything  else,
    Appendix FM-SE, paragraph D(c) states that the decision-maker will  not
    request documents where he or she does not anticipate  that  addressing
    the error or omission will lead to a  grant,  because  the  application
    will be refused for other reasons.  In this case it  is  apparent  that
    the respondent did not anticipate that addressing any error or omission
    would lead to a grant, given the number of reasons given  for  refusing
    the application.  That is so, even though the FtJ resolved the  matters
    in the appellant's favour, and one matter was conceded by  the  ECM  in
    the review.

22. It is  to  be  noted  that  one  of  the  elements  of  the  evidential
    flexibility Rule is under D(b)(i)(dd) in relation to a  document  which
    does not contain all of  the  specified  information.   The  employer's
    letter dated August 2013 does omit reference to the complete period  of
    the sponsor's employment.  However, that letter was itself outside  the
    relevant 28 day period, so the omission in it, even if corrected, could
    not have meant that the letter complied with the  requirements  of  the
    Rules.

23. For those reasons, I am not satisfied that evidential flexibility could
    or should have been applied.

24. In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the FtJ erred in law  in  the
    respect to which I have referred.  His decision is set  aside.   I  re-
    make the decision dismissing the appeal.

    Decision

25. The decision of the FtT involved the making of an error on a  point  of
    law.  Its decision is set aside and the decision is re-made, dismissing
    the appeal.








Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            11/05/16
