

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02906/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Birmingham                     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On : 24 June 2015                             |On: 30 June 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            suldano dahir anshur
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Khan, instructed by Acharyas Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO). However, for  the
   purposes of this decision, I shall refer to the ECO as the respondent and
   Mrs Anshur as the appellant, reflecting their positions as they  were  in
   the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born on 5 May  1945,  residing  in
   Uganda. She applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as an adult
   dependent relative under  paragraph  EC-DR.1.1  of  Appendix  FM  of  the
   immigration rules. Her application was refused on 30 January 2014 on  the
   grounds that, whilst the respondent was satisfied that she required long-
   term personal care and thus satisfied the requirements  of  paragraph  E-
   ECDR.2.4, the evidence produced did not satisfy the respondent  that  she
   was unable to obtain the required level of care in Uganda so as  to  meet
   the requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.5.

3. The appellant appealed that decision  and  her  appeal  came  before  the
   First-tier  Tribunal  on  22  September  2014  and  was  allowed   in   a
   determination promulgated on 2 October 2014.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
   Pacey heard oral evidence from the  sponsor,  the  appellant's  son,  and
   considered documentary evidence from Mengo Hospital in  Kampala  and  two
   medical reports from Mulago Hospital and Kusenyi Health  Unit  confirming
   that the care needed by the appellant was not available there.  She  also
   considered a letter from the appellant's neighbour who had  been  looking
   after the appellant, but who had since left Uganda for the USA as she had
   refugee status there. On the basis that the appellant was being  provided
   with care by her neighbour at the date of the  respondent's  decision  to
   refuse entry clearance, she found that the requirements of  paragraph  E-
   ECDR.2.5 had not been met and that the appeal therefore failed under  the
   immigration rules. However, with respect to Article 8 she considered that
   matters at the date of hearing were relevant and, given that by that time
   the appellant's neighbour had left Uganda and the appellant was therefore
   without any care, she allowed the appeal on human rights grounds  on  the
   basis of her family life with the sponsor.

4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the  respondent,
   and granted, on the grounds of the judge's erroneous consideration of the
   appellant's circumstances at the date of the hearing rather than the date
   of the decision.

Appeal hearing and submissions

5. The appeal came before me on 24 June 2015. I heard submissions from  both
   parties.

6. Mr Khan accepted that the case law was against him and  that  he  had  to
   accept there was an error of law on the basis upon which  permission  had
   been granted. However he submitted that the appeal could nevertheless  be
   allowed on human rights grounds given that the appellant's  circumstances
   were exceptional and compelling. Family life had  been  established  with
   her son as there was a dependency going beyond normal ties between adults
   and it would be unduly harsh to refuse entry clearance.

7. Mr Mills submitted that there had to exist not only  compelling  features
   in the appellant's case, but compelling features not dealt with under the
   immigration rules, and that in this case everything had  been  considered
   under the rules.

8. Mr Khan reiterated his submissions in response.

Consideration and findings

9. It is not a matter of dispute that Judge Pacey erred in law by  directing
   herself that she had to consider matters at the date of the hearing  when
   considering Article 8. That was plainly not correct with respect to entry
   clearance cases and was contrary to the requirements in section 85(5)  of
   the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  The  position  was
   confirmed by the House of Lords in AS (Somalia) &  Anor  v  Secretary  of
   State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 32 where it was made clear that
   the correct approach, where there had  been  a  change  of  circumstances
   since the date of decision, would be to  make  a  fresh  application  for
   entry clearance. Indeed had the appellant made a fresh  application  when
   it became apparent that her neighbour was  leaving  Uganda,  rather  than
   going down the lengthier route of appealing the decision,  she  may  well
   have been granted entry clearance  by  now,  subject  of  course  to  the
   respondent being satisfied that the financial and other  requirements  of
   the rules could be met at that time.

10. It is argued on behalf of the appellant that her  circumstances  at  the
   date of the decision were sufficiently exceptional and compelling that it
   was open to the Tribunal to exercise discretion and allow the  appeal  on
   Article 8 grounds on that basis. However I agree with Mr Mills that  such
   a submission demonstrates a misapplication of the case  law  relevant  to
   Article 8 outside the immigration  rules,  since  the  appellant  has  to
   establish  not  simply  that  her  circumstances   were   compelling   or
   exceptional, but that there existed compelling  circumstances  which  had
   not been covered by the rules  and  which  therefore  existed  above  and
   beyond the  rules  outweighing  any  public  interest  considerations  as
   identified in section 117 of the 2002 Act. That has been  clarified  most
   recently in the case of The Secretary of State for the Home Department  v
   SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 which addressed both entry clearance
   cases as well as applications for  leave  to  remain  within  the  United
   Kingdom.

11. With regard to the appellant's particular case, the question of her ill-
   health and long-term care needs were all  matters  addressed  within  the
   rules and there is nothing in the evidence to  demonstrate  circumstances
   existing beyond that, at the time of the respondent's decision, so as  to
   justify a grant of leave outside the rules. Article 8  cannot  simply  be
   used to circumvent the requirements of the rules and it remains  open  to
   the appellant to make a fresh application for entry clearance to join her
   son in the United Kingdom. She will,  of  course,  have  to  satisfy  the
   respondent that she is able to meet all the  requirements  of  the  rules
   including the evidential and financial requirements, at that time.

12. For those reasons I find that the  judge  erred  in  law  and  that  her
   decision has  to  be  set  aside  and  the  appeal  dismissed  under  the
   immigration rules and on Article 8 grounds.

DECISION

13. The making of the decision  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
   making of an error on a point of law. The decision has been set aside and
   to that extent the appeal made by the  ECO  is  allowed.  I  re-make  the
   decision and substitute a decision dismissing Mrs Anshur's appeal on  all
   grounds.






                               Signed


                               Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede
