
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02872/2014
     OA/02873/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 11th December 2014 & 20th January 2015|On 11th February 2015               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     hNB
                                     gWB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           entry clearance officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss A Faryl of Counsel instructed by Beachwood
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. This is the Appellants' appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Dickson
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 1st August 2014.



Background

 2. The Appellants are citizens of the DRC born on 16th June 1998 and  15th
    May 2000 respectively. They applied to come to the  UK  to  join  their
    sister but were refused entry clearance. The Entry Clearance Officer he
    was not satisfied that they were related as  claimed,  nor  that  their
    father had died nor that their mother had abandoned them.  There was no
    evidence to demonstrate that they had ever met the Sponsor or that  she
    had ever provided them with financial support, and although  there  was
    evidence of an adoption in the DRC courts, it was not recognised by the
    UK.  The application was also refused on accommodation grounds.

 3. The judge had before him DNA evidence which supported the  relationship
    as claimed. He was satisfied that the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  were
    siblings, and that the Sponsor and her husband had been responsible for
    the Appellants' maintenance since July 2008.  So far  as  accommodation
    was concerned he stated that at the time of the decision there may  not
    have been satisfactory accommodation under the Housing Act.

 4. He wrote as follows:

         "The Appellants are well supported by  the  Sponsor  and  they  are
         living with the lawyer who  obtained  their  adoption  in  the  DRC
         courts.  It is reasonable to assume they have a  good  standard  of
         living by DRC standards.  The second Appellant is attending  school
         and studying for his A levels and the first Appellant is at present
         attending a training centre in order to learn to sew.

         I have considered the relevant  matters  as  set  out  in  Mundeba.
         There is no Article 8 claim in this case.  The Appellants have  not
         established that there are serious and compelling family  or  other
         considerations which would make their  exclusion  undesirable.   It
         follows that this appeal must be dismissed."

 5. The Appellants sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge had erred in erroneously assessing the circumstances  as  at  the
    date of hearing rather than as at the date of  decision.   As  at  that
    date,  on  the  evidence  before  the  judge,  there  was  a  temporary
    arrangement for them to live with the  lawyer  who  assisted  with  the
    adoption and his wife.  Furthermore the judge did not make any decision
    as to whether the accommodation rules were satisfied.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Lambert on 14th October 2014.

 7. On 5th November 2014 the Respondent served a reply accepting  that  the
    judge may have erred in considering postdecision evidence as to whether
    there were serious or compelling circumstances but submitting that this
    was immaterial in light  of  the  fact  that  the  circumstances  which
    existed as  at  the  date  of  decision  were  very  similar  to  those
    considered by the judge.



The Hearing

 8. Miss Faryl submitted that it was absolutely clear that  the  judge  had
    erred in looking at the circumstances as at the date  of  hearing.   It
    was equally clear that he had not had regard to the evidence before him
    from the lawyer dated 25th June 2013 which stated as follows

         "Sir

         Further to your correspondence dated  15.5.2013  requesting  me  to
         keep Miss Bikuta Ndundu Helange and Mr Bikuta Wasongamo  Grace  for
         aid (assistance) until all steps are finished with the aim to  join
         you in England.

         Given  that  Congolese  law  expressly  grants  you  the   parental
         authority of the said children following the judgment dated  May  7
         2014 the court Assossa Peace of Kinshasa/Kasa-Vubu.  On this, I put
         my service your request.  Knowing that you will pay my fees.

         Please accept Sir the assurance of the best feelings."

 9. Mr Diwnycz did not, as he put it, resist the application.

Consideration of whether there is an error of law

10. There are a number of errors in this determination.   First  the  judge
    wrongfully considered matters as they were at the date of  hearing  and
    not as at the date of decision, which is material because  he  did  not
    take into account the evidence that the lawyer was  looking  after  the
    children in a temporary capacity until they could join the  Sponsor  in
    the UK.  Second, he did not  make  a  clear  decision  in  relation  to
    accommodation. Third, he did not make any findings in  respect  of  the
    Appellants natural parents, one of whom is said to have died,  and  the
    other is said to have abandoned them.

11. The determination of Judge Dickson is set aside and must be re-made. It
    was hoped that the resumed hearing could continue  immediately  but  it
    quickly transpired that the Sponsor, who has since moved  to  a  larger
    property, did not have with her  evidence  of  the  compliance  of  the
    previous accommodation with the requirement of the Housing Acts.

The Resumed Hearing

12. At the resumed hearing the  Sponsor  gave  brief  oral  evidence.   She
    adopted her witness statement and explained that her father had died on
    1st April 2008. When she went to the DRC  in  July  of  that  year  her
    mother had disappeared and had left  the  children  with  a  neighbour.
    When the neighbour became unable to look after them the children passed
    to the care of the lawyer who had arranged for their  adoption  by  the
    Sponsor and for the application for entry clearance.

13. She provided two further letters from that lawyer confirming the  facts
    as stated  by  the  Sponsor  and  in  particular  confirming  that  the
    temporary arrangement, for which  he  was  being  paid,  could  not  be
    considered permanent.

14. She explained to Mr Diwnycz that,  so  far  as  the  accommodation  was
    concerned, it had been intended that the family would live in the  home
    provided by Unity Homes and Enterprises, although they  have  since  in
    fact moved to a larger house.  The document  from  Unity  Homes  states
    that the accommodation before the Entry Clearance Officer was a  three-
    bedroomed house with two double bedrooms and a  single  bedroom  and  a
    large living room, not a through room, with a separate kitchen.

15. Mr Diwnycz made no submissions save to  rely  on  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's reasons for refusal.  He was content that a finding  be  made
    that accommodation was satisfactory.  He was not  going  to  doubt  the
    Sponsor's  evidence  that  the  mother  had  disappeared  and  did  not
    challenge any of the documents from the  DRC,  including  the  document
    from the High Court of Kinshasa dated 7th May 2013 awarding custody  of
    the children to the Sponsor.  He  made  no  submission  that  the  high
    threshold set in paragraph 297(i)(f) was not met.

Findings and Conclusions

16. The DRC is not a signatory to the Hague  Convention  and  the  adoption
    order from the High Court in Kinshasa  is  not  recognised  here.   The
    Sponsor has not made any application in the  UK  for  an  inter-country
    adoption and the requirements of paragraph 316A are not met.

17. Accordingly, the relevant  paragraph  is  297(i)  which  sets  out  the
    requirements to be met by persons seeking indefinite leave to enter the
    UK as children of a  relative  present  and  settled  in  the  UK.  The
    relevant provision here is that the Appellants are seeking  to  join  a
    relative present and settled in  the  UK  and  there  are  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion  of  the
    children undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for their
    care.

18. The original judge made no adverse credibility findings.  Although  the
    Entry Clearance Officer originally doubted that the relationship was as
    claimed the issue has been settled by DNA evidence and the Sponsor  has
    been proved to be the biological  sister  of  both  Appellants.  It  is
    accepted that the Sponsor has  been  responsible  for  the  Appellants'
    maintenance since July 2008 and she paid for them to be  looked  after,
    first by neighbours and then by the lawyer who  obtained  the  adoption
    order.  Monies have also been sent for the school fees.   No  issue  is
    taken with the authenticity of the death certificate.

19. The underlying facts are therefore no longer in dispute.

20. The Appellants' father died in April 2008, and shortly thereafter their
    mother, who is from Angola, disappeared. Since that time responsibility
    for the Appellants' welfare has passed to the Sponsor who has made  the
    arrangements for  their  care.  For  the  subsequent   five  years  the
    children were looked after by a neighbour and, at the date of decision,
    they were living in a one-bedroom flat with the lawyer who had prepared
    the adoption and visa papers.

21. In Mundeba (Section 55  and  para  297(i)(f))  [2013]  UKUT  00088  the
    Tribunal held that, whilst the statutory duty under Section 55  of  the
    UK Borders Act 2009 only applies to children within the UK, the broader
    duty under the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child  explained  why
    the Secretary of  State's  IDI  invites  Entry  Clearance  Officers  to
    consider the statutory guidance issued under Section 55.

22. The Tribunal held that the focus must be on the  circumstances  of  the
    child  in  the  light  of  his  or  her  age,  social  background   and
    developmental history and will involve enquiry as to whether -

      a) There is evidence of neglect or abuse;

      b) There are unmet needs that should be catered for;

      c) There are stable arrangements for the child's physical care.

23.  "Serious  and  compelling"  requires  more  than  the  parties  simply
    desiring a particular state  of  affairs  and  sets  a  high  threshold
    excluding cases where it is simply  the  wish  of  the  parties  to  be
    together.  In that case the Appellant was being  looked  after  by  the
    Girl Guides Association. His sister  was  in  straitened  circumstances
    supported through income support and DLA and has a 4 year old child who
    suffers from sickle cell anaemia.  She had never cared  for  him,  they
    had been separated four years and were now maintaining communication by
    electronic means.

24. The Tribunal observed that:

         "Our conclusion is that on the evidence before  him  it  was  fully
         open to the judge to  conclude  that  the  threshold  in  paragraph
         297(i)(f) had not been reached.  We doubt whether he could lawfully
         have concluded that it had been reached.  It is not the  case  that
         any 15 year old orphan who has a sister in the UK must be  admitted
         irrespective of his actual circumstances or the  prior  history  of
         the relations between the Appellant and the proposed carer."

25. The facts here are rather different. The  Sponsor  took  responsibility
    for the Appellants following the discovery that they had been abandoned
    and made arrangements for them to be cared  for  by  neighbours,  which
    came to an end when the neighbour became  ill.   The  Sponsor  and  her
    husband then made an application for guardianship which was granted  in
    May 2013. The Sponsor and her husband are financially  independent  and
    their application is supported by social services. No  issue  is  taken
    with the Sponsor's ability to provide suitable care for them in the way
    that a parent would.

26. The very temporary nature of their accommodation  is  not  evidence  of
    neglect or abuse, but it is evidence both of instability and  of  unmet
    needs. A roof has been provided but the unchallenged evidence  is  that
    this is a short term  commercial  arrangement,  and  it  could  not  be
    described as secure. No provision is  being  made  for  the  children's
    emotional needs, which are best addressed by being  with  the  Sponsor.
    It is now some seven years since they have been  without  a  family  to
    care for them.

27. The Sponsor left the DRC as a  refugee  and,  on  the  evidence,  never
    intended to bring her younger siblings to the UK until her parents were
    no longer able to  care  for  them  either  through  death  or  through
    abandonment.  She made arrangements for them to  stay  with  neighbours
    for the five years after her parents died/abandoned them but when  that
    arrangement came to an end. This is not a case where the Sponsor simply
    wants her siblings to be with her.

28. The  fact  that  the  Sponsor  has  been  able  to  make  a  commercial
    arrangement with the lawyer who conducted the guardianship  proceedings
    on her behalf to  accommodate  the  children  temporarily  in  his  one
    bedroom flat is not a proper basis to conclude that they thereby do not
    fulfil the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f).

Decision

29. The original judge erred in law.  His  decision  has  been  set  aside.
    This is re-made as follows.  The Appellants' appeals are allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        Date 10th February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

