
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/02388/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision Promulgated         |
|On 9 August 2016                              |On 22 August 2016            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                               PRIYANKA KUMARI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of Priyanka Kumari, a citizen  of  India  born  25
       August 1988, against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  3
       June 2016 dismissing her appeal, itself brought against the  decision
       of the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse her entry clearance  as  the
       partner of her Sponsor, Syamkumar Ramadhin.

    2. The application was made on the basis of her marriage to Mr  Ramadhin
       on 18 September 2013. The case put by the Appellant and  Sponsor  was
       that their relationship was genuine and subsisting with  a  permanent
       intention to reside together, and that this  was  backed  up  by  the
       extensive visits the Sponsor had made to the Appellant in Mauritius.

    3. The application was refused because the decision maker considered

       (a)  There was insufficient evidence to establish that  the  marriage
           was a genuine and  subsisting  one,  given  that  there  was  no
           adequate material put forward of  ongoing  contact  between  the
           Sponsor and Appellant following their wedding;

       (b)  The financial requirements were not met absent clear evidence of
           her Sponsor's receipt of Carer's Allowance.

    4. The second reason was withdrawn  when  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager
       recognised that adequate evidence had now  been  forthcoming  of  the
       Sponsor's entitlement to the social support in question.

    5. The Appellant duly appealed, and her  appeal  was  dismissed  by  the
       First-tier Tribunal, upholding the reasoning of the  Entry  Clearance
       Officer, essentially because there were gaps in the messaging history
       and insufficient evidence had been put forward of their time together
       during the Sponsor's visit to see her  in  Mauritius;  some  passport
       stamps prayed in aid of the case were thought to be unexplained.  The
       First-tier Tribunal also thought that the photographs  supplied  were
       of limited use; additionally it opined that no  marriage  certificate
       had been put forward, and so the fact of marriage was rejected.

    6. Grounds of appeal argued that

       (a)  The question of the validity of the marriage was  not  in  issue
           and a marriage certificate was readily available if sought;

       (b)  Date-stamped  photographs  showed  the  extent  of  family  life
           between the couple during the Sponsor's various  visits  to  see
           her;

       (c)  The lack of social media records was largely  explained  by  the
           extensive  periods  over  which  the  Sponsor  had  visited  the
           Appellant, during which periods no  such  messaging  would  have
           been necessary;

       (d)   The  fact  that  the  Sponsor  was  his  parents'   carer   but
           nevertheless considered it essential to make long visits to  his
           wife itself showed his case to be a genuine one.

    7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Gillespie  for  the  First-
       tier Tribunal on 5 July 2016 accepting that the grounds were arguable
       and additionally noted that the decision seemed  to  have,  arguably,
       applied a standard of proof rather higher than  that  of  balance  of
       probabilities given the extent of documentary evidence that had  been
       found inadequate to discharge the burden on the Appellant.

    8. As the Sponsor was unrepresented, I conducted  the  proceedings  with
       some informality. The Sponsor provided a bundle of evidence that  had
       been before the First-tier Tribunal. This included

       (a)  A  marriage  register  entry  recording  their  marriage  on  18
           September 2013 in Delhi;

       (b)  A series of electronically date-stamped photographs showing  the
           couple at their wedding and during various visits  made  by  the
           Appellant since the wedding;

       (c)   Social  media  records  showing  numerous  calls  between   the
           Appellant and Sponsor;

       (d)  Confirmation of  hotel  bookings  for  the  couple  and  of  the
           Sponsor's outward-bound travel to join her,  between  India  and
           Mauritius;

       (e)  Bank statements  for  the  Appellant  showing  her  presence  in
           Mauritius;

       (f)  Money transfer receipts for remittances from the Sponsor to  the
           Appellant;

       (g)  Evidence of the Sponsor's mother Chandranee  Rahamdin's  illness
           from heart disease including heart failure, and other illnesses;
           and a note of his father's treatment for Alzheimer's disease.

    9. As Mr Wilding for the Secretary of State  readily  accepted,  it  was
       very hard to defend the decision of Judge Sweeney, which appeared  to
       apply a standard of proof significantly higher than of the balance of
       probabilities and summarily rejected several strands of evidence that
       appeared perfectly cogent.

   10. There were self-evident explanations for the matters  that  concerned
       the First-tier Tribunal: the Sponsor's extensive visits  to  see  his
       wife, which were clearly shown in photographs that were unequivocally
       date-stamped by his mobile 'phone or via social media website records
       and plainly displayed the Sponsor himself together with his  wife  in
       many situations in which they displayed affection  for  one  another,
       meant that it was unrealistic to expect a  consistent  chain  of  the
       kind of  social  messaging  that  might  appear  when  a  couple  are
       separated for very  long  periods;  the  Sponsor's  passport  plainly
       showed the extent and duration of his visits to Mauritius; and  there
       was evidence attesting to their joint stay in hotel  rooms.  Much  of
       this material  predated  the  decision,  and  that  which  post-dated
       patently  related  to  circumstances  appertaining  at  the  date  of
       decision, as demonstrating the reality of the  relationship.  It  was
       additionally correct that the validity of the marriage had  not  been
       questioned by the Respondent.

   11. I accordingly  accepted  that  there  were  material  errors  of  law
       established in the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision,  by  way  of  a
       failure to take account of relevant considerations and the making  of
       irrational conclusions.

   12. Mr Wilding again took a pragmatic stance given the highly cogent  and
       animated evidence from the Sponsor, who was a very impressive witness
       who exuded affection for his wife and expressed  serious  frustration
       with the process that had  so  far  delayed  their  reunion  in  this
       country, and accepted that it would  be  appropriate  for  the  Upper
       Tribunal to proceed to finally determine the appeal on  the  material
       before it: he had nothing to add to the refusal letter from the Entry
       Clearance Officer.

   13. I have already summarised the evidence above  that  corroborates  the
       Appellant's claim to be in a genuine and subsisting relationship with
       the Sponsor, with whom she intends to live permanently. I accept that
       the Sponsor's oral evidence, which was consistent with  the  original
       application and the documents supplied,  is  credible.  Together  the
       social media records, date-stamped photographs, and travel and  hotel
       records make a powerful case for the relationship being a genuine one
       once assessed according to the appropriate standard of proof  of  the
       balance of probabilities.

   14. I accordingly allow the appeal.

Decision:

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  allowed.  The  Appellant's
appeal against the refusal of entry clearance  by  the  Respondent  is  also
finally determined, and allowed.

Decision

The appeal is allowed.


Signed      Date: 10 August 2016

Judge Symes
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Date: 10 August 2016

Judge Symes
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
