
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02776/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 May 2016                                |On 3 June 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                             mr md yeasir arafat
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik of Counsel instructed by Hafiz & Haque
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The subject of this  appeal  is  a  determination  sent  by  First-tier
    Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge  Metzer  on  19  October  2015  dismissing   the
    appellant's appeal against a decision made  by  the  respondent  on  17
    December 2014 to remove him from the UK under s.10  of  the  1999  Act.
    Such a decision carries a right of appeal  out  of  country  which  the
    appellant exercised upon his return to Bangladesh.

2.   The basis of the respondent's decision was that  in  his  last  Tier  1
    application made on 16 November 2012  (shortly  before  expiry  of  his
    leave to remain) he had exercised deception by  submitting  an  invalid
    TOEIC score report with his Tier 1 application.  In concluding that the
    respondent had discharged the burden on her to prove deception, the FtT
    judge noted the evidence relied upon by the respondent  which  included
    (i) the ETS finding that his test results had been obtained by use of a
    proxy  tester;  (ii)  Home  Office  generic  evidence   regarding   the
    reliability of the ETS analyses; and (iii)  evidence  specific  to  the
    appellant's case.  This was identified at para 6 as follows:

         "The Respondent also relied upon security  marking  which  gives  a
         context as to the level of cheating.  The secure public test centre
         as overseen by ETS global employees show that only three were valid
         out of 1,039 TOEIC  speaking  and  written  tests  whereas  Synergy
         Business College where the Appellant took the test, ETS  identified
         that 2,410 out of 4,894  TOEIC  speaking  and  written  tests  were
         invalid comprising 49%, whereas the percentage  invalid  of  secure
         public test centres was 0.28%."


     The judge then concluded at para 8:

         "Although the Appellant  has  submitted  an  IELTS  certificate  in
         February 2015 suggesting he  passed  the  test  which  the  parties
         agreed only went to the Appellant's credibility, I have received no
         further evidence as to how he took  the  test  and  have  no  other
         evidence from the Appellant  to  counter  the  points  advanced  on
         behalf of  the  Respondent.   The  failure  rate  is  49%  and  the
         Appellant's case was based upon an analysis by ETS.  It was alleged
         that the Appellant's result was obtained by  the  use  of  a  proxy
         tester and the Appellant has not sought to  address  that  concern.
         Even taking into account that the Appellant appears to have  passed
         a recent test, I do not find the Appellant has adequately addressed
         the concerns of the Respondent  as  contained  within  the  witness
         evidenced and reflected [in] the inordinately high failure rate  in
         respect of Synergy Business College."

3.   The appellant's grounds as advanced are in summary:

         (1)  that the judge had erred by deciding the case  "in  line  with
             the  respondent's   generalised   allegation"   and   "without
             considering the evidence of the appellant" which was  that  he
             had not used a proxy;


         (2)  that the judge failed to consider the  appellant's  subsequent
             achievement in securing the "English Certificate";


         (3)  that the judge failed to take into account the fact  that  the
             appellant was not given an in-country right of appeal  due  to
             which he had to leave the UK and was unable to  give  evidence
             to the FtT to explain any allegation raised against him;


         (4)  (This ground was added by way of a skeleton argument submitted
             at the outset of the hearing before me) the "generic evidence"
             relied on by the respondent has been "firmly rejected" by  the
             Upper Tribunal in SM and Qadir v SSHD (ETS - evidence - Burden
             of Proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) (hereafter "Qadir").


4.   I am not persuaded that the judge erred in law.  Taking the grounds  in
    reverse order, whilst I am prepared to accept ground (4) as an  amended
    ground, it relies on  evidence that was not  in existence at  the  time
    the judge made his decision and does not fulfil the criteria  necessary
    for a mistake of fact to constitute an error of law.  Further, in Qadir
    the conclusion of the Presidential panel did not amount  to  a  blanket
    rejection of the generic evidence. Whilst finding it weak it considered
    it was sufficient to discharge  the  evidential  burden  and  could  be
    sufficient to discharge the legal burden in the absence of credible and
    satisfactory evidence from individual appellants.   Thus, at para 67-68
    the Tribunal concluded that the Secretary of State had  discharged  the
    evidential burden:

         "67. We begin by asking ourselves whether the  Secretary  of  State
             has discharged the  evidential  burden  of  proving  that  the
             Appellants were, or either of them was, guilty  of  dishonesty
             in the respects alleged. Bearing in mind that, as noted above,
             all of the Secretary of State's evidence  was  adduced  first,
             reflecting the burden of proof, it is  appropriate  to  record
             that at the stage when the Secretary of  State's  case  closed
             there was no submission on behalf of either Appellant that the
             aforementioned evidential burden had not been  discharged.  We
             draw attention, en passant, to a procedural issue which may be
             worthy  of  fuller  consideration  in  an  appropriate  future
             appeal, namely the question of whether in  a  case  where  the
             Secretary of State bears the evidential burden of establishing
             sufficient evidence of deception and,  at  the  hearing,  goes
             first in the order of  batting,  the  Tribunal  should  invite
             submissions from the parties'  representatives  at  the  stage
             when the Secretary of State's evidence is completed.


         68.  As our analysis and conclusions in the  immediately  preceding
             section make clear, we have substantial reservations about the
             strength and quality of the Secretary of State's evidence. Its
             shortcomings are manifest. On the other hand, while bearing in
             mind that the context is one of alleged deception, we must  be
             mindful  of  the  comparatively  modest  threshold  which   an
             evidential  burden  entails.  The  calls  for  an   evaluative
             assessment on the part  of  the  tribunal.  By  an  admittedly
             narrow margin we are satisfied that the Secretary of State has
             discharged this burden. The effect of this is that there is  a
             burden, again an evidential one, on the Appellants of  raising
             an innocent explanation."


5.   It then turned to the issue of  the  legal  burden  together  with  the
    state of the evidence advanced by the appellants in the case before it.




         "69. We turn thus  to  address  the  legal  burden.  We  accept  Mr
             Dunlop's submission  that  in  considering  an  allegation  of
             dishonesty in this context the relevant factors to be  weighed
             include (inexhaustively, we would add) what the person accused
             has to gain from being dishonest; what he  has  to  lose  from
             being dishonest; what is known about his  character;  and  the
             culture or environment in which he operated.  Mr  Dunlop  also
             highlighted the importance of  three  further  considerations,
             namely how the Appellants performed under  cross  examination,
             whether the Tribunal's assessment of  their  English  language
             proficiency  is  commensurate  with  their  TOEIC  scores  and
             whether their academic  achievements  are  such  that  it  was
             unnecessary or illogical for them to have cheated."


6.   Having made clear that the relevant  factors  to  be  weighed  included
    those pertaining the individual appellant, the Tribunal then  proceeded
    to treat the assessment it had  to  make  as  a  two-stage  one,  first
    assessing the evidence  of  Dr  Harrison  produced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellants;  and  second  assessing  the  evidence  particular  to  the
    appellant. As regards the first stage it said:


         "70. We begin with the expert evidence of Dr  Harrison  upon  which
             both Appellants rely. We have already made our  assessment  of
             Dr Harrison's evidence in the context of our evaluation of the
             evidence on behalf of the Secretary of State: see [58] -  [61]
             above. There is nothing of substance to add to this. In short,
             the evidence adduced on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
             emerged paled and heavily weakened by the examination to which
             it was subjected. By the stage when Dr Harrison's evidence was
             completed, the Secretary of State's  evidence  had  paled  and
             wilted. In the sporting world a verdict of  no  contest  would
             have been appropriate at this juncture. The Appellants'  cases
             are enhanced and fortified by Dr Harrison's evidence, which we
             accept in its entirety".


7.   The Tribunal then turned to the evidence particular to  the  appellants
    and in this context it is notable that it attached  significant  weight
    to the detailed accounts of both as regards how they took the tests and
    the surrounding circumstances. It concluded that  the  first  appellant
    had given  credible  evidence  and  then  proceeded  to  the  following
    conclusion:

         "89.     The final question is whether the Secretary of  State  has
             discharged the legal burden of establishing on the balance  of
             probabilities  that  this   Appellant   procured   his   TOEIC
             certificate by deceit. The answer to this question requires  a
             balancing of all of the findings  and  evaluative  assessments
             rehearsed above. We are satisfied, objectively,  that  at  the
             stage when this Appellant took the tests in question there was
             no need for him to engage in any form of  cheating.  He  would
             have been sufficiently proficient in  English  to  secure  the
             necessary qualification legitimately. Furthermore,  given  his
             extensive familiarity with the immigration  system,  he  would
             have been aware of the  grave  consequences  of  any  form  of
             deception. To have cheated would have entailed engaging  in  a
             game of risk with very high stakes indeed. Furthermore, having
             considered all the evidence, we have no reason to question the
             Appellant's good character generally.


         90.  In addition, as already highlighted, this Appellant's case  is
             fortified by the unchallenged evidence of the  steps  which  he
             took in his own defence from the moment when  the  illegitimacy
             of his TOEIC certificate  was  first  questioned.  We  find  no
             reason to doubt this evidence. Moreover, there was very  little
             exploration in cross-examination of the Appellant's account  of
             the  tests  undertaken  and  the   surrounding   circumstances.
             Finally, we must  weigh  our  findings  concerning  the  marked
             shortcomings in the Secretary of State's evidence, coupled with
             our acceptance of the Appellants' expert evidence."


8.   A similar process of assessment was conducted in respect of the  second
    appellant.

9.   The Tribunal ended by setting out what is called" Omnibus  Conclusions"
    as follows:


         "100.The evidence adduced on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State
             suffers  from  the   multiple   frailties   and   shortcomings
             identified above. The oral evidence of  the  first  Appellant,
             SM, was a classic curate's egg. We have  exposed  its  mix  of
             strengths and imperfections above. Having  done  so,  we  have
             concluded that the core elements of his  case  are  plausible.
             The oral evidence of the second Appellant, Mr Qadir,  was,  in
             contrast, impressive in its entirety.  We  have  accepted  the
             central thrust of his  case  also.  The  documentary  evidence
             adduced by both  Appellants  contains  no  significant  flaws.
             While  certain  questions  deserving  of   consideration   and
             reflection have been raised (reflected in our conclusion  that
             the  Secretary  of  State's   evidential   burden   has   been
             satisfied), these are insufficient  to  displace  our  omnibus
             conclusion that, viewing all the evidence  in  the  round  and
             having subjected the Appellants' testimony to the Tribunal  to
             critical scrutiny, the  core  of  their  respective  cases  is
             truthful and plausible. Finally, the  expert  evidence  of  Dr
             Harrison significantly undermines  the  Secretary  of  State's
             case, fortifies and reinforces the  case  of  both  Appellants
             and, ultimately, has emerged not merely unshaken but  enhanced
             .


         101.  We have already held that  the  evidential  burden  of  proof
             resting  on  the  Secretary  of  State   has   been   narrowly
             discharged. For the  reasons  which  we  have  given,  we  are
             satisfied that both Appellants have discharged their burden of
             raising an innocent explanation of the prima facie indications
             of deception  on  their  part  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
             evidence. For the reasons  elaborated,  we  conclude,  without
             hesitation,  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has  failed   to
             establish,  on  the  balance  of   probabilities,   that   the
             Appellants'  prima  facie  innocent  explanations  are  to  be
             rejected. The legal burden of proof falling on  the  Secretary
             of State has not been discharged.  The  Appellants  are  clear
             winners.


         102.   We take this opportunity to  re-emphasise  that  every  case
             belonging to the ETS/TOEIC  stable  will  invariably  be  fact
             sensitive. To this we add that every appeal will be determined
             on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  adduced  by  the   parties.
             Furthermore, the hearing of  these  appeals  has  demonstrated
             beyond  peradventure  that  judicial  review  is  an  entirely
             unsatisfactory litigation vehicle  for  the  determination  of
             disputes of this kind: see Gazi at [36] - [37].


         103. We take note of  the  indications  in  the  conduct  of  these
             appeals that, in some future case, the Secretary of State  may
             seek to adduce  further  evidence,  likely  to  be  expert  in
             nature. Should this  eventuate  the  evidential  framework  of
             future appeals will not  merely  be  fact  sensitive  but  may
             include an entirely new ingredient. As we have emphasised, all
             appeals will be decided on the basis of the evidence  actually
             adduced.


         104. The factors which  were  of  particular  significance  in  the
             exercise of making  our  findings  and  conclusions  in  these
             appeals  are  evident  from  what  we  have  written  in  this
             judgment. We are conscious that some future appeals may be  of
             the "out of country" species. It  is  our  understanding  that
             neither the FtT nor this tribunal has experience of an out  of
             country appeal of this kind, whether  through  the  medium  of
             video link or Skype or  otherwise.  The  question  of  whether
             mechanisms of this kind are satisfactory and,  in  particular,
             the legal question of whether they provide an appellant with a
             fair hearing will  depend  upon  the  particular  context  and
             circumstances of the individual case. This, predictably, is an
             issue which may require future judicial determination."

    Particular note should be taken of what the Tribunal said in para  102,
    namely that "...every case  belonging  to  the  ETS/TOEIC  stable  will
    invariably be fact sensitive. To this we add that every appeal will  be
    determined on the basis of the evidence adduced by the parties."

10.  As regards ground (3), the fact that the appellant had only an  out-of-
    country appeal was a consequence of the statutory framework.  The judge
    had no discretion to change that.  Insofar as  the  argument  seeks  to
    identify lack of equality of arms, the appellant in this case  took  no
    steps to enhance his  ability  to  give  evidence.   He  did  not,  for
    example, request that he be allowed to  give  evidence  by  video-link.
    Moreover, although he had submitted a written statement dated 2 October
    2015, in relation to the allegation against him of deception it did not
    seek to provide any detail as to how, where and when he  took  his  ETS
    test, and what he recalled about it.  As the judge noted at para 8,  "I
    received no further evidence as to how he took the  test  and  have  no
    other evidence  to  counter  the  points  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent".  The appellant's statement simply repeated his denial that
    he had not used a proxy or otherwise practised deception.

11.  In addition, the evidence relied upon by the respondent in  support  of
    her allegation that the appellant in this  appeal  had  used  deception
    went beyond the generic evidence.  As observed and relied upon  by  the
    judge at para 6:

         "The Respondent also relied upon security  marking  which  gives  a
         context as to the level of cheating.  The secure public test centre
         as overseen by ETS global  employees  show  that  only  three  were
         invalid out of 1,039 TOEIC speaking and written tests whereas  [at]
         Synergy Business College where the Appellant  took  the  test,  ETS
         identified that 2,410 out of 4,894 TOEIC speaking and written tests
         were invalid comprising 49%,  whereas  the  percentage  invalid  of
         secure public test centres was 0.28%."

12.  Ground (2) complains  that  the  judge  should  not  have  ignored  the
    appellant's achievement in obtaining  an  IELTS  certificate  dated  18
    February 2015 taken with the Cambridge English language  assessment  in
    which he passed all the tests  with  an  overall  band  score  of  7.0.
    However, in order to succeed under the relevant  immigration  rule  the
    applicant had to show he had obtained  the  relevant  English  language
    qualification prior to the date of application.  At that date (November
    2012) the qualification he relied on was based  on  the  invalid  TOEIC
    score  report.   Nor  had  the  appellant  even  obtained   the   IELTS
    certificate by the date of decision in December  2014.  In  Qadir,  the
    Tribunal pointed out at para 80 that one factor that  might  limit  the
    value of evidence of a recent certificate was  "the  passage  of  time"
    since an impugned ETS test was taken. In this  case  it  was  over  two
    years. In any event, the judge appears to have been prepared to  accept
    the fact that the appellant had obtained this qualification in February
    2015 as being relevant to his credibility (see 8) but even so  was  not
    satisfied it cast a different light on the earlier test or  on  overall
    assessment of his account. The judge stated at 8:

         "Even taking into account that the Appellant appears to have passed
         a recent test, I do not find  [he]  has  adequately  addressed  the
         concerns of the Respondent as contained within the witness evidence
         and reflected [in] the inordinately high failure rate in respect of
         Synergy Business College."

13.  In light of what I have already set out in rejecting  grounds  (2)-(4),
    it is unnecessary to say anything about ground (1) save that,  contrary
    to what it asserts, the judge did not decide the case "in line with the
    respondent's generalised allegation without considering the evidence of
    the  appellant".   The  judge  properly  noted  that  the  respondent's
    allegation was based both on generic and specific evidence and that the
    appellant's own evidence seeking to rebut the allegation  of  deception
    was both not credible and unsatisfactory.

Notice of Decision

14.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly the judge's decision to dismiss the appeal  must
    stand.

15.  No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 2 June 2016

                         [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

