
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02870/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th March 2014                              |                           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                             MRS BABLY RANI DEB
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan (instructed by Immigration Aid)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal, with  permission,  against
    the determination of the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Fox)  promulgated
    on 26th November 2013 by which  it  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  to  refuse  her  entry
    clearance as a spouse

 2. It was accepted before the First-tier Tribunal that the only issue  was
    accommodation. In the determination the  Judge  set  out  the  evidence
    before him between  paragraphs  11  and  18,  the  submissions  between
    paragraph 19 and 24 and his findings from paragraph 25 to 31.

 3. The Judge noted that there was no Respondent's bundle in the file.  The
    Respondent was however represented and had  sight  of  the  Appellant's
    bundle. With regard to accommodation  it  was  said  that  the  Sponsor
    resided with his parents and a sister in a three bedroom flat of  which
    his father was the tenant. He held a secure tenancy, the landlord being
    Islington Council. The Judge noted that he had before him a letter from
    Islington Council dated 12th December 2012  which  confirmed  that  the
    Sponsor's father holds a secure tenancy on  the  property  which  is  a
    three-bedroom flat suitable for six persons. That letter also  said  in
    terms:-

         "This letter does  not  in  any  way  constitute  permission  being
         granted by Islington Council. I am simply providing the information
         as requested."

          So much was noted by the Judge at paragraph 13.

 4. The Sponsor told the Judge that he believed he had permission but  then
    agreed that the Appellant did not have permission and agreed  that  she
    required permission.

 5. The Judge noted that housing benefit was paid to the  Sponsor's  father
    but that the Sponsor claimed to pay rent to his father.

 6. The Judge also referred to another document from  the  local  authority
    listing the persons  authorised  to  live  at  the  property  and  that
    included a second sister. The Judge noted there was discrepant evidence
    as to when she left the property. The  Judge  was  told  that  she  had
    married and left in November 2012 but the housing report that the judge
    had been provided with, which followed an inspection in July 2012, made
    no mention of her occupancy.

 7. In his findings the Judge at  paragraph  25  said  that  the  evidence,
    considered in the round, demonstrated that  misleading  statements  had
    been made. He noted that the Sponsor had stated  that  his  sister  had
    left the address in November 2012 but that the housing report  did  not
    list her as an occupant in July  2012.  The  Judge  said  that  it  was
    reasonable to conclude that a false statement  or  false  document  had
    been used to facilitate the Appellant's entry to the UK. He  then  went
    on to indicate that he was unable to rely upon the Sponsor  to  provide
    an honest account of his domestic circumstances which cast  doubt  upon
    the reliance he placed  upon  the  rent  receipts  to  demonstrate  his
    contribution to the payment of the accommodation. The Judge  then  went
    on at paragraph 28 to indicate that whilst he was confined to  consider
    the sole issue of  accommodation,  he  expressed  significant  concerns
    relating to the other documentary evidence relied upon.  He  placed  no
    weight on the letter from Islington Council.

 8. The Judge had earlier referred  to  the  housing  report  and  said  at
    paragraph 19 that the report was unreliable as there  was  inconsistent
    reference to the author in the first and third  person  which  did  not
    indicate the report was written by the alleged author.  He  also  noted
    that only one bedroom had been photographed despite  confirmation  that
    the property was a three-bedroom property.

 9. I find that the Judge's findings of dishonesty and  the  use  of  false
    statements and false documents to be unsupported by  the  evidence  and
    wholly unjustifiable in the circumstances.

10. I have examined the documents closely. This Tribunal  often  sees  less
    than professional housing reports in support of such appeals. In  fact,
    this example is better than most as it does contain some photographs as
    well as a proper description of the property. I see nothing whatever of
    significance in the fact that there is only a photograph of one of  the
    bedrooms. The property is quite clearly  a  three-bedroom  property  as
    confirmed by Islington Council who own it. There is also a copy of  the
    Sponsor's father's tenancy agreement. He is the sole tenant recorded in
    that document which is dated January 2009.  It  also  lists  the  other
    persons who are to live in the property as being the Sponsor's  mother,
    two sisters and himself. That document confirms the property  to  be  a
    three-bedroom property. Assuming, and I do, that the adult Sponsor does
    not share a room with his sister then there is sufficient accommodation
    for the Appellant in the property whether  or  not  the  second  sister
    resides there.

11. However, that is not the end of the matter. Adequacy  of  accommodation
    consists of  more  than  physical  space.  The  accommodation  must  be
    available  to  the  Appellant  as  well  as  of  sufficient  size.  The
    availability of that accommodation for the  Appellant  is  specifically
    not confirmed. The secure tenancy agreement does not list  her;  indeed
    it would not as she was not her Sponsor's  spouse  at  the  time.  More
    tellingly, the letter of 12th December 2012, clearly obtained  for  the
    purposes of the appeal specifically rules out permission.

12. Accordingly, the Appellant, on the basis of  the  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal could not  succeed  so  far  as  the  accommodation
    requirement is concerned. It would have been a very  simple  matter  to
    obtain that evidence and present  it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  a
    follow-up letter to the council specifically asking for permission  for
    her to reside there would  have  been  required.  This  was  not  done.
    Therefore, despite the Judge making an  error  in  his  findings  about
    dishonesty, that error is not material as the Appellant cannot succeed.

13. If it is the case that the Council is prepared to give consent then the
    appropriate course for the Appellant is to  make  a  fresh  application
    with appropriate evidence. This decision  should  make  clear  for  any
    future application that there has been no finding of dishonesty against
    the family.

14. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 11th March 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
