
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02775/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 17th July 2015                    |On 23rd July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                            Mr pradip kumar modak
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - new delhi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Dasani (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Somal, promulgated on 23rd February 2015, following a hearing  at
    Nottingham on 20th February 2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    allowed the appeal of Pradip Kumar Modak.  The Respondent Secretary  of
    State, subsequently applied to, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of India, who was born on 20th April
    1996.  He is the child of the Sponsor, Mr Dipak Kumar Modak,  a  person
    present and settled in the UK.  The Appellant challenges  the  decision
    of the Respondent  dated  30th  January  2014  that  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities, his sponsoring father did not have  sole  responsibility
    for his upbringing  or  that  there  was  an  absence  of  serious  and
    compelling family or  other  considerations  which  did  not  make  his
    exclusion undesirable from the UK.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that, although he is living with his mother in
    India, since his father came to the UK in  August  2004,  his  mother's
    health has progressively deteriorated such that she is unable  to  look
    after herself "for her basic needs let alone take care  of  their  son"
    (paragraph 8).  She has hepatitis and problems  with  her  hearing  and
    struggles with colds.  She is unable to cook for  the  children  or  to
    clean the house.  There is a lady who comes to the house every  day  to
    shop, cook, and clean and another man who comes to  take  care  of  the
    house and to undertake household chores.  He relies upon a letter  from
    a doctor dated 12th July 2013  stating  that  the  mother  has  chronic
    hepatitis and recommends that she has three  months'  bed  rest.   (See
    paragraph 10).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the  sponsoring  father,  Dipak  Modak,  carried  a
    substantial responsibility for his son  in  India.   She  set  out  his
    activities in relation to their son.  First, that he "Sends  money  for
    the  Appellant's  maintenance,  which  his  mother  uses  for  all  his
    financial needs and upkeep".  Second, that "The Sponsor has financially
    supported the Appellant as evidenced through the money transfers.   The
    Sponsor has stated that he alone made all the important decisions about
    the Appellant".  The judge observed that,

         "The fact that the Appellant's mother took day-to-day care  of  him
         but is no longer able to and the fact that his father lives in  the
         UK which has been his home for the last for over  ten  years  makes
         exclusion of the Appellant undesirable given his  father  lives  in
         the UK".

    Third, that "The parent who lives abroad cannot be described as  having
    abdicated responsibility for the Appellant",  because,  "The  Sponsor's
    evidence was clear that he alone made decisions about  the  Appellant".
    Fourth,  the  judge  considered  the   specifics   of   the   Sponsor's
    responsibility and pointed out  that,  "In  particular,  he  has  given
    instructions about  which  school  his  son  should  attend  and  which
    college.  He has also chosen the son's tutor ..." (paragraph  12).   On
    this basis, the judge was clear that the sponsoring father  in  the  UK
    had exercised sole responsibility for the child and that his  exclusion
    would be undesirable.

 5. In particular, the judge observed that as far as the sponsoring  father
    is concerned, "His wife's health deteriorated and that is confirmed  by
    the evidence of the doctor" (paragraph 13).

 6. In relation to Article 8, since the father's departure for  the  UK  in
    2004, what has transpired is that,

         "There has been daily  contact  through  phone  calls  and  regular
         visits by his father who last  visited  in  October  2014  when  he
         stayed with them for three weeks.  His mother is  ill  and  getting
         worse and is unable  to  care  for  him.   On  the  facts  of  this
         particular case, I find it would not be reasonable to expect family
         life to continue with indirect contact and visits from the  Sponsor
         ..." (paragraph 14).

    The appeal was, accordingly, also allowed on Article 8 grounds.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to  have  regard
    to the criteria in regard to assessing sole responsibility as  set  out
    in TD (paragraph 297(i)(e): sole responsibility)  [2006]  UKAIT  00049.
    Second, that the judge failed to provide adequate reasons  for  finding
    that there were serious and compelling reasons to make exclusion of the
    Appellant undesirable.   Third,  that  the  reasoning  in  relation  to
    Article 8 was also flawed.

 8. On 27th April 2015, permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that
    the judge made no reference to the criteria set out in TD.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me on 17th July  2015,  Mr  Mills,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, handed up to the  bench  a
    copy of TD (Yemen) and Mundeba (Section  55  and  paragraph  297(i)(f))
    [2013] UKUT 00088.  He made the following submissions.  First, this was
    a case where a 17 year old was applying to join his father in the UK in
    circumstances where, as the judge recounted, the Appellant was a  child
    who "Stayed at home and helped look after his mother but could  not  do
    anything personal due to his gender and his wife relied upon  the  lady
    who visited each day to do such tasks for her" (paragraph 9) what  this
    suggested was that the mother and the Appellant child lived together in
    the same household.  It is in these circumstances that  the  judge  got
    the "sole responsibility" test wrong.  This was because the case of  TD
    (Yemen) makes it clear that, although the test is  whether  the  parent
    has  continuing  control  and  direction  of  the  child's  upbringing,
    including making all the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life,
    nevertheless, "Where both parents are involved in a child's upbringing,
    it will be exceptional that one of them will have 'sole responsibility'
    then".  Second, this was not a case  where  the  mother  had  abandoned
    parental responsibility.  Third, the judge had not explained  what  was
    exceptional about the facts of this case, in  circumstances  where  the
    mother and child were living together in the same  household.   Indeed,
    the judge had  not  even  applied  TD  (Yemen).   Fourth,  the  medical
    evidence only stated that, given the mother's hepatitis condition  that
    the doctor "recommended she have three months' bed rest" (see paragraph
    10).  Finally, it was arguable that the Rules here, in relation to  the
    sole responsibility test, are a complete code because they  set  out  a
    myriad of different circumstances to be taken into  account.   In  that
    event, recourse could only be had free-standing Article  8  rights,  if
    there was something exceptional or unusual about the facts of the case.
     Mr Mills asked me to make a finding of an error of law,  and  then  to
    proceed to dismiss the appeal on the basis of  the  evidence  that  was
    before the judge.

10. For her part, Ms Dasani  submitted,  that  both  paragraph  297(e)  and
    paragraph 297(f) were in issue before the judge, which meant that  both
    the question of "sole responsibility" and the  question  of  "exclusion
    undesirable" were in issue.

11. Second, the case of TD (Yemen) was  within  the  contemplation  of  the
    judge because arguments made by the Appellant's  representative  before
    the Tribunal were based upon these cases.

12. Third, if one looks at the determination as a whole in the round it was
    clear that there was no error of law.  The fact was that the mother was
    unable to look after the Appellant child because she was unable to both
    cook herself or to even  look  after  herself.   This  was  plain  from
    paragraph 8 of the determination.  There were at least two occasions on
    which the judge had made it clear that the Appellant's mother could not
    even look after herself.

13. Fourth, in TD (Yemen) itself, it was clear that there was  a  reference
    to cases from the European Court of Human Rights  where  a  mother  had
    remained involved in the  child's  upbringing,  and  yet  there  was  a
    finding that sole responsibility lay with the father.  My attention was
    drawn to the case of Alagon v ECO, Manilla [1993] Imm AR 336.  In  that
    case the Appellant sought entry clearance to join his mother in the  UK
    shortly before his 18th birthday.  His mother had come to this  country
    when he was aged 8 and had only made one visit to see him when  he  was
    13 years old.  The Appellant lived in the house with his father who was
    divorced from his mother.  The house was  owned  by  her  mother.   The
    mother provided most  of  the  financial  support  for  the  Appellant.
    Relatives who lived relatively closely saw and provided some  financial
    and other support to the Appellant.   The  father  did  not  contribute
    financially to the  Appellant's  support  and  himself  benefited  from
    living in the house and the financial contributions  from  the  mother.
    The mother alone was  consulted  about  all  major  decisions  such  as
    education and the Appellant's future and maintenance.  The  father  was
    not consulted and he took no major decisions about the  Appellant.   In
    that case, the facts showed that it was accepted that the father played
    "at most a  passive  role"  in  the  Appellant's  life.   Lord  Prosser
    acknowledged (at page 344) that it was significant that  the  Appellant
    was living with her father, "Since any responsibility exercised by  her
    father need not be derived from her mother, and might put in doubt  the
    mother's 'sole responsibility'".

14. Even so, the judge concluded that the  Appellant's  mother  had  indeed
    established "sole responsibility" for her on the basis  that  (at  page
    345), "The Adjudicator effectively  found  that  the  father  is  doing
    nothing for the child beyond the  bear  fact  of  living  with  her  on
    reasonably good terms ...  Moreover ... that is in the house  belonging
    to the mother ...".  The facts of this case, submitted Ms Dasani,  were
    properly explicated in the case of TD (Yemen) itself (at paragraphs  39
    to 42).

15. Furthermore, the principles to  be  derived  from  this  were  actually
    explained in TD (Yemen) itself by the Tribunal which observed that,

         "In  order  to  conclude  that  the  UK  based  parent  had   'sole
         responsibility' for the child, it would be necessary to  show  that
         the parent abroad had abdicated any responsibility  for  the  child
         and was merely acting at the direction of the UK based  parent  and
         was otherwise totally uninvolved in  the  child's  upbringing  ..."
         (Paragraph 46).

16. Indeed, what this meant was that the proper test was that  set  out  at
    paragraph 52(ix) of TD (Yemen) itself.  This made it clear that,

         "The  test   is,   not   whether   anyone   else   has   day-to-day
         responsibility, but whether the Appellant  has  continuing  control
         and direction of the child's upbringing including  making  all  the
         important  decisions  in  the   child's   life.    If   not,   sole
         responsibility is shared and so not 'sole'".

    On this basis, submitted Ms Dasani the judge was correct  to  make  the
    findings that she did.  There was no error of law.

17. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that  this  case  was  not  remotely  like
    Alagon because that was the case of a Filipino woman who  had  come  to
    the UK to work and had  left  her  husband  behind  to  live  with  the
    children and the  maintenance  and  financial  support  was  all  being
    provided by the mother who was working in the UK.  In this case,  there
    is only a temporary separation between the mother and their child.   It
    cannot really be said that the mother does not have any role to play in
    the child's upbringing.  The  medical  evidence  only  shows  that  the
    doctor recommended that the mother has three months' rest.

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  The Upper Tribunal is a supervising Tribunal.  It is not for
    this Tribunal to second guess the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.
    It is not for this Tribunal to intervene to offset  a  decision  of  an
    expert Tribunal below which has heard the evidence, which this Tribunal
    has not, and has come to firm findings on the basis of  that  Tribunal.
    This Tribunal can only intervene if the Tribunal below has fallen  into
    error.

19. It is well-known that the standard to be applied is that set out by the
    words of Brooke LJ in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ 982, where his  Lordship
    stated that, "It is well-known that 'perversity' represents a very high
    hurdle" (paragraph 11).  His Lordship went on to explain that "Far  too
    often practitioners use the word 'irrational' or 'perverse' when  these
    epithets are completely inappropriate" (in paragraph 12).

20. On the facts of this case, it  is  not  the  case  that,  as  Mr  Mills
    maintained that

         "The mother has separated  on  a  temporary  basis  only  from  the
         Appellant child.  The evidence before the judge was that as far  as
         the Appellant child was concerned, he stayed  at  home  and  helped
         look after his mother but could not do anything personal due to his
         gender and his wife relied upon the lady who visited each day to do
         such tasks for her" (paragraph 9).

21. The evidence was that,  "The  Sponsor  ...  had  always  made  the  key
    decisions in his son's life ...  his  father  had  also  decided  which
    tutor to appoint outside college for the Appellant  ...  the  Appellant
    spoke with him every day  ..."  (paragraph  9).   In  this  sense,  the
    Appellant's case is not dissimilar from  the  facts  as  found  by  the
    European Court in Alagon.  Nothing  in  TD  (Yemen)  militates  against
    this.

22. The case of TD (Yemen) does make it clear that where both  parents  are
    involved in the child's upbringing it will be exceptional  for  one  of
    them to have sole responsibility.  In this  case,  however,  the  other
    parent was not involved in the child's upbringing.

23. The findings of the  judge  were  that  she  could  barely  look  after
    herself.  In these circumstances, the  position  was  "exceptional"  in
    terms of the care provided by the sponsoring father in the UK  and  the
    support that he gave to the Appellant.

24. The case of TD (Yemen) is clear at paragraph 52(ix) that  the  test  is
    not whether anyone else has day-to-day responsibility but which  parent
    has continuing control and direction of the  child's  upbringing.   The
    matter only has to be determined on a balance of probabilities.

25. On that basis, the decision made by the judge was entirely open to her.
     It is not for this Tribunal to second guess that decision.

Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    23rd July 2015

