
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02070/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 July 2015                      |On 11 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Mr Paulinus Chijioke Nwanoneze
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Corban, Corban Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   In this  decision  I  am  going  to  refer  to  the  parties  by  their
    designations before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a Nigerian national and was born on  19  August  1960.
    He appealed to the Upper Tribunal with permission of Senior Immigration
    Judge Martin.   Senior Immigration Judge  Martin  considered  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was  arguably  wrong  because  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had remitted the matter  back  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer for him to make a decision  on  the  basis  that  the
    original decision appeared to have been  erroneous  because  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer had insisted on the requirement of  the  Rules,  that
    there had to be a bank statement or  statements  covering  the  28  day
    period up to the date of the application, be met.

Discussion

3.   I have been referred by Mr Tufan, who represents the  Home  Office,  to
    the requirements of the Rules and in particular the requirement that in
    deciding any application  under  Appendix  FM  all  documents  must  be
    supplied with the application. The Entry Clearance  Officer  will  only
    consider  documents  submitted  after  the  application  where  certain
    exceptions apply, and it is not being suggested that  those  exceptions
    apply here.

4.   The Immigration Rules and Appendix FM-SE at  subparagraph  (c),  quoted
    in Phelan on Immigration Law at p.1176 states that where personal  bank
    statements are relied on they must correspond with  the  dates  on  the
    payslips submitted showing that the  salary  has  been  paid  into  the
    account in the name of the person concerned or their  partner  for  the
    relevant period.  The period concerned was 28 days and  accordingly  it
    is difficult to understand the legal basis for  the  Immigration  Judge
    holding in paragraph 7 that to expect the  appellant  to  provide  bank
    statements for a 28 day period up to the date of the application  would
    not have been reasonable, sustainable or  lawful.   I  am  paraphrasing
    what he said.  The Immigration Judge characterised this  as  a  mistake
    but, with respect to the Immigration Judge, on my reading of the Rules,
    it was not a mistake.  It was indeed a requirement of  the  Immigration
    Rules that bank statements for that period were supplied and  whilst  I
    am sympathetic to the difficulties in obtaining  such  documents  I  am
    afraid the Rules, however onerous they  appear,  have  to  be  complied
    with. This Tribunal does not have any power to  strike  down  statutory
    instruments or Immigration  Rules  which  appear  unduly  technical  or
    difficult to comply with.  That would be for another court and  another
    place.

Conclusion

5.   So for those short reasons, I will allow the  respondent's  appeal.   I
    find that there was a material error of law  in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I substitute the  decision  of  this  Tribunal,
    which is to dismiss the appeal against the  ECO's  decision  to  refuse
    entry clearance.  That is not to say that a fresh application supported
    by the correct documentation would not now  succeed.   Indeed,  it  may
    well succeed given that all the other requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules appear to be met.

Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal is allowed. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
is set aside. The Upper Tribunal re-makes the decision which is  to  dismiss
the appellant's appeal against the decision of the ECO.

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal  and  I  make  no
anonymity direction.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

There was no fee award by the First-tier Tribunal and that decision  stands.




Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

