
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02017/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |   Decision & Reasons          |
|                                              |Promulgated                    |
|On 26 January 2016                            |   On 4 February 2016          |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                               mr yash bharti
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of India, born on 19 August 1999.

 2. His appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated  6
    January 2014 to refuse him leave to enter as a dependent of his mother,
    was allowed by Judge Majid (the judge) in a decision dated  16  January
    2015.

 3. The appellant applied under paragraph 319 of the Immigration Rules, but
    the Entry Clearance Officer did not accept that paragraph  319H(f)  was
    satisfied.  In particular, the Appellant's mother in the United Kingdom
    did not have  sole  responsibility  for  his  upbringing  in  terms  of
    319H(f)(ii).  That decision was upheld by the Entry  Clearance  Manager
    on review.

 4. The judge found the sponsor had sole responsibility for  the  appellant
    and allowed the appeal under the Rules and on human rights grounds.

 5. The grounds claimed the  judge  failed  to  give  reasons  or  adequate
    reasons for findings on material matters.  In particular that the judge
    failed to provide adequate reasons for his findings  that  the  sponsor
    had sole responsibility for the appellant.  In the  sponsor's  Business
    Visa Application Form in August 2013 she said she was living  with  the
    appellant's father.  There was a discrepancy which the  judge  had  not
    addressed.

 6. The grounds submitted that the judge  erred  in  his  approach  to  the
    Article 8 assessment.  He gave no consideration to the new  Immigration
    Act 2014.  See Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC
    720 (Admin).

 7. The grounds submitted  that  the  judge  failed  to  identify  why  the
    appellant's circumstances were either compelling or exceptional.

 8. Judge Hollingworth in his decision dated 12 May  2015  found  that  the
    judge had arguably erred.  At [22] the judge allowed the appeal on  the
    basis that the  appellant  satisfied  the  Immigration  Rules  and  was
    entitled to the protection of the ECHR but it was  arguable  that  both
    were inadequately analysed and with regard to the Rules, there  was  an
    arguable error in  relation  to  the  scope  of  the  analysis  of  the
    available evidence and consequently,  the  weight  to  be  attached  in
    respect of the findings of fact.

 9. There was no Rule 24 response.

Submissions on Error of Law

10. Mr Duffy relied upon the grounds.  In summary,  there  were  either  no
    reasons or inadequate reasons for the judge's findings and decision.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11. It was the sponsor's claim that she had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    appellant, however, there  were  unexplained  inconsistencies  in  that
    regard as in her business Visa Application Form dated August 2013,  she
    said she was living with the appellant's father.  She said that was  in
    error, but there was a further inconsistency in  that  she  claimed  to
    have separated from the appellant's father and to have moved out of the
    matrimonial home some time ago.  The judge accepted the  evidence  with
    no adequate analysis notwithstanding that  it  was  challenged  by  the
    respondent.   In  particular,  there  was  no  consideration  that  the
    appellant's father might well have continued to be responsible for  his
    care.  In any event, it appeared there were  other  family  members  in
    India who could care for the appellant.

12. I find the judge further erred in his Article 8 assessment as  he  gave
    no consideration to the new Immigration Act  2014,  in  particular,  s.
    117.

13. The grounds refer to the judge's failure to  engage  with  Gulshan  and
    Nagre, however, SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and Sunassee [2005] EWHC
    1604 (Admin) are instructive.  See in particular the analysis at  [32]-
    [38] of SS.  Sunassee gave a helpful  analysis  of  SS  and  sought  to
    simplify the complex requirements under the Rules  by  suggesting  that
    whether circumstances were "compelling"  or  "exceptional"  was  not  a
    matter of substance.  Rather they must be  relevant,  weighty  and  not
    fully provided for within the Rules.  That is, there must be  a  "gap",
    not covered by the Rules.  Whilst in practice  those  gap  issues  were
    likely to be both compelling and exceptional,  that  was  not  a  legal
    requirement.  The judge was required to carry  out  a  public  interest
    analysis which was absent from the decision.

14. In the  circumstances,  none  of  the  judge's  findings  shall  stand.
    Directions are attached to this short decision.

Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law, is  set
    aside and will be remade following a de novo hearing.

Anonymity direction not made.






Signed                              Date 26 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart

















                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02017/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 January 2016                            |On 4th February 2016          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                               mr yash bharti
                       (anonymity direction not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                 DIRECTIONS


16. List for hearing at Taylor House first available date.

17. Time estimate three hours.

18. Not later than ten working days prior to the hearing, the parties  must
    file with the First-tier  Tribunal  and  serve  upon  each  other,  all
    documentary evidence (including witness  statements)  upon  which  they
    intend to rely at the hearing as well as any skeleton arguments.






Signed                              Date 26 January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart



