
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02230/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st March 2016                            |On 13th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     upper tribunal DEPUTY judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
            (on behalf of the Entry clearance officer islamabad)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               FARHAN RASHEED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs Anisa Yasmein (the Sponsor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for the Home Department  on
    behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer Islamabad (the ECO)  against  the
    decision of a First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of Farhan Rasheed
    against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision of 31 December  2014  to
    refuse him entry clearance to the UK as the  spouse  of  Anisa  Yasmein
    (the Sponsor).

 2. For the purposes of this decision I  shall  hereinafter  refer  to  the
    Secretary of State and the ECO as "the Respondent" and  Farhan  Rasheed
    as "the Appellant" reflecting their  positions  as  they  were  in  the
    appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born 23rd May 1994.  He  applied
    to enter the UK as the spouse of his Sponsor Anisa  Yasmein.   The  ECO
    refused the application on the  sole  ground  that  the  Appellant  was
    unable to satisfy the relevant parts of the Immigration Rules  relating
    to the English language test requirement (Appendix FM E-ECP 4.1).

 4. In refusing the application  the  ECO  noted  that  the  Appellant  had
    submitted an ETS TOEIC score report in support of his application.  The
    application was dated 3rd October 2014.  However as of 22 July 2014 ETS
    TOEIC was no longer designated as an approved provider of  the  English
    language test.  Accordingly the Entry Clearance Officer  could  not  be
    satisfied that the Appellant had passed an English  language  test  (A1
    level of Common European Framework) with a provider approved  by  UKBA.
    Accordingly he refused the application because the Appellant could  not
    show that at the date of decision, he met the requirements of  Appendix
    FM of the Immigration Rules.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

 5. When the Appellant's appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal,  Judge
    Grimshaw said the following:

         "14. The single issue in this case is whether or not the  Appellant
             met the English language  requirements  at  the  time  of  the
             decision taken by the Entry Clearance Officer.   I  have  seen
             the English language certificate produced by the Appellant  to
             support the application.  The certificate was issued  by  City
             and Guilds on 4 March 2015, some two months after the date  of
             the decision.

         15.  I accept that the certificate submitted by the Appellant  with
             the application had been issued by an  English  language  test
             provider  that  had  lost  its  accreditation  in  July  2014.
             However, the Appellant was  unaware  that  ETS  TOEIC  was  no
             longer an approved provider.  Indeed he had  been  allowed  to
             take his English language test without being  alerted  to  the
             loss of accreditation.  It  was  only  when  he  received  the
             refusal notice that he realised he had taken the test  with  a
             provider who  was  no  longer  approved  by  UKBA.   In  these
             circumstances it is only fair  that  he  should  be  given  an
             opportunity to supply a  fresh  English  language  certificate
             from an approved provider.

         16.  I am satisfied the Appellant  acted  diligently  when  he  was
             alerted to the concerns raised by the Entry Clearance Officer.
              The  Appellant  has  now  submitted  an  alternative  English
             language certificate issued by City and  Guilds  which  is  an
             approved provider.  I have seen the test  certificate  in  the
             original.  It confirms  that  the  Appellant  has  achieved  a
             standard equivalent to Level  A1.   The  authenticity  of  the
             certificate was accepted by Mr Sobowale at the hearing."

 6. The judge then allowed the appeal.   The  Respondent  sought,  and  was
    granted,  permission  to  appeal  Judge  Grimshaw's  decision  in   the
    following terms:

         "1.  In a Decision promulgated on 31 July 2015 Judge of the  First-
             tier Tribunal Grimshaw allowed the  Appellant's  appeal  under
             the Immigration Rules against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
             refuse him entry clearance as a partner.

         2.   The Respondent refused the entry clearance application because
             the Appellant had not produced evidence that he had passed  an
             English Language test with an approved provider.

         3.   The Judge accepted that the test certificate produced  by  the
             Appellant was not from an approved provider but held  that  as
             the Appellant had not been told that  this  provider  was  not
             approved he should be permitted to demonstrate his proficiency
             in English at the time of the Respondent's decision by relying
             on a test certificate from an approved provider obtained after
             the date of the Respondent's decision.

         4.   The grounds on which permission to  appeal  is  sought  submit
             that the Judge erred in law in  that  the  Appellant  had  not
             satisfied the requirement to "have passed an English  language
             test ... with a provider approved by the Secretary of  State."
             This is arguable.  It is  arguable  that  the  Judge  was  not
             entitled  to  have  regard  to  the  later  test  certificate.
             Arguably  it  did  not  form   part   of   the   circumstances
             appertaining  at  the  time  of  the  Respondent's   decision.
             Arguably the Judge  focussed  on  whether  the  Appellant  was
             sufficiently proficient in English at the date of the decision
             rather than on whether he had, at that  date,  passed  a  test
             with an approved provider."

    Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether the FtT's decision
    involved the making of an error of law such that the decision  must  be
    set aside and remade.

The UT Hearing

 7. Mr Diwnycz appeared on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.   The  Appellant's
    Sponsor appeared on his behalf.  Mr Diwnycz outlined the  reasons  why,
    the FtT had materially erred.  He kept to  the  lines  of  the  grounds
    seeking permission and said that as this matter is an  out  of  country
    appeal, it is settled law that the judge should have  confined  herself
    to evidence which was in existence at the date  of  decision.  She  had
    mistakenly tried to circumvent this by relying on DR (ECO: postdecision
    evidence) Morocco [2005] UKAIT 00038.  That  case  of  course  confirms
    that evidence which is supplied after the date of decision can be taken
    into account provided the evidence relates to circumstances  pertaining
    at the time of the decision to refuse.  The judge  had  stretched  this
    point to say that  the  Appellant  had  done  everything  that  can  be
    reasonably expected of him  because  he  had  now  produced  to  her  a
    certificate issued  by  an  approved  English  language  provider.   Mr
    Diwnycz submitted that clearly the Entry Clearance  Officer  could  not
    have taken  this  later  certificate  into  account  nor  could  it  be
    reasonably foreseeable that the Appellant would, postdecision,  provide
    an acceptable English language test certificate.  Mr Diwnycz  submitted
    that if the Appellant now meets the  relevant  requirements,  then  the
    appropriate course is to make a fresh application for entry.

 8.  I asked the Sponsor was there  anything  she  wished  to  say  on  the
    Appellant's behalf.  She said that she felt  it  was  unfair  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer was maintaining his refusal. This  was  because
    her husband had now completed the English language test.   It  was  not
    their fault that the first test provider was not acceptable.  They  had
    only been made aware of this when they got the refusal notice.

Consideration

 9. I find force in Mr Diwnycz's submissions.   What  is  before  me  is  a
    narrow point. I find that there was no evidential basis for the FtT  to
    conclude that at the date of decision it was reasonably foreseeable  to
    the ECO, that the Appellant  would  supply  a  fresh  English  language
    certificate from an approved provider.  It is quite clear that  at  the
    date of decision the Appellant failed to provide the relevant specified
    evidence and the ECO had no alternative but to refuse the  application.
    I cannot see any basis for the judge finding that she was  entitled  to
    have regard to the later test certificate.  The judge appears  to  have
    become distracted by focusing on the Appellant's position at  the  date
    of hearing rather on the date of decision.  That is  a  material  error
    and I find that the decision must be set aside and remade.

Re-Making the Decision

10. There was no further evidence to put before me. I was  therefore  in  a
    position to remake the decision. Accordingly I am  satisfied  that  the
    evidence shows that at the  date  of  decision  made  by  the  ECO  the
    Appellant did not meet all the requirements for entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse, contained in Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. He  did  not
    provide an English language test  certificate  from  an  approved  test
    provider. Accordingly for those reasons, the Appellant's appeal against
    the ECO's decision of 31st December 2014 refusing him  entry  clearance
    to the UK, must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  31st  July  2015  is
set aside for legal error.  I remake the decision.

The appeal of Farhan Rasheed against the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision
of 31st December 2014 is hereby dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.

No fee award made.




Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Deputy Judge Roberts

