
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02839/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated     |
|On 24th April 2015                            |On 5th May 2015               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                naheed jahan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Wood of Rochdale Legal Enterprise
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lever (the judge) promulgated on 9th September 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a female citizen of Pakistan born 23rd September  1948
    who applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom to enable her  to
    settle with her adult children in this country.

 3. The Respondent assessed the application as  a  returning  resident  and
    therefore referred to paragraphs 18 and 19 of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The application was refused on 8th February 2014.

 4. The Respondent noted that the Appellant had been away from  the  United
    Kingdom for more than two years and therefore refused  the  application
    with reference to paragraph 18(ii).   The  Respondent  noted  that  the
    Appellant had only lived in the United Kingdom for  a  period  of  five
    years.  The  Respondent  refused  the  application  with  reference  to
    paragraph 320(9) on the basis that the Appellant had  failed  to  prove
    that she meets the requirements of  paragraph  18  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, and failed to prove that she sought leave to enter for the  same
    purpose as for that which her earlier leave was granted.

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.   It  was  contended
    that  the  Respondent's  decision  was  not  in  accordance  with   the
    Immigration Rules, and  there  had  been  inadequate  consideration  of
    paragraphs 18 and 19 of the rules.

 6. It was contended that  the  Appellant  satisfied  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 19 of the  rules,  and  the  Respondent  had  not  considered
    paragraph 317 although this issue  had  been  raised  in  two  previous
    decisions.

 7. It was contended that the Respondent should have exercised  differently
    a discretion  conferred  by  the  Immigration  Rules  when  making  the
    decision of 8th February 2014.

 8. It was further contended that the decision was not in  accordance  with
    the law as there had  been  no  consideration  or  application  of  the
    Respondent's published policy  on  the  exercise  of  discretion  under
    paragraph 19 of the rules, and the Appellant submitted  that  a  proper
    application of that policy should have resulted in  her  being  granted
    entry clearance.

 9. Finally it was submitted that the  decision  breached  the  Appellant's
    right to a family life pursuant to  Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention).

10. The appeal was heard by the judge on 26th August 2014 and evidence  was
    given by one of the Appellant's daughters who is resident in the United
    Kingdom, and her son.

11. The judge set out the background to the application,  noting  that  the
    original application was made by the Appellant and her late husband  as
    long ago as 29th July 2011.  The judge took the view that  in  addition
    to considering paragraphs 18 and 19 of the Immigration Rules, he should
    also consider paragraph 317 which was the subject matter of an  earlier
    appeal, which had not been decided, in that the  Respondent's  decision
    had been found not to be  in  accordance  with  the  law  and  remained
    outstanding before the Respondent.

12. The judge concluded, in a comprehensive decision,  that  the  Appellant
    could not satisfy paragraph 317(iii) of the Immigration Rules.

13. The judge considered paragraphs 18  and  19  in  paragraph  30  of  his
    decision and concluded that the Appellant could not  satisfy  paragraph
    18, and that in relation to paragraph 19, the Respondent's exercise  of
    discretion  against  the  Appellant  was  "neither   unreasonable   nor
    unexpected."

14. The judge considered Article 8 in paragraphs 31-33 of his decision  and
    found that refusal of entry clearance was not  disproportionate,  given
    the circumstances of this case.

15. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    relying upon three grounds.

16.  Firstly  it  was  contended  that  the  judge  had  made  a   material
    misdirection in law when considering the exercise of  discretion  under
    paragraph 19 of the Immigration Rules.  Reliance  was  placed  upon  EO
    Turkey [2007] UKAIT 00062.  It was submitted that the judge should have
    considered  whether  the  Respondent's  discretion  should  have   been
    exercised differently, but the judge had confined himself in  paragraph
    30 to reviewing the reasonableness of the Respondent's decision.

17.  Secondly  it  was  contended  that  the  judge  had  made  a  material
    misdirection in law in failing to consider criteria set out in R v SSHD
    Ex parte Dominic Omosanya Ademuyiwa [1986] Imm AR 1.  It was  contended
    that in paragraph 30 the  judge  had  not  properly  engaged  with  the
    criteria set out in Ademuyiwa, and in particular had not taken  account
    of the fact that the Appellant has a British born  son,  who  was  born
    when the Appellant was lawfully in the United Kingdom, or that three of
    her daughters had been granted entry clearance as  returning  residents
    and a fourth was awaiting a decision on her  application  on  the  same
    basis.

18. It was contended that the failure to have full regard to the cumulative
    effect of the six criteria in Ademuyiwa vitiated the  judge's  findings
    on paragraph 19 of the Immigration Rules, and his failure  to  consider
    the full factual matrix vitiated the Article 8 assessment.

19. Thirdly it was contended that the judge had failed to make a finding of
    fact on a material matter as the Appellant had raised  as  one  of  the
    grounds of appeal that the Respondent's decision was not in  accordance
    with the law, because of  the  failure  to  consider  the  Respondent's
    published policy on returning residents.  It  was  submitted  that  the
    decision did not demonstrate that the Respondent had had regard to  the
    published policy, which meant the decision was not in  accordance  with
    the law, and the judge  erred  in  failing  to  make  such  a  finding.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Renton in  the
    following terms;


         The Appellant applied in time for leave to  appeal.   There  is  an
         arguable error of law.
         The Appellant appealed a decision to refuse her leave to enter as a
         returning resident and  dependent  relative.   First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Lever (the judge) dismissed the appeal  because  he  was  not
         satisfied that the Appellant met the requirements of paras 317  and
         18 of HC 395.  These decisions are not impugned in the grounds.
         The judge also dismissed the appeal as he was  not  satisfied  that
         discretion should be exercised in favour  of  the  Appellant  under
         para 19 of HC 395.  It is arguable that the judge erred in  law  in
         reaching that decision by not taking into account all the  criteria
         set out in R v SSHD ex parte Dominic Omosanya Ademuyiwa [1986]  Imm
         AR 1.
         The remaining grounds may be argued.

20. Following the grant of  permission  there  was  no  response  from  the
    Respondent pursuant  to  rule  24  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

21. Directions were subsequently issued making provision for there to be  a
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal  to  decide  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision should be set aside.

Submissions

22. Mr Harrison apologised for the lack of a rule 24 response, and  advised
    that the application for permission to appeal was not opposed.   It was
    accepted that the judge had erred in law as contended by the Appellant.

23. Mr Wood relied  upon  the  grounds  set  out  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.

24. Mr Wood submitted that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  should
    be set aside for the  reasons  given  in  the  grounds,  and  that  the
    appropriate course of action was for the decision of the Respondent  to
    be declared not in accordance with the law, which would mean  that  the
    decision remained outstanding before the Respondent.

25. Mr Harrison agreed.

My Conclusions and Reasons

26. I take into account that the application for permission  to  appeal  is
    not  opposed  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.   The  decision  of  the
    Respondent does not demonstrate that the Respondent's published  policy
    on returning residents was adequately considered.  There is a reference
    to paragraph 19 in the refusal decision, but no  evidence  to  indicate
    that the terms of the policy were taken into account  and  analysed  in
    making the decision.

27. There has therefore been inadequate consideration of  paragraph  19  by
    the Respondent which means that the decision dated 8th February 2014 is
    not in accordance with the law.  I conclude that the judge erred in not
    making such a finding.

28. The consideration of paragraphs 18 and 19 by the judge is contained  in
    paragraph  30  of  the  decision.   It  is  common  ground   that   the
    requirements of paragraph 18  cannot  be  satisfied.   In  relation  to
    paragraph 19 the judge concluded;

         "Any exercise of discretion against the Appellant by the Respondent
         is therefore neither unreasonable nor unexpected."

29. In my view the judge reviewed the reasonableness  of  the  Respondent's
    decision, rather than considering whether the  discretion  should  have
    been exercised differently.  The decision made by the Respondent was  a
    flawed decision, not having taken into account the published policy  in
    relation to rule 19.  That amounts to an error of law.  The judge  made
    no reference to the decision in Ademuyiwa which is  not  in  itself  an
    error, if the principles  have  been  considered  and  applied.   I  am
    persuaded that the judge did not engage with all the criteria  set  out
    in Ademuyiwa which also amounts to an error of law.

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  therefore  set  aside.   I
    accept  the  submissions  made  by  both  representatives,   that   the
    appropriate course is to find the decision not to be in accordance with
    the law,  so  that  the  application  remains  outstanding  before  the
    Respondent for a lawful decision to be made.  The issue to  be  decided
    relates to rule  19  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  needs  to  be
    considered by the Respondent in the light of the published guidance  on
    returning residents, and the criteria set out in Ademuyiwa.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision  is  set  aside.   The
appeal is allowed to the extent that the Respondent's  decision  is  not  in
accordance with the law, and therefore the application  remains  outstanding
before the Respondent for a lawful decision to be made.

Anonymity

No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity and I find no need to make an anonymity direction.






Signed                              Date 28th April 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Mr Wood applied for  a  fee  award.   Mr  Harrison  indicated  that  it  was
difficult to oppose such an application.  Even though the  appeal  has  only
been allowed to a limited extent I find it appropriate to make a fee  award.
 This is because the Respondent's decision was not in  accordance  with  the
law, as was accepted on behalf of the Respondent, and an appeal  had  to  be
entered as a result of that decision.  I make a full fee award.






Signed                              Date 28th April 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

