

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02805/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Laganside Courts Centre, Belfast     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13th January 2014                          |On 21st January 2014         |
|[Corrected under Rule 42]                     |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                  The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey, President

                                   Between

                               MATTHEW THATTIL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER FOR INDIA AT CHENNAI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Barr of Creighton and Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal has its origins  in  a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer ("the ECO"), dated 12th December 2012, refusing the application
    of Matthew Chattil  ("the  Appellant")  for  admission  to  the  United
    Kingdom as the family member of a EEA national exercising, or proposing
    to exercise, Treaty rights.  The application was  made  and  determined
    under the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations  2006  ("the
    EEA Regulations").  The gravamen of the ECO's decision is  encapsulated
    in the following passage:

         "Your sponsor has provided no evidence that she has ever  exercised
         her treaty rights as  a  qualified  person  in  that  there  is  no
         evidence that she has ever worked in the UK .....  In interview she
         stated that she was not capable  and  would  not  be  returning  to
         employment.  I therefore consider that you have failed  to  provide
         evidence that your EEA national family member is a qualified person
         in accordance with Regulation 6 ....."


    The ECO also determined that the refusal of the application  would  not
    infringe the Applicant's rights under Article 8 ECHR.


 2. The Appellant is of Indian nationality  and  is  aged  53  years.   The
    sponsor is of Irish nationality.  The decision of the ECO was affirmed,
    on internal appeal, by  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager.   This  further
    decision is dated 29th April 2013.  Its essence is  ascertainable  from
    the following passages:

         "I have noted the sponsor's  answers  at  interview.   She  is  not
         working and has not worked since 1990  in  a  Spar.   She  has  not
         worked since  then  as  she  has  not  been  well,  suffering  from
         depression. Her only income is from benefits .............


         Even where I to accept that she had worked at the Spar between 1990
         and 1995, the fact remains that she has not worked for at least  16
         years ...............


         Given her employment history,  I  consider  it  unlikely  that  she
         intends to seek employment in the future ................


         She has not demonstrated that she is temporarily unemployed due  to
         incapacity or involuntary  unemployment  or  that  she  has  ceased
         employment  due  to  permanent  incapacity.   As  such,  I  am  not
         satisfied that the sponsor is a qualified person and  am  satisfied
         that the decision to refuse was correct."

 3.  The  ensuing  appeal  to  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  ("the  FtT")  was
    unsuccessful.   In  dismissing  the  appeal,  the  Judge  reasoned  and
    concluded as follows:

      . The sponsor is not residing in the United Kingdom in  the  exercise
        of Treaty Rights, has resided there all  her  life  and  is  not  a
        beneficiary within the meaning of Article 3 of the  Directive.   As
        an Irish citizen she has at all times been a settled person in  the
        United Kingdom.


      . She is not a qualified person under  regulation  6(1)  of  the  EEA
        Regulations.

      . She has not been economically active but has been a burden  on  the
        United Kingdom's social assistance scheme.


      . As she is not residing in accordance with Regulation 14, she has no
        derived right.


    Finally, the Judge dismissed the Appellant's claim under Article 8 ECHR,
    noting that when the parties married they were aware that the  Appellant
    had no right to reside in the United Kingdom and that  the  sponsor  had
    been able to spend extensive periods in India. The Judge stated:


          "Applying the sequential guidance in Razgar I find the decision is
    proportionate."

 4. It is appropriate to highlight one particular passage in the grounds of
    appeal to the FTT:

         "The ECO should have referenced Regulation 12 ......... [and]  ....
         has confused the requirement focusing on  Regulation  6.   However,
         Regulation 13 is applicable to this application which satisfies  an
         entitlement to reside for an initial period of three months without
         requiring exercise of Treaty Rights."

    This passage serves to illuminate the grant of permission to appeal  to
    this Tribunal, which focused on Regulation 13 and stated,  in  material
    part:


         "...  The sponsor ... is nonetheless entitled to the initial  right
         of residence under Regulation 13(1) and the Appellant is  similarly
         entitled under Regulation 13(2) of the 2006 Regulations,  following
         her entry to the United  Kingdom  as  an  EEA  national  holding  a
         passport issued by an EEA State (Ireland). She is not  required  to
         show that she is a qualified person."

 5. The factual matrix in the recent decision of the Upper Tribunal in Bali
    (Family Member: three month  visit)  [2013]  UKUT  570  (IAC)  was  not
    dissimilar.  In paragraph [5],  this  Tribunal  considered  the  regime
    established by Directive 2004/38/EC:
        "[5] The regime established by the Directive system  promotes  both
             the "feeling" of EU citizenship and social cohesion, which is
             one of the fundamental objectives of the EU, per recital  (17).
             By Article 2, "family member" includes the spouse  of  an  EU
             citizen. Article 6(1) provides:-
                  "Union citizens shall have the right of residence  on  the
                  territory of another Member State for a period of  up  to
                  three months without any conditions  or  any  formalities
                  other that the requirement to hold a valid identity  card
                  or passport. The provisions of  paragraph  1  shall  also
                  apply to family members in possession of a valid passport
                  who are not nationals of a Member state, accompanying  or
                  joining the Union citizen".
             The right enjoyed  by  the  Respondent's  spouse,  as  an  EEA
             national, under the transposing EEA Regulations  is  expressed
             in regulation 11(1) thus:-
                  "An EEA National must be admitted to the United Kingdom if
                  he produces on arrival a valid national identity  card  or
                  passport issued by an EEA State".
             The right potentially enjoyed by the  Respondent,  being  the
             husband [and, hence a "family member"] of an EEA National, is
             contained in regulation 11(2):-
                  "A person who is not an EEA National must be  admitted  to
                  the United Kingdom if he is a  family  member  of  an  EEA
                  National....... and produces on arrival -
                  (a) a valid passport; and
                  (b)  an EEA family permit, a residence card, a  derivative
                  residence card, or         a permanent residence card".
             It is not suggested that the Respondent was  at  any  material
             time  capable  of  complying  with   the   second   of   these
             "production" requirements. Accordingly, any right of entry  to
             the  United  Kingdom  enjoyed  by  him  is  not  derived  from
             Regulation 11(2). In order to identify any such  right  it  is
             necessary to delve a little deeper into the Regulations."
             [Emphasis added]


         The judgment continues:


         "[6] The outworkings of  the  right  of  admission  to  the  United
             Kingdom  conferred  on  the  Respondent's  spouse  as  an  EEA
             National, are found in regulation 13(1):-
                  "An EEA national is  entitled  to  reside  in  the  United
                  Kingdom for a period not exceeding three months  beginning
                  on the date on which he is admitted to the United  Kingdom
                  provided that he holds a valid national identity  card  or
                  passport issued by an EEA State".
         The related right which the Respondent can seek to  invoke  in  the
         present case is expressed in  the  next  succeeding  paragraph,  in
         regulation 13(2):-
             "A family member of an EEA National or a family member who has
             retained the right of residence who is residing in the  United
             Kingdom under paragraph (1) who is not himself an EEA National
             is entitled to reside in the United Kingdom provided  that  he
             holds a valid passport".
        We consider that the analysis applicable to the factual  matrix  of
        the present case is to be conducted in the following sequence:-
        a)   the Respondent's spouse has a right of admission to the United
             Kingdom under regulation 13(1).
        b)   following admission, the Respondent's spouse  is  entitled  to
             reside there for  a  maximum  period  of  three  months,  under
             regulation 13(1).
        c)   the Respondent thereby acquires an entitlement  to  reside  in
             the United Kingdom also: per regulation 13(2).
    Next, this Tribunal addressed the question of whether the relevant  EEA
    national was required to be already in the United Kingdom at  the  time
    of the Respondent's proposed entry.  The terms of Regulation 12(1) were
    noted:


         "[12]    (1)
        An Entry Clearance Officer must issue an EEA  family  permit  to  a
        person who applies for one if the person is a family member  of  an
        EEA National and -
         a)  the EEA National -
             (i)     is  residing  in  the  UK  in  accordance  with   these
Regulations; or
             (ii)   will be travelling to  the  United  Kingdom  within  six
                 months of the date of the application and will  be  an  EEA
                 National residing in the United Kingdom in accordance  with
                 these Regulations on arrival in the United Kingdom; and
             (iii)     the  family  member  will  be  accompanying  the  EEA
                 National to the United Kingdom or joining the EEA  National
                 there".
         This Tribunal reasoned and concluded thus:

         "...  we are satisfied that the  Regulations  do  not  require  the
         Respondent's spouse to precede  the  Respondent,  arriving  in  the
         United Kingdom before him. Thus the conditions for the grant of  an
         EEA family permit were satisfied. This being so, the ECO has -  and
         had - no discretion: he "must" issue an EEA family permit to  the
         Respondent if he applies for  one.  The  issue  of  such  a  permit
         unlocks the door to entry to the United  Kingdom  under  regulation
         11(2). Thus  the  ECO's  failure  to  issue  a  family  permit  was
         erroneous in law."

 6. The gravamen of the decision in Bali is expressed in paragraph [10]  of
    the text in the following terms:

         "Our decision is that a non-EEA national family  member  travelling
         to the United Kingdom accompanied by the EEA national family member
         concerned, for the purposes of a  visit  of  not  more  than  three
         months duration, is  entitled  to  enter  pursuant  to  Regulations
         11(2), 12(1) and 13(1) and (2) read together."

     Upon the hearing of this appeal, the Appellant relied on  the  decision
    in Bali, and on behalf of the  Respondent,  Mrs  O'Brien  realistically
    acknowledged that the two cases are  materially  indistinguishable.   I
    consider that this reasoning and conclusion apply fully to  the  matrix
    of the present case.  It follows that the Determination of the FTT must
    be set aside.

REMAKING THE DECISION

 7. The parties agreed with the suggestion  that  the  decision  should  be
    remade in  the  forum  of  this  Tribunal.   This  gives  rise  to  the
    inevitable  outcome  that  the  appeal   is   allowed.    No   separate
    consideration of Article 8 ECHR is necessary in these circumstances.

 8. In passing, Mr Barr (on behalf  of  the  Appellant)  indicated  that  a
    successful outcome to this appeal for his  client  would,  predictably,
    result in a further and future application to the  Secretary  of  State
    under the EEA regulations.

DECISION

 9. This appeal is determined as follows:

    (i)  The decision of the FTT is set aside.


    (ii) The remade decision of the  Upper  Tribunal  is  that  the  appeal
         against the refusal decision of the ECO is allowed.

It follows that the Appellant's application for a family permit must be
granted.

10.  I also order that the appeal fees be refunded.




                                                                       [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY

          PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER


                                                     Dated:  20 January 2014


