
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02262/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 August 2015                    |On 18 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 JASWAT KAUR
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N. Bramble
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION

1.   The Respondent was born  on  4  January  1964,  married  to  a  British
    citizen in India on 19 April 2013. On 11 October 2013 she  applied  for
    settlement to join her husband in the United Kingdom. She  was  refused
    on suitability grounds on 8 January  2014  because  the  Appellant  had
    information from HMRC that her husband had not  been  paid  the  salary
    claimed in her application.

2.   Her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid and he  allowed
    it on 27 February 2015.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal
    on 6 March 2015 on the basis that the Judge had failed to  address  the
    relevant Immigration Rules, had not given any reasons for allowing  the
    appeal and had also failed to consider whether the Respondent  and  her
    husband could continue their family life in India. In addition, it  was
    asserted that the Judge had failed to take into account Appendix FM  of
    the Immigration Rules and Section 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum  Act  2002,  consider  the  public  interest  or  conduct  a
    proportionality exercise.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Cheales
    on 17 May 2015 on the basis that the Judge had not fully addressed  the
    reasons for refusing the Respondent leave to enter and had not assessed
    the requirements contained in the Immigration Rules and Section 117B of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

4.   On 24 July 2015 the Respondent's representatives emailed  the  Tribunal
    to inform it that they had discussed the appeal  with  the  Appellant's
    representative and agreed that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision
    should be set aside on the basis that there had been a  material  error
    of law. They also requested that the hearing set  down  for  10  August
    2015 be vacated and the appeal be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a re-hearing before a different judge.

5.   On 27 July 2015 Upper Tribunal Judge  Eshun  made  an  order  that  the
    appeal should remain in the list for  10  August  2015  but  should  be
    determined on the papers in accordance with the  agreement  reached  by
    the parties.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

6.   There was no appearance on behalf of the Respondent  and  I  considered
    the appeal on the papers.

7.   First-tier Tribunal Judge  Majid's  decision  and  reasons  was  fairly
    brief but more importantly he failed  to  make  any  reference  to  the
    relevant parts of Appendix FM and Appendix FM-SE of  Immigration  Rules
    or Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    either directly or in substance.

8.   He also did not refer to any particular pieces of evidence in what  was
    a  substantial  bundle  of  documents  which  included  payslips,  bank
    statements and other documents from HMRC, including a P60 and a summary
    of tax paid by the Respondent's husband at  the  relevant  time,  which
    potentially contradicted the information supplied to the Appellant.

9.   In the light  of  the  substantial  and  conflicting  evidence  it  was
    clearly necessary for the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to  make  detailed
    and careful findings of fact, which he singularly failed to do.  At the
    every most, he said that  he  had  looked  at  the  statements  by  the
    Appellant's husband and step-daughter and had decided that she met  all
    the requirements to join her husband. But  even  then  it  was  unclear
    whether he was talking about the Immigration Rules or Article 8 of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.

10.  In addition, he failed to give any detailed reasons  for  allowing  the
    appeal which took into account relevant and current case law.

11.  As a consequence, it is clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge's
    decision and reasons contained a number of material errors of  law  and
    that a re-hearing is required.

12.  However, I am concerned that through no fault  of  the  Respondent  and
    despite submitting a large amount of  evidence  to  the  Tribunal,  her
    appeal, although allowed, was ultimately bound to fail given the nature
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and reasons  and  that  she
    may now have to wait a very long time for her appeal to be relisted.

13.  I do not have the jurisdiction to make an order for expedition  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal but  would  hope  that  any  application  made  for
    expedition would be successful in the light of the shortcomings in  the
    previous decision and reasons, the age of both the Respondent  and  her
    husband and his ill-health.

Conclusions:

    1.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and findings  included  a
         number of material errors of law.

    2.   The decision by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Majid  should  be  set
         aside in its entirety.

Directions

      1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Taylor
         House.

      2. The appeal is listed for a de  novo  hearing  before  a  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid.


Signed   Date 13th August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch

