
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02202/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th August 2015                  |On 18th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                          mrs Bhubaneswori Shrestha
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jesurum of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, born on 6th July 1947,  is  a  citizen  of  Nepal.   The
    Appellant who was present was represented by  Mr  Jesurum  of  Counsel.
    The Respondent was represented by Mr Tarlow, a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made application for entry clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom as an adult dependent  relative.   That  application  had  been
    refused by the Respondent on the basis that  the  Appellant  failed  to
    meet the requirements of paragraph
    EC-DR.1.1(d) of Appendix FM.  That decision had been  appealed  by  the
    Appellant and the appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Dean
    sitting at Taylor House on 20th February 2015.   The  judge  had  found
    that the Appellant failed to meet the requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules but allowed the appeal under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 3. The Respondent had made  application  for  permission  to  appeal  that
    decision.  Firstly it was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons as to why the Appellant  and  Sponsor  enjoyed
    family life and  secondly  that  the  judge  had  speculated  as  to  a
    hypothetical future situation in terms of the Appellant's circumstances
    in order to conclude that the Respondent's decision  disproportionately
    interfered with Article 8 rights.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer on
    6th May 2015.  Directions were issued for the Upper Tribunal firstly to
    decide whether an error of law had been made by the First-tier Tribunal
    and the matter comes before me in accordance with those directions.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 5. Mr Tarlow relied upon the Grounds of Appeal  submitted  and  identified
    what was said to be the two errors of law namely that there had been an
    inadequate reasoning as to why  it  was  found  that  family  life  was
    engaged between two adults and secondly that essentially the judge  had
    speculated as to a future position  that  may  have  disproportionately
    interfered with any family life rather  than  looking  at  the  current
    position.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 6. Mr Jesurum had provided an admirably concise skeleton in support of his
    submissions.  He also  provided  detailed  submissions  expanding  upon
    those points.  He made  reference  to  a  substantial  number  of  both
    domestic and European case law.

 7. In summary he accepted that  in  terms  of  finding  that  family  life
    existed the judge could have given more reasons but his failure  to  do
    so did not amount to an error of law.  It was  further  submitted  that
    the test of family life as outlined in the case of  Kugathas  had  been
    found by later case law such as Ghisling to be too restricted.

 8. In terms of Article 8 it was submitted that the judge was  entitled  to
    find that family life existed in terms of  telephone  and  Skype  calls
    made  between  the  parties.   It  was  also  submitted  there  was  no
    requirement to find anything compelling in entry clearance  cases.   Mr
    Jesurum invited me to find that  SS  Congo  was  not  binding  upon  me
    because that decision  had  been  made  in  error.   In  particular  he
    referred to extracts from SS  Congo  where  the  Court  of  Appeal  had
    referred  to  "margins  of  appreciation"  which  he  submitted  was  a
    misinterpretation  of  European  case  law  where  the  term  "marginal
    appreciation" was a reference  to  the  ability  of  domestic  national
    courts having a margin of appreciation rather than the way that it  had
    been interpreted in SS Congo.   He  relied  upon  the  case  of  Huang.
    Finally in terms of Section 117B of the 2002 Act although  he  accepted
    the judge had not gone through each and every aspect  of  Section  117B
    the case of Dube  [2015]  did  not  suggest  such  was  necessary.   He
    conceded that if  I  followed  SS  Congo  then  that  did  support  the
    Respondent's position.

 9. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

10. The Appellant had made application to  come  to  the  UK  as  an  adult
    dependent relative of her  Sponsor  son.   That  application  had  been
    refused in January 2014 and as this was an out of country appeal it was
    the circumstances  appertaining  at  the  date  of  refusal  that  were
    relevant.  The judge had noted however that the Appellant was in the UK
    and attended  the  appeal  hearing  on  4th  February  2015,  and  gave
    evidence.  Her presence in the UK was a result it appears of her having
    obtaining a visit visa to see her Sponsor son.  It was  noted  that  at
    the error of law hearing before me on 27th August  2015  the  Appellant
    was also present.  It is not clear whether she had  returned  to  Nepal
    and had then come back to the UK within a very short time or had simply
    remained and if so, whether that was lawfully or unlawfully.

11. Although the Appellant had made  application  to  enter  the  UK  under
    Appendix FM paragraph EC-DR.1.1(d), it was conceded by  Mr  Jesurum  at
    the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant did not meet the Immigration
    Rules in particular the basis for refusal namely paragraph  E-ECPR.2.4,
    namely that as a result of her age, illness or disability she  required
    long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks.

12. The judge therefore was essentially being asked to, and did,  undertake
    an examination of this case outside of the Rules under Article 8 of the
    ECHR.  At paragraph 16 the judge referred to  the  case  of  Razgar  in
    assessing matters.  He found (paragraph 16) that stages one to four  of
    Razgar could be answered in  the  affirmative.   In  terms  of  finding
    family life existed between Appellant and son he stated "Looking at the
    totality of the evidence before me I find that there is both  from  the
    Appellant's perspective and from that of her son and daughter-in-law".

13. There is of  course  a  biological  connection  between  Appellant  and
    Sponsor as mother and  son  that  remains  unchanged  throughout  their
    lives.  However to discover whether there is  family  life  within  the
    terms of Article 8 of the ECHR and to then discover whether a  proposed
    interference would interfere with that family life to  the  appropriate
    level referred to in Razgar, requires an analysis of the evidence.   It
    is not necessary incumbent upon a judge to go into lengthy  details  to
    sustain a finding.  It depends on the specific facts of the case.   For
    example family life between a parent and young child  is  almost  self-
    explanatory and would require little  or  no  reasons.   In  this  case
    however the issue of family life had been raised by the ECO.  The facts
    of this case demonstrated that the Sponsor son was an  adult.   He  had
    not only left the family home but his home country of  Nepal  in  2001.
    He had relinquished his Nepalese citizenship  and  was  now  a  British
    citizen.  There was no evidence he had returned to Nepal to  visit  his
    mother, she making visits to the UK.  There was no financial  or  other
    asset support provided by the  Sponsor  to  his  mother.   The  contact
    between  them  amounted  to  telephone  and  Skype  calls.   In   those
    circumstances it was incumbent upon the judge to provide  some  reasons
    for finding family life existed even if such a test is not  necessarily
    strict.  It could also be said that the  judge's  finding  that  family
    life existed from the perspective of Appellant and Sponsor was not  the
    correct approach in determining such a matter.

14. There was therefore  an  inadequacy  of  findings  and  potentially  an
    incorrect approach to such assessment that amounted to an error of law.
     It was material in the sense that if properly and adequately  reasoned
    it could have been concluded that one or two of the earlier stage tests
    of Razgar had not been met  and  therefore  the  final  stage  test  of
    proportionality not reached.

15. Secondly  in  any  event  the  Respondent  argues  that  there  was  no
    compelling circumstances requiring an examination outside of the  Rules
    as the circumstances considered  by  the  judge  were  hypothetical  or
    speculative rather than current.

16. Mr Jesurum submitted that SS Congo  was  wrong  in  law  and  I  should
    courageously state as such and not follow that case.  A Junior Tribunal
    Judge ordinarily would not seek to suggest a Court of  Appeal  decision
    was wrong in law and perhaps more importantly even if believing it  was
    would still be bound to follow the precedent of a superior court.

17. The application of Article 8 of the ECHR  and  its  relation  with  the
    Immigration Rules and indeed other statutes is a fraught area  of  law.
    Whilst there is no shortage of case law from both the  superior  courts
    and Europe  it  remains  difficult  to  discern  a  clear,  simple  and
    consistent approach readily understood  by  all,  that  lasts  for  any
    length of time.  However as a matter of good sense and reason,  and  in
    keeping with the original concept  of  Article  8(2)  of  the  ECHR  it
    follows that there must be a strong case  for  a  court  to  allow  the
    wishes of an individual or individual  family  to  overcome  legitimate
    public interest which serves society as a whole.  Where society has set
    out a series of Rules that seek  to  reflect  a  proper  and  realistic
    balance between  countervailing  claims  then  it  further  seems  both
    rational and good sense  to  require  something  "compelling"  or  even
    higher to shift the balance.  SS Congo  is  neither  inconsistent  with
    previous case law, the original concept within Article 8(2) nor perhaps
    most importantly in this day and age a realistic and sensible  approach
    to this vexed area of law.

18. In this case the judge had in one sense based any findings of "arguably
    good grounds to look outside of the Rules",  on  a  speculative  basis.
    The best evidence available to the judge on the  Appellant's  condition
    which was the thrust of the case was referred to by him at paragraph 9.
     That was a letter from the doctor that whilst confirming the Appellant
    had osteoarthritis she could carry out regular daily activities, had  a
    maid to assist her and as the evidence indicated was able either on her
    own or with a friend's help to make the lengthy journey to  the  UK  as
    and when it pleased her to visit the  Sponsor.   It  had  already  been
    accepted she did not fall within  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  judge
    concluded entirely logically that as she got older  her  condition  was
    likely to deteriorate.  He essentially based his decision under Article
    8 of the ECHR on the future position rather than the current.  That was
    a material error.  Perhaps taking an extreme example most  middle  aged
    or elderly people could raise the same  argument  that  in  time  their
    health  and  mobility  would  deteriorate  to  the  extent  that  their
    individual needs raised an arguably good case or indeed compelling case
    such that they should overcome in proportionate terms the interests  of
    society as a whole.  That is neither a practical or indeed lawful basis
    for considering Article 8 cases.

19. It could also be said that whilst the judge refers at paragraph  17  to
    having regard to Section 117B of the 2002 Act there is  no  attempt  to
    analyse or consider those factors.  To the extent that it could be said
    they were considered as referred to  by  Mr  Jesurum,  in  the  judge's
    conclusion at paragraph 11 that the Appellant would not be a burden  on
    public funds because the Sponsor and wife had a decent income; that  is
    potentially a flawed approach.  He took no  account  of  the  potential
    cost to the NHS in respect of medical treatment that would  potentially
    flow for an unspecified number of years as one example of public cost.

20. In summary the approach taken by the judge to Article 8 of the ECHR was
    in error.  He failed to  identify  compelling  reasons  why  this  case
    should be examined or allowed outside  of  the  Rules,  and  based  any
    examination and findings upon  a  speculative  future  position  whilst
    potentially even in that respect making flawed or  inadequate  findings
    in terms of the wider public interest.  Those factors  in  addition  to
    the inadequate reasoning in respect of family  life  means  there  were
    material errors of law in this case.

Decision

21. A material error of law was made by the judge in this case  and  I  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

22. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
