
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02653/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 13 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                         ms kantaben bhogilal parekh
                       (anonymity directiON NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THEB HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Pinder, Counsel instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal brought with the permission  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Colyer to challenge the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hosie which was promulgated on 23 April 2015.  It  arises  out  of  the
    refusal of the Entry Clearance Officer concerning the appellant's  wish
    to come to the United Kingdom as a dependent relative.

2.   The appellant was born on 1 June 1949 and is an Indian  national.   She
    applied for entry clearance.  By notice of  refusal  dated  22  January
    2014 and a subsequent review dated 5 April  2014  her  application  was
    refused on the basis that she did not  meet  all  the  requirements  of
    paragraph E-ECDR.1.1 of Appendix  FM  to  the  Immigration  Rules.   An
    appeal was made to the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the Immigration Rules  not  was  in
    compliant  with  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and   in
    particular Article 8, which protects private and family life.

3.   The appellant has suffered from mental illness for some  time.  It  was
    diagnosed as frontotemporal dementia in 2013.  Prior  to  that  it  had
    been understood she was suffering from some form of depressive illness.
     Her husband died in 1997 and she has three children, two sons and  one
    daughter, who currently live in the United Kingdom with their families.
     The appellant visits her family members in the United Kingdom and they
    visit her  in  India.   At  the  time  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    considered the matter, the appellant's last visit to the United Kingdom
    had been from September 2012 until February 2013.

4.   Section E-ECDR.2.5 of the Immigration Rules includes the following:

         "The applicant [...] must be unable even  with  the  practical  and
         financial help of the sponsor to obtain the required level of  care
         in the country where they are living because -

         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
             can reasonably provide it; or

         (b)  it is not affordable."

    In discussing and analysing the evidence the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    came to the inevitable conclusion that this  particular  provision  was
    not satisfied and it therefore  followed  that  the  appellant's  claim
    under the Immigration Rules could not succeed.  Care  is  available  in
    India, and there was nothing to suggest it was not affordable. There is
    no appeal against the judge's findings and conclusions in  relation  to
    the Immigration Rules.

5.   It is the discrete analysis  and  conclusion  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in relation to Article 8 which is  the  subject  of  the
    current appeal.  The grounds which were settled by  Counsel  have  been
    argued before me by Ms Pinder who was not their author but  she  adopts
    all three grounds and in her very helpful  and  clear  submissions  has
    developed them before me in oral submissions.

6.   The first ground is put on  the  basis  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge failed to make findings on material matters and it  is  suggested
    that the judge did not make findings as to whether family life  existed
    between the appellant and the appellant's family members in the  United
    Kingdom nor was there an attempt to identify the strength or quality of
    the appellant's relationships with her children and grandchildren whose
    best interests would be a primary  consideration  of  any  decision  to
    exclude the appellant from the UK.

7.   It was heralded in the granting of permission, that there  may  not  be
    very much in this ground because from the fact that the judge works his
    way successively through the five questions commended in  the  decision
    in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27  it  is  implicit  that  the  judge  did  make
    findings as to there being a private life and in doing so  went  on  to
    consider the remainder of the questions.  Looking at  paragraph  27  of
    the  determination,  where  the  first  of  the  Razgar  questions   is
    addressed, the judge  quite  properly  considers  family  life  in  the
    circumstances  of  the  substantive  findings  made  earlier   in   the
    determination. Ms Pinder, wisely, did not press this first ground.

8.   The second two  grounds  of  appeal  can  usefully  be  read  together.
    Ground 2 makes complaint that the judge's proportionality analysis  was
    based upon an irrational conclusion that the appellant does not require
    full-time care and  reference  is  made  to  a  particular  segment  in
    paragraph 33 of the determination. The thrust of ground 3  is  that  in
    the proportionality analysis irrelevant factors were taken into account
    and relevant factors were left out of account.

9.   The judge's analysis of the Article 8 considerations (mindful that  the
    claim failed to meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules),  is
    full, fair, complete, orderly and balanced.  It begins at paragraph 22.
     In paragraph 24 it makes  reference  to  the  guideline  authority  of
    Razgar to which I have already referred  and  in  particular  the  five
    questions to be considered and the proportionality  analysis  to  which
    they give rise.  It is quite clear to any reader of that  determination
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge worked through each  of  those  five
    questions, resolving them appropriately.

10.  It  is  instructive  to  refer  back  to  an  earlier  section  of  the
    determination in which  the  appellant's  mental  health  condition  is
    examined  and  where  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  makes   express
    findings, giving reasons.  Paragraph 17 reads:

         "It is accepted that the appellant has a mental health condition in
         respect of which  she  appears  to  be  in  receipt  of  prescribed
         medication.  Taken as prescribed this ought to be alleviating  some
         of the effects of her mental illness.  No evidence was led that her
         taking of medication was supervised.  This could be arranged if not
         already in place.  There are care homes in India.  No evidence  was
         led that research had been carried  out  by  the  family  regarding
         availability and suitability for the appellant.  If  the  appellant
         does require 24/7 care and supervision  then  this  is  a  possible
         solution as is the option of a live-in carer.  It  was  clear  that
         finances are available to the appellant and these could be used  to
         fund her care and supervision needs.  Whilst it is true that people
         with  dementia  and  mental  illness  benefit  from   routine   and
         familiarity, this could be provided by nursing staff in a care home
         or by a dedicated full-time live-in carer.  However desired  it  is
         not necessary that this care be delivered by a close family member.
          On the contrary a person with frontotemporal dementia may  benefit
         more from being cared for by someone who is medically qualified."

11.  In addressing the Razgar questions the judge  considered  at  paragraph
    27 considered whether there had been an unjustified lack of respect for
    the appellant's private and  family  life  having  regard  to  positive
    obligations on the United Kingdom. The second question, concerning  the
    gravity of  any  interference  for  the  purposes  of  Article  8,  was
    addressed in paragraph 8.  The careful  and  nuanced  analysis  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge reads as follows:

         "Reference is made to the stress placed on the  appellant  and  her
         family in the UK.  Surely this can be alleviated by  providing  the
         right care for her in India and by frequent family visits.  Care of
         the elderly places stress on  all  families,  whether  at  home  or
         abroad.  I accept the respondent's Counsel's  submission  that  the
         sponsor and his  extended  family  did  not  appear  to  have  made
         provision for their mother's old age.  She had mental health issues
         for a while before the  application.   If  her  mental  health  has
         deteriorated then full consideration must be given to adapting  her
         care in India before it can  be  said  that  her  needs  cannot  be
         adequately met in India.  This is proportionate and no evidence was
         provided that this has been done."

12.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to consider the  third  question,
    namely whether the interference was in accordance with  law.  Based  on
    the findings under the Immigration Rules  (which  are  not  challenged)
    this conclusion was clearly justified.

13.  The fourth question was whether any such interference in  a  democratic
    society is in the interests of national security, public safety or  the
    economic well-being of the country, for the prevention of  disorder  or
    crime or the protection of health or morals or for  the  protection  of
    the rights and freedoms of other. The judge  found,  not  surprisingly,
    that the interference was necessary in  the  interests  of  immigration
    control and was in the proper pursuance of lawful immigration control.

14.  The fifth and final test under Razgar was whether the interference  was
    proportionate to the legitimate public aim sought to be achieved.   The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge made reference  to  the  material  which  was
    before the Tribunal dealing with emotional stress including a factsheet
    from  the  Alzheimers  Association.  The  judge  accepted  respondent's
    Counsel's submission that missing one's  family  does  not  qualify  an
    applicant in terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  properly
    exercised the  balancing  test  of  proportionality  and  came  to  the
    conclusion that there was  no  merit  in  the  appeal  so  far  as  the
    appellant's human rights were concerned.

15.  I have reviewed with care the judge's findings, the  judge's  reasoning
    and the judge's conclusions.   I  have  had  regard  to  the  arguments
    advanced today suggestive of error of law.  I can perceive no error  of
    law on the face of this determination.  It is an  entirely  proper  and
    fulsome  analysis  as  commended  in  the  judgment  of  Razgar.   Full
    attention is given by the judge to the quality of family  life  enjoyed
    by the appellant and her family and there is nothing irrational in  the
    conclusions which the judge reached. Full time care  is  available  for
    the appellant in India and  there  is  noting  to  suggest  it  is  not
    affordable. In all the circumstances, though not without  sympathy  for
    the appellant and her family, I am drawn inevitably to  the  conclusion
    that this appeal must be dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill QC  Date 12 October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Mark Hill QC  Date 12 October 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
