
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02697/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination and reasons promulgated|
|on 25th March 2015                   |On 30th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 Joel Madila
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer, NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by McGlashan
                    MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo, born on
    27th March 1995.  He appeals  against  a  determination  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Doyle, promulgated on 4th August  2014,  dismissing  his
    appeal against refusal of entry clearance to join his sponsor in the UK
    under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The appellant regards his sponsor as his adoptive mother.  She  is  his
    maternal aunt.  An adoption order was made in the  Democratic  Republic
    of Congo (DRC) in 2003, but carries no formal recognition  for  present
    purposes.

 3. The appellant has a sister, born on 16th June 2002.  She stands in  the
    same relationship to the  sponsor.   The  judge  dismissed  her  appeal
    (OA/02701/2014)  against  refusal  of   entry   clearance   under   the
    Immigration Rules, but allowed it under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 4. The grounds of appeal to the UT strike at paragraph 14(k)  and  (l)  of
    the determination, where the judge drew a distinction between  the  two
    appellants because this appellant had attained majority "and because of
    the paucity of evidence about his  circumstances  and  the  nature  and
    extent of his  relationship  with  the  sponsor".   At  (l)  the  judge
    acknowledged that his decision might separate the two appellants before
    him, but referred to Bakir [2002] UKIAT 01176 for the proposition  that
    it would be most unusual for Article 8 purposes to extend the notion of
    family life to adult siblings.  The  relationship  was  not  one  which
    could be expected to give rise to a permanent common household, and  it
    was possible to  maintain  family  life  between  siblings  by  regular
    communications and visits.  (Those observations appear to  derive  from
    the case cited, rather than from the particular facts of this case.)

 5. The grounds cite case law (from England and Wales and from  Strasbourg)
    to the effect that family life does not automatically terminate when  a
    child obtains majority; the existence of family life between parent and
    child depends on the facts; removal of an adult may interfere with  his
    right to respect for his family life with parents and  siblings;  there
    is no authority that Article 8 cannot be engaged when the  family  life
    is that of adult siblings  living  together;  and  each  case  is  fact
    sensitive.  The argument is  that  the  judge  failed  to  analyse  the
    circumstances and to explain why the relationship of the appellant with
    the sponsor and his sister did not amount to family life.

 6. The grounds also argue that the judge failed to  take  account  of  the
    best interests of the child (the sister) in respect of separation  from
    the appellant.  Authority is cited on failure  to  take  account  of  a
    relevant consideration.  The  grounds  found  on  UNHCR  guidelines  on
    determining the best interests of the  child,  paragraph  3.4,  on  the
    importance of the continuity of  a  child's  relationship  with  family
    members including siblings.  One of the factors  to  be  considered  is
    that "every effort should be made to keep siblings together".

 7. The grounds finally argue that the judge failed to consider the  family
    as a whole in accordance with Beoku-Betts [2009] AC 115.

 8. Mr Devlin recalled that the sponsor tried to bring the appellant to the
    UK before he reached the age of 18, but the funds sent for that purpose
    were misspent by another family member.  He accepted that the judge had
    not found that there were  serious  compelling  circumstances,  but  he
    pointed out the appellant and  sister  had  been  living  with  elderly
    grandparents  and  with  an  aunt  who  suffered  from  a   psychiatric
    condition.  He also accepted that there had been no statements from the
    appellants, only from the sponsor.  The appellant and  his  sister  had
    been traced to a refugee camp in 2011, there  having  been  no  contact
    since 2004.  They had then been reunited with the other family  members
    in DRC.  Mr Devlin submitted that an inference  could  legitimately  be
    drawn that the older sibling would have assumed  a  protective,  quasi-
    paternal and close relationship with the  younger  sister.   The  judge
    failed to address whether under such circumstances her  best  interests
    would be adversely affected by separation from her brother.  The  judge
    appeared to have found at 15(l) that there was no family life, but  the
    authority he cited did not suffice for that purpose.  The existence  of
    family life was more a factual than a  legal  question.   Even  if  the
    judge had been correct to find no family life between the appellant and
    his sister there was nevertheless  a  relationship,  the  severance  of
    which would  have  to  be  factored  into  the  analysis  of  her  best
    interests.  The judge failed to look  at  these  matters.   On  a  true
    consideration of the facts, his decision should be reversed.

 9. The Presenting Officer submitted that the  judge  correctly  took  into
    account that there was not much evidence  of  substantial  family  life
    among the appellant, his sister and the sponsor.  The sponsor separated
    from them when the appellant was aged 9 and his sister aged  1.   There
    had been no relationship at all until 2011, by which time the appellant
    was almost  16.   Since  2011  there  was  evidence  of  the  sponsor's
    involvement only through sending money but not through making important
    decisions or otherwise participating in family life.  The  judge  noted
    at paragraph 14(e) that the evidence gave him only a limited glimpse of
    the operation of family life between the  sponsor  and  the  appellant.
    Very little was known of the life  of  the  appellant  and  his  sister
    during the absence of the sponsor.  It would be conjecture rather  than
    inference to find that there must have been any more than  an  ordinary
    sibling relationship.  In any event, from 2011 grandparents and an aunt
    assumed the  parental  role.   By  the  time  of  the  application  the
    appellant was 18 years old.  He was living in a house  with  the  other
    adults.  There was nothing to  suggest  that  he  still  exercised  any
    particular protective role.  Even if the age of  18  is  not  always  a
    clear cut off point, there is a proper distinction  between  minor  and
    adult children.  It was for the appellant  to  produce  evidence  going
    beyond that, and there was none.  There was no error on the evidence in
    thinking that for Article 8 purposes family life among  the  appellant,
    his sponsor and his sister came to an end on his  18th  birthday.   The
    appellant had not provided evidence upon which findings of primary fact
    might be made leading to a conclusion in his favour.   The  Immigration
    Rules are in principle compatible with Article 8.  There was no  reason
    to look outside them.  The original application was  not  made  on  the
    basis that the appellant was a person without whom his sister could not
    reasonably be expected to travel to and settle in the UK, and he was an
    adult at that time.  There was no evidence to permit  conclusions  that
    this was a  relationship  within  the  scope  of  Article  8,  or  that
    separation carried significant disadvantages for his sister.

10. Mr Devlin in response submitted  that  conclusions  in  favour  of  the
    appellant in respect of his role in his  sister's  life  would  not  be
    speculative but legitimate  on  the  basis  of  common  sense  and  the
    practical experience of a judge.  Two children who had  lived  together
    in a refugee camp without an adult family member for seven  years  were
    almost  bound  to  develop  a  mutual  relationship  going  beyond  the
    ordinary.  In any event, there did not need to be a special  protective
    relationship to extend family life beyond the age of majority.   Either
    on the basis of greater than usual ties between  siblings,  or  on  the
    basis of the sister's tender years at the point of separation from  her
    brother, the case should have succeeded under Article 8.   It  had  not
    been appropriate to distinguish between the siblings in the outcome.

11. I reserved my determination.

12. At paragraph 14(d) the judge  says  that  family  life  clearly  exists
    because the appellants are brother and sister and the sponsor is  their
    adoptive mother.  At paragraph 14(l) he decides that  the  relationship
    is not family life.  The contradiction is  only  apparent  and  not  an
    error.  It is due to the fact that there a distinction  between  family
    life in ordinary usage, which  extends  to  relationships  among  adult
    siblings, adult children and their parents, and other relatives  beyond
    the common core, and family  life  for  purposes  of  protection  under
    Article 8.

13. Article 8 does not define family life.  However, the core relationships
    it protects are those based on marriage (or a similar relationship) and
    those between parent and child.  Whether wider relationships, including
    relationships going beyond the age of majority with parents,  or  among
    siblings, fall within Article 8 is a question primarily  of  fact.   It
    turns on the strength of ties.  The  thrust  of  the  determination  is
    plainly enough that although wider family life existed, the judge  drew
    the Article 8 line at the point of the appellant's  majority.   On  the
    evidence, I see no error therein.

14. The issue of family life extending beyond age 18 or among siblings  was
    not significantly developed in the FtT,  where  the  case  was  put  as
    essentially the same for both appellants.  The case is not  now  argued
    to any significant extent on the basis of the appellant's  relationship
    with the sponsor, but on his relationship with his sister  and  on  her
    best interests.  That was not put in the application to the  respondent
    or in the FtT.  It is artfully developed in the grounds and submissions
    to the UT, but as an afterthought.

15. The Presenting Officer was justified in  pointing  to  the  absence  of
    evidence, and to the fact that the application was not presented as one
    in which the  desirability  of  not  separating  the  siblings  was  an
    important issue.  The two appellants  at  that  stage,  who  had  legal
    advice, could not properly have assumed that their cases must stand  or
    fall together, it being obvious that one was an adult and one a  child.
    The argument in the First-tier Tribunal focused on the parent and child
    relationship and not on the relationship between the  siblings.   There
    do not appear to have been  any  significant  submissions  on  why  the
    appellant should be treated not as an independent adult but as a child,
    nor on the issue of separation.  The UNHCR guidelines were not drawn to
    attention.

16. The ECHR is designed for the protection of  fundamental  rights,  which
    should not be obscured by niceties of pleading,  but  it  was  for  the
    appellant to make his case both by evidence of  primary  facts  and  by
    submissions.

17.  The  judge  gave  Article  8  a  wide  application  in  finding   that
    notwithstanding the Rules the respondent was under a duty to permit the
    entry of a child to join a maternal aunt who does not stand legally  in
    the place of a parent, and whom she has not  seen  since  infancy.   It
    would be an even wider finding that the child has a  relationship  with
    an adult sibling which requires the entry  also  of  that  sibling.   A
    consideration of the best interests of the  child  might  in  principle
    require the entry of such a relative, but that would  need  a  positive
    case.  It would be conjectural to reverse the present determination and
    reach an opposite decision on the basis of the asserted best  interests
    of the child.  Those matters had faint foundation in evidence and  were
    not developed either in the application to the  respondent  or  in  the
    case put to the First-tier Tribunal.  (Nor  was  any  further  evidence
    offered, if the decision were to be remade; and the appellant's  sister
    is now in the UK.)

18. The finding that family life for Article 8 purposes was not established
    for this appellant either with the sponsor or with his sister was  open
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  In reality, on such evidence as  was  made
    available, no other conclusion on that point could reasonably have been
    expected.

19. The argument based on the best interests of the child was  not  put  to
    the First-tier Tribunal; very little evidence can be found  to  support
    it once the point is identified; and  it  carried  little  prospect  of
    another outcome being reached, based on such evidence as there was.

20. The grounds disclose no error of law by the First-tier  Tribunal  which
    would justify interference by the Upper Tribunal.  The determination of
    the FtT shall stand.

21. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


                           [pic]


                           30 March 2015
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
