
[pic]
S-T

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02193/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 November 2015                  |On 20 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KINGSTON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            RADESHA ARNELA ROACH
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Richardson, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent to this appeal  is  a  citizen  of  Jamaica  born  on  4
    December 1990. The appellant is the ECO,  who  has  appealed  with  the
    permission of the First-tier Tribunal against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  Stokes,  allowing  the  respondent's  appeal
    against a decision of the ECO made on  11  December  2013  outside  the
    rules on Article 8 grounds. The appellant conceded she could  not  meet
    the requirements of Appendix FM of the rules.

 2. It is more convenient to refer to the parties as they were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. I shall therefore refer to Ms Roach from now on as
    "the appellant" and the ECO as "the respondent".

 3. The appellant applied for entry clearance on 1 October 2013,  aged  22,
    in  order  to  join  her  mother,  Ms  Sharon  Rose  Dixon-Smith  ("the
    sponsor"), who is a British  citizen.  It  appears  the  appellant  was
    hoping that  her  application  would  be  considered  by  reference  to
    paragraph 317 of the Immigration Rules. However, the respondent applied
    the new adult dependent relative  rules  and  refused  the  application
    because the appellant admitted she had no medical  conditions  and  she
    was able to care for herself.  The  grounds  of  appeal  explained  the
    appellant and the sponsor  are  close  and  the  sponsor  supports  the
    appellant. The appellant's brother, Fabian, was murdered on 6  November
    2012 and the appellant was fearful of the  repercussions  for  her  own
    safety.

 4. As said, at the hearing, counsel for the appellant accepted  the  rules
    in Appendix FM were not met. The judge  then  wrote  as  follows:  "The
    issue in this appeal is whether  or  not  the  Respondent  should  have
    exercised discretion to grant the Appellant leave to remain outside the
    Rules under Article 8 ECHR"  [23].  The  judge  went  on  to  find  the
    appellant lived with the sponsor until the latter left Jamaica in 2002.
    There was evidence of regular visits and  financial  support  from  the
    sponsor. Family life continued. Fabian's death had taken  an  emotional
    toll on both of them. Thus Article 8 was engaged. Moving on to consider
    proportionality, she found it was not reasonable  for  the  sponsor  to
    move to Jamaica. She had resided in  the  UK  for  13  years  and  been
    married for 10 of them. She had a daughter living with her in the UK in
    the final stages of her secondary education. All three  family  members
    were British. The sponsor had three jobs. Relocating to  Jamaica  would
    have an adverse effect on their wellbeing.

 5. The judge then balanced the matters in favour of refusal against  those
    in favour of the appellant. In terms of the former,  there  was  strong
    public interest in  maintaining  effective  immigration  controls  (see
    section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act). The  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    eligibility requirements of the rules as an adult  dependent  relative.
    There was nothing to show the appellant could not lead a normal life in
    Jamaica as a result of threats being made against her. However, in  her
    favour the judge noted the enormous emotional toll on both her and  the
    sponsor caused by Fabian's death. The appellant speaks English and  has
    a degree. She would be supported by the sponsor  and  her  step-father.
    She would be able to integrate (see  sections  117B(2)  and  (3)).  The
    appellant has no immediate family in Jamaica and relies on friends  for
    accommodation. The judge concluded the refusal of entry  clearance  was
    not proportionate.

 6. The respondent applied for permission to appeal on the basis  that  the
    judge had made a misdirection in law. The appellant failed to meet  the
    requirements of the rules by a wide margin and this should have  formed
    a weighty factor in the  judge's  assessment  of  proportionality.  The
    judge erred by failing to direct herself  that  in  general  the  rules
    codified the categories of persons for whom the UK placed weight on the
    importance of family reunion. Finally, the judge erred by giving  undue
    weight to evidence of the murder rate in Jamaica  given  the  appellant
    had not received any threats.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal granted permission to appeal.  It  was  unclear
    whether the judge had identified compelling circumstances supporting  a
    claim for leave outside the rules (SSHD v SS (Congo)  [2015]  EWCA  Civ
    387).

Error of law

 8. I heard submissions on whether the judge made a material error of law.

 9. Mr Tufan said the correct rules had been applied and the appellant  did
    not meet them. The judge erred in paragraph  23  in  directing  herself
    because she had not applied the test explained in Singh & Khalid v SSHD
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74.  She  also  erred  in  making  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise because she failed realise the threshold  is  higher
    in entry clearance cases following SS (Congo).

10. Mr Richardson said the test under SS (Congo)  was  whether  there  were
    compelling circumstances justifying the exercise of discretion  outside
    the rules. As the judge allowed the appeal, it could not be argued  she
    had not identified compelling circumstances.  The  respondent  had  not
    argued her decision was perverse. He recognised  the  rules  were  more
    than a starting-point, in line with Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ
    558, but pointed out the judge had taken every possible adverse  matter
    into account when coming to her decision. The respondent's grounds were
    mere disagreement with the outcome. It could not be  argued  the  judge
    had not had the correct test in  mind  because  she  cited  R  (on  the
    application of Esther Ebun Oludoyi &  Ors)  v  SSHD  (Article  8  -  MM
    (Lebanon) and Nagre) IJR [2014] UKUT 00539 (IAC). Even if the judge had
    not applied the correct approach, as explained in SS (Congo), her error
    could not possibly be material because she found there were  compelling
    circumstances.

11. I indicated that I needed to  reserve  my  decision  on  whether  Judge
    Stoke's decision should be set aside. As no additional findings of fact
    would be required, the representatives agreed to  make  submissions  in
    case I decided to set aside the decision.

12. In my judgment the decision of Judge Stokes is vitiated by error of law
    and must be set aside. My reasons are as follows.

13. In SS (Congo) the Court of Appeal resolved a  number  of  uncertainties
    regarding the correct approach to assessing  Article  8  following  the
    introduction of rules in July 2012 designed to give effect to the  UK's
    obligations under Article 8. The judge heard  this  appeal  before  the
    Court of Appeal had given judgment. However, the  court  was  revealing
    what had always been the law and it is therefore appropriate  to  apply
    the case when determining whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.



14. Giving the judgment of the court, Richards LJ explained as follows:

         "17. If the gap between what Article 8 requires and the content  of
         the Immigration Rules is wide, then the part for the  Secretary  of
         State's residual discretion to play in satisfying the  requirements
         of Article 8 and section 6(1) of the HRA  will  be  correspondingly
         greater. In  such  circumstances,  the  practical  guidance  to  be
         derived from the content of the Rules as to relevant public  policy
         considerations for the purposes of the balance to be  struck  under
         Article 8 is also likely to  be  reduced:  to  use  the  expression
         employed by Aikens LJ in MM (Lebanon) in the Court  of  Appeal,  at
         [135], the proportionality balancing  exercise  "will  be  more  at
         large". If the Secretary of State  has  not  made  a  conscientious
         effort to strike a fair balance for the purposes of  Article  8  in
         making the Rules, a court or tribunal will naturally be disinclined
         to give significant weight to her view regarding the actual balance
         to be struck when the  court  or  tribunal  has  to  consider  that
         question for itself. On the other  hand,  where  the  Secretary  of
         State has sought to fashion the content  of  the  Rules  so  as  to
         strike what she regards as the appropriate balance under Article  8
         and any gap between the  Rules  and  what  Article  8  requires  is
         comparatively narrow, the Secretary of State's formulation  of  the
         Rules may allow the Court to be more confident that she has brought
         a focused assessment of considerations of the  public  interest  to
         bear on the matter. That will in turn allow the Court more  readily
         to give weight to that assessment  when  making  its  own  decision
         pursuant to Article 8. An issue arises on this appeal as to whether
         the Secretary of State has made a conscientious effort to  use  the
         new Immigration Rules to strike the fair balance  which  Article  8
         requires and whether there is a substantial gap,  or  not,  between
         the content of the FTE Rules and the requirements of Article 8.

         ...

         32.  However, even away from those contexts, if  the  Secretary  of
         State has sought to formulate Immigration Rules to reflect  a  fair
         balance of interests under Article 8 in the general  run  of  cases
         falling within their scope, then, as  explained  above,  the  Rules
         themselves will provide significant  evidence  about  the  relevant
         public interest considerations which should be brought into account
         when a court or tribunal seeks to  strike  the  proper  balance  of
         interests under Article 8 in making its own decision. As Beatson LJ
         observed  in  Haleemudeen  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the   Home
         Department [2014] EWCA Civ 558; [2014] Imm AR 6, at [40],  the  new
         Rules in Appendix FM:

             "... are a central part of the legislative and policy  context
             in which the interests of  immigration  control  are  balanced
             against the interests and rights of people who  have  come  to
             this country and wish to settle in it. Overall, the  Secretary
             of State's policy as to when an interference with an Article 8
             right  will  be   regarded   as   disproportionate   is   more
             particularised in the new Rules than it had previously been."

         Accordingly, a court or tribunal is required to give the new  Rules
         "greater  weight  than  as  merely  a  starting   point   for   the
         consideration  of  the  proportionality  of  an  interference  with
         Article 8 rights" (para. [47]).

         33.  In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality does not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in  Appendix  FM.
         It also reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has
         been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,  e.g.,
         Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ.

         ...

         40.  In the light of these authorities, we consider that the  state
         has a wider margin of appreciation in determining the conditions to
         be satisfied before LTE is granted, by contrast with  the  position
         in relation to decisions regarding LTR for  persons  with  a  (non-
         precarious) family life already established in the United  Kingdom.
         The Secretary of State has already, in effect,  made  some  use  of
         this wider margin of appreciation by excluding section  EX.1  as  a
         basis for grant of LTE, although it is available  as  a  basis  for
         grant of LTR. The LTE Rules therefore maintain, in general terms, a
         reasonable relationship with the requirements of Article 8  in  the
         ordinary run of cases. However,  it  remains  possible  to  imagine
         cases where the individual interests at stake are of a particularly
         pressing nature so that a good claim for  LTE  can  be  established
         outside the Rules. In our view, the appropriate general formulation
         for this category is that such cases will arise where an  applicant
         for LTE can show that compelling circumstances exist (which are not
         sufficiently recognised under the new Rules) to require  the  grant
         of such leave.

         41.  This formulation is aligned to that proposed in Nagre at  [29]
         in relation to the general position in respect of the new Rules for
         LTR, which was adopted in this court in Haleemudeen at [44]. It  is
         a fairly demanding test,  reflecting  the  reasonable  relationship
         between the Rules themselves and the proper outcome of  application
         of Article 8 in the usual  run  of  cases.  But,  contrary  to  the
         submission  of  Mr  Payne,  it  is  not   as   demanding   as   the
         exceptionality or "very compelling circumstances"  test  applicable
         in the special contexts explained in MF  (Nigeria)  (precariousness
         of family relationship and deportation of foreigners  convicted  of
         serious crimes)."

15. In this case, it is not possible to discern from her decision that  the
    judge had in mind the need for the  appellant  to  identify  compelling
    circumstances justifying a grant of leave to enter  outside  the  rules
    given the fact the rules contained in Appendix FM were designed to give
    effect to the UK's obligations to admit  family  members  in  order  to
    continue family life. Nor does her decision show  that  she  recognized
    that the rules in a LTE case maintain, in general terms,  a  reasonable
    relationship with the requirements of Article 8. The only way in  which
    the judge's paragraph 23 can fairly be read is that she moved  straight
    from finding Appendix FM was not satisfied to a freestanding Article  8
    assessment notwithstanding her reference in paragraph  17  to  Oludoyi,
    which  applied  the  Nagre  test,  approved  in  Singh  &  Khalid   and
    Haleemudeen. It is possible the judge took from the passage cited  from
    Oludoyi that there was no threshold test, as suggested in Gulshan,  but
    she overlooked that there remained a need to give reasons for making  a
    two-stage assessment and to identify at that point  compelling  reasons
    justifying a second stage.

16. Mr Richardson's argument was that it  was  implicit  from  the  judge's
    ultimate decision allowing the appeal on proportionality  grounds  that
    she found there were compelling circumstances is not a complete  answer
    because absent from the judge's decision is any  recognition  that  the
    rules were more than a starting-point and that the judge needed to show
    in her decision that she recognized that she had to  give  "appropriate
    weight to the focused consideration of public interest factors as finds
    expression in the Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules  in
    Appendix FM."

17. Furthermore, when going on to the second stage, the judge was  required
    to approach the proportionality balancing exercise "through  the  lens"
    of the rules, as explained by the Court of Appeal  in  the  context  of
    deportation appeals: see, for example, AQ (Nigeria) & Ors v SSHD [2015]
    EWCA Civ 250, paragraphs 37 and 74. It is not possible to see that  the
    judge recognized that this matter played a role in the  proportionality
    balancing exercise.

18. I set aside the decision of Judge Stokes.

Re-making the decision

19. I shall now summarise the parties' submissions to me on how the  appeal
    should be disposed of. Mr Richardson took me  to  paragraph  39  of  SS
    (Congo), which he described as a "template"  for  his  submissions.  He
    argued the case showed an appellant could succeed on Article 8  grounds
    if they were outside the UK. There was an obligation to give weight  to
    the way in which the Secretary of State struck the balance through  the
    rules but there was nonetheless a positive  obligation  on  the  UK  to
    respect  family  life.  The  appellant's  circumstances   had   changed
    fundamentally when her brother was killed. She had cooperated with  the
    police in their enquiries and feared the consequences of doing so.  Her
    emotional  difficulties  supported  a  finding  of  family  life.   The
    compelling circumstance was the killing of her brother.  The  appellant
    was 24 years of age but was not completely independent. In terms of the
    public interest which the Secretary of State was  seeking  to  protect,
    the appellant would not be a drain on public funds, as found  by  Judge
    Stokes. In the circumstances, there was more likely to  be  a  positive
    obligation to respect family life. The fact the appellant has  a  minor
    half-sibling in the UK tipped the balance in her favour. It  could  not
    be suggested that the child, who was British, should leave the UK.  The
    application of the section 117B factors did not give the appellant  any
    positives but neither did they give rise to any negatives.

20. Mr Tufan  relied  on  his  previous  submissions  that  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the  rules
    on Article 8 grounds. He questioned whether there was family life given
    the appellant is an adult. The sponsor had left Jamaica in 2002 so  the
    separation had been  voluntary.  The  decision  was  proportionate.  Mr
    Richardson did not wish to reply.

21. I reserved my decision.

22. The burden of proof is on the appellant and the standard  of  proof  is
    the ordinary civil standard  of  a  balance  of  probabilities.  I  may
    consider only  the  circumstances  appertaining  at  the  time  of  the
    decision to refuse, as interpreted in DR (ECO: Post-decision  evidence)
    Morocco [2005] UKIAT 00038 Starred.

23. There is no need to disturb the findings of fact made by  Judge  Stokes
    and I gratefully adopt them. These can be found in  paragraphs  24,  28
    and 29 of her decision and I do not need to set them out again.

24. Unfortunately for this appellant, the rules now severely  restrict  the
    circumstances in which an adult dependent relative can be  admitted  to
    the UK. The only persons who will succeed under Appendix FM  are  those
    who can show, among other things, that as a result of age,  illness  or
    disability they require long-term personal  care  to  perform  everyday
    tasks (see section E-ECDR of  Appendix  FM[1]).  It  is  therefore  the
    Secretary of State's view that the public interest lies in  restricting
    this particular route for  family  reunion.  That  must  be  a  weighty
    consideration.

25. The appellant was 24 years of age at the date of decision. It is common
    ground that the murder of the appellant's older brother on  6  November
    2012, aged 25, would have caused  the  appellant  shock  and  emotional
    distress. However, the appellant is a healthy adult. She waited  almost
    a year before applying for entry clearance and she was able to  lead  a
    normal life in Jamaica. She was not living  with  Fabian  when  he  was
    killed and she did not move home until several months after his  death.
    The appellant is well-qualified and there was no reason given  why  she
    could not find employment.  The  sponsor  was  able  to  visit  Jamaica
    without any problems. The appellant has been separated from the sponsor
    since 2002 when the latter decided to move to the UK.

26. In paragraphs 35 to 40 of its judgment in  SS  (Congo),  the  Court  of
    Appeal explained the different considerations which apply in a LTE case
    compared to a LTR case. The requirements on the State are usually  less
    stringent in the LTE context and the rules will  generally  maintain  a
    reasonable relationship with the requirements of Article 8.  The  court
    did not look specifically at the situation of an adult child.  However,
    the current case lies at the outer margins  of  what  might  be  deemed
    extant family life for the purposes of Article 8 due to the age of  the
    appellant at the date of decision and the fact the  lengthy  separation
    from her mother was brought about through the latter's choice to  leave
    Jamaica without her children. In my judgment this  is  not  a  case  in
    which, despite the tragic death of Fabian, it is correct to  say  there
    are compelling circumstances  which  are  not  sufficiently  recognized
    under the rules to require the grant of leave on Article 8 grounds.   I
    therefore substitute a decision dismissing the appeal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

    The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made a material error of  law  and
    her decision allowing the appeal is set aside. The  following  decision
    is substituted:

         The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.




                               Signed   Date 18 November 2015


                               Judge Froom,
                               sitting as a Deputy Judge of the Upper
                               Tribunal
-----------------------
      [1] "E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner
      are the sponsor's parents or grandparents,  the  applicant's  partner,
      must as a result of  age,  illness  or  disability  require  long-term
      personal care to perform everyday tasks.

      E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner  are
      the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's  partner,  must
      be unable, even with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,
      to obtain the required level of care in the  country  where  they  are
      living, because-

           (a) it is not available and there is no person in  that  country
           who can reasonably provide it; or

           (b) it is not affordable."



