
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02451/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |   Decision & Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                    |
|On 6th August 2015                           |   On 13th August 2015         |
|                                             |                               |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Pretoria

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mr Eric Mutanda
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs E Mutanda, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Background

1.   This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Thew, who in a determination promulgated  on  23rd  May  2015,
    allowed the appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse  him  entry
    to the United Kingdom in order to join his wife and three  children  in
    the United Kingdom. The Entry Clearance Officer  is  the  appellant  in
    this appeal but for the sake of convenience I will identify the parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a national of Zambia, born  on  22nd  September  1964.
    His wife, the sponsor, is a national  of  the  Democratic  Republic  of
    Congo. They married on 6th October 1991  in  the  DRC  and  then  lived
    together in Zambia following their marriage.  They have three children,
    all born in Zambia in 1993, 1995 and December 1997. At the date of  the
    decision under appeal only the youngest child was still a minor. He was
    16 years old. The appellant first entered the United Kingdom in 2002 as
    a student.  The sponsor and their children joined him later that  year.
    After being granted further periods of leave to  remain  the  appellant
    eventually overstayed. The sponsor and  the  children  lived  with  the
    appellant from 2002 until he voluntarily returned to Zambia in 2009.

3.   At the  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  sponsor  said  the
    appellant was advised that he should returned to Zambia as  this  would
    have assisted his wife's asylum claim, she  having  claimed  asylum  in
    December 2008. Although her asylum appeal was dismissed the sponsor and
    her children were successful in respect of  the  Article  8  aspect  of
    their appeal in 2011. This was, in turn, based on  the  extent  of  the
    children's private lives in the United Kingdom. They  were  all  issued
    with discretionary leave to  remain  (DLR)  until  8  July  2014.   The
    children  have  not  seen  the  appellant  since  2009  but  they  have
    communicated via the internet and telephone.  The sponsor  returned  to
    visit the appellant in May 2014 for  two  weeks  and  she  saw  him  in
    January 2015 for nine days.

4.   It is not altogether clear how many applications the appellant made  to
    re-enter the United Kingdom following his voluntary departure.  In  his
    application form at section 32 he refers to a student application  that
    was refused on 29th May 2009 and a visit  application  refused  on  1st
    January 2013. The Entry Clearance Manager review  dated  8th  May  2014
    claimed that the appellant was previously refused entry clearance under
    paragraphs 320(7A) and 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules.  Paragraph  26
    of the determination refers to a refusal of  a  visit  application  and
    refers to a student application in September 2009 and  vague  reference
    was made to the appellant's adverse  immigration  history  and  use  of
    deception.  The same paragraph also refers  to  a  visitor  application
    refused on 17th January 2012.

5.   In respect of the present application the appellant applied  for  entry
    clearance in a settlement category although he maintains that he merely
    wished to be granted status in  line  with  that  of  his  family.  His
    application was refused on 6th February 2014. The application  was  not
    refused under paragraphs 320(7A)  or  320(7B).  It  was  refused  under
    paragraph 320(1) on the basis that the entry clearance was being sought
    for a purpose not covered by the Immigration Rules.  This  was  because
    the appellant sought to join his sponsor and children who had all  been
    granted discretionary leave to remain (DLR).   There  is  no  provision
    within the Immigration Rules for a dependant to  join  someone  granted
    DLR. The Entry Clearance Manager was not satisfied that  the  appellant
    had shown "extreme"  compelling  or  compassionate  circumstances  that
    would warrant overlooking the Immigration Rules in light of Article 8".
     This is clearly the wrong test.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor  and
    from the appellant's youngest son. The judge took account of  a  letter
    written by all three children. It was acknowledged by  the  appellant's
    representative  that  the  application  could  not  succeed  under  the
    provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  judge  referred  to  the
    previously successful Article 8 appeal. The judge found that there  was
    family life between the appellant  and  the  sponsor  and  between  the
    appellant and his three sons.

7.   The judge then considered the  public  interest  and  referred  to  the
    requirements of Sections 117A and 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002. The judge was satisfied that the  appellant  would
    be proficient in English and would be able to find  a  job.  The  judge
    noted that the appeal was not a removal  case  but  that  the  youngest
    child was a qualified person within the  definition  in  Section  117D.
    Crucially, the judge made reference to the fact that, in December 2014,
    the sponsor and the children were granted DLR until December 2017. This
    was some ten months after the date of the decision under  appeal.  This
    is clear from paragraphs 37 and 41 of the determination.

8.   At paragraph 41 of the determination,  and  in  conclusion,  the  judge
    said this:

         "However,  the  decision   was   based   upon   the   circumstances
         appertaining at the date of the  decision,  that  is  discretionary
         leave for his  wife  and  sons  until  8th  July  2014.   In  those
         circumstances I allow the appeal to the extent that I remit  it  to
         the respondent for consideration of the  changed  circumstances  of
         that leave having been  extended  until  3rd  December  2017,  with
         particular reference to the family life considerations relating  to
         the youngest child, his interests being a primary consideration."

The Grounds of Appeal

9.   The grounds of appeal take issue with the judge's reliance on the post-
    decision grant of a further three years' DLR. The grounds contend  that
    the judge impermissibly took account  of  this  postdecision  evidence,
    with supporting  reference  to  the  House  of  Lords  decision  of  AS
    (Somalia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 32.

10.  The grounds further contend that  the  judge  exceeded  her  powers  by
    remitting the appeal on human rights grounds in circumstances where, at
    paragraph  30  of  her  determination,  she  had  already   found   the
    respondent's decision lawful.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

11.  At the hearing Mr Duffy briefly amplified those grounds. He  submitted,
    with reference to paragraph 30 of  the  determination  that  the  judge
    should have stopped at the third Razgar step.   If  she  was  going  to
    remit the matter back to the respondent she could only have so  on  the
    basis that the decision was unlawful, yet she found that  the  decision
    was not unlawful.

12.  In response the sponsor, who was not represented at the hearing as  she
    could not afford funding for a representative, indicated that,  at  the
    date of the application, she still had leave to remain and  could  have
    spent time together with her husband if he was granted leave to  enter.
    The sponsor indicated that one needed to approach family  life  with  a
    heart and that it was  very  difficult  raising  her  children  in  the
    appellant's absence. She reiterated  that  her  children  missed  their
    father.

Discussion

13.  I am satisfied, for the reasons essentially set out in the  grounds  of
    appeal that the judge did materially err by taking into  account  post-
    decision events when she was not entitled, by virtue of section 85A  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  to  do  so.  Despite
    reminding herself at  paragraph  39  of  her  determination  that  only
    circumstances appertaining at the date of the decision were relevant to
    the appeal, she then went on, at paragraphs 40 and  41,  to  take  into
    account the grant of a further three years' DLR to the sponsor and  the
    children. Whilst such an extension may have been expected  it  did  not
    occurred for a further ten months after the refusal of entry clearance.
    By taking account of this post-decision event and seeking to remit  the
    matter back to the respondent the judge has clearly  had  regard  to  a
    matter in respect of which she was not entitled to  consider  (applying
    AS (Somalia)).

14.  I am further satisfied that, having  found  the  respondent's  decision
    lawful under the Razgar analysis, the judge was not entitled  to  remit
    the matter back to the  respondent.   One  should  only  remit  when  a
    consideration has been unlawful in  order  for  an  application  to  be
    lawfully considered. If the respondent's  decision  was  in  accordance
    with the law, as the Judge had already established, there seems  to  me
    to be no scope in remitting back to the respondent.

15.  I indicated my decision to the sponsor and  that  I  would  remake  the
    decision afresh.  Given that this was an entry clearance appeal  I  can
    only take account of the factual matrix in existence at the date of the
    decision. The sponsor had already given evidence before the  First-tier
    Tribunal as had the youngest son, who was not present at the hearing. I
    gave the  sponsor  an  opportunity  to  present  any  further  evidence
    appertaining to the date of the decision that had not been provided  to
    the First-tier Tribunal. The sponsor gave evidence  relating  to  post-
    decision matters involving medical tests and indicated that she  wished
    her husband was by her side.

16.  I reserved my determination.

Remaking of Decision

17.  It was accepted in the First-tier Tribunal hearing that  the  appellant
    cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules. In determining whether  the
    failure to grant entry clearance would be disproportionate I  have  had
    regard to  the  decision  of  The  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387, in  particular  paragraphs
    39, 40 and 41. I  have  to  be  satisfied  that  there  are  compelling
    circumstances outside of the Immigration Rules that  would  render  the
    decision under appeal disproportionate under Article 8 ECHR.

18.  At the date of the decision the appellant's two  oldest  children  were
    over the age of 18. Following the authority of Singh v The Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2015]  EWCA  Civ  630,  and  within  the
    context of immigration control, I  note  that  there  is  no  legal  or
    factual presumption as to the existence or absence of family  life  for
    the purpose of Article 8 between adult children and their parents.   It
    all depends on the particular facts. The love and affection between  an
    adult and his parents will not of itself justify a  finding  of  family
    life. There has to be something more.

19.  I am not satisfied that there  is  anything  more  in  respect  of  the
    relationship between the appellant and his two adult children.  I  have
    taken account of the letter written by all three sons and the fact that
    they genuinely miss their father. But the love  and  affection  between
    the appellant and his two adult children do not, in the absence of  any
    other factor, amount to family life for the purpose of Article 8.

20. I am satisfied that there is family life between the appellant  and  the
    sponsor and between the appellant and his younger son, who was 16 years
    of age  at  the  date  of  the  decision.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
    interference is sufficiently serious to engage the operation of Article
    8 in respect to both sets of relationships.  I am  satisfied  that  the
    decision is lawful and in pursuit of a legitimate aim.

21.  I must now consider the nature of the actual family life  relationships
    between the appellant and his sponsor and youngest son.  I  first  note
    that the appellant voluntarily departed the United Kingdom,  albeit  he
    claims on the basis of bad legal advice. The choice however was his. He
    voluntarily left his family even if  he  believed  it  may  assist  his
    wife's asylum application, which was rejected. I find this  a  relevant
    factor when assessing the existence of  compelling  circumstances.  The
    youngest son had not seen his father for over four years at the date of
    the decision although he had been in communication  via  telephone  and
    the internet. The sponsor had been able to visit the  appellant  and  I
    see no reason why the youngest son could not have  done  the  same.   I
    accept that there may be financial  difficulties  but  given  that  the
    sponsor was able to visit the appellant there was  no  reason  why  the
    youngest son would not be able to do the same.

22.  I take into account the age of the youngest son  at  the  date  of  the
    decision.  As a 16 year old he  was  not  a  young  child.  Whilst  the
    evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  indicates  that  he  clearly
    missed his father and that it had been tough not having  the  appellant
    present, there was nothing in the evidence to indicate that the absence
    of the appellant had been significantly detrimental in respect  of  the
    youngest son's  emotional  or  mental  health.  There  was  nothing  to
    indicate that the youngest son had any medical concerns or other needs.

23.  I must also identify the best interests of the youngest son,  which  is
    a  primary  consideration  pursuant  to  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. In his determination of 14th July
    2011 Judge Hodgkinson found that it would be disproportionate to remove
    the youngest child in terms of the length of time  he  had  lived,  the
    fact that they were the formative years of his life and  his  level  of
    integration. I am satisfied that the best interests of the youngest son
    are that he be brought up by both parents, and that his best  interests
    would therefore require the appellant's admission to the UK.

24.  I also take into account the fact that the  sponsor  and  the  youngest
    son, at the date of the decision, were only in receipt of DLR until May
    2014, some three months after the date of the  decision.  I  must  also
    consider the factors identified in Sections 117A and 117B of  the  NIAA
    2002.

25.  I take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control is in the public interest. I am prepared to  accept
    that the appellant is probably proficient  in  English  given  that  he
    entered the United Kingdom as a student. There is, however, no evidence
    that the appellant would be able to obtain employment in the UK and  no
    evidence at all of the sponsor's financial circumstances. I  note  that
    the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor and the youngest
    son was not formed when they were in the UK unlawfully.

26.  In relation to Section 117B(5)(vi),  this  indicates  that  the  public
    interest does not require a person's removal where  the  person  has  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with a qualifying  child,  that  is
    one who has lived in the UK for seven  years  or  more.  However,  this
    provision relates to a situation when an individual is  facing  removal
    from the UK. Parliament has indicated a  clear  distinction  between  a
    situations where a person is  being  removed  and  where  a  person  is
    applying for entry clearance. I also have regard to the fact  that  the
    status quo, as it has existed since 2009, in terms of the  relationship
    between the appellant  and  his  sponsor  and  youngest  son,  will  be
    maintained by a refusal of entry clearance.

27.  I have also, following SS (Congo) and earlier authorities, to  look  at
    the appellant's position and the position  of  proportionality  through
    the prism or lens of the Immigration Rules, which do  not  provide  for
    entry clearance when the sponsor is only in receipt of DLR.

28.  In terms of the appellant's personal position in Zambia I note that  he
    has his father there, albeit living four hours away. The appellant  was
    self-employed  in  Zambia  and  received  financial  support  from  the
    sponsor. The appellant  has  been  described  as  well-educated  and  a
    qualified mechanical engineer but no qualifications have been  provided
    in support.

29.  Having taking account of the best interests of the youngest  son  as  a
    primary  consideration,  and  having  regard  to  the  nature  of   the
    relationship between the appellant and his sponsor and his youngest son
    as it has been over the last five years since he voluntarily  left  the
    United Kingdom, and  having  regard  to  the  public  interest  factors
    identified in Section 117B, and to the age of the youngest child and to
    the absence of any evidence that the separation is  having  a  damaging
    impact on him, I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  appeal  does  disclose
    compelling circumstances sufficient to  render  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance unlawful or a disproportionate  interference  in  the  family
    life relationship between the appellant and his family  in  the  UK.  I
    consequently dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed

[pic]

Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Blum
Date: 10 August 2015



I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed

[pic]

Upper                  Tribunal                  Judge                  Blum
Date: 10 August 2015

