
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02976/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7 November 2013                         |On 13 November 2013        |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MR MOHAMMAD LUTHFUR RAHMAN
                                                                  Respondent


    Representation:

                            For the Appellant: Mr E Tufan a Senior
           Home Office Presenting Officer
          For the Respondent: Mr J Khan of counsel instructed by Taj
solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is the Entry Clearance  Officer  in  Dhaka  ("the  Entry
      Clearance Officer"). The respondent is a citizen of Bangladesh who was
      born on 1 March 1986 ("the claimant"). The Entry Clearance Officer has
      been given  permission  to  appeal  the  determination  of  First-Tier
      Tribunal Judge Elson MBE  ("the  FTTJ")  who  allowed  the  claimant's
      appeal against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision  to  refuse  him
      entry clearance to the UK as the dependent spouse  of  a  Points-based
      System  migrant  under  the  provisions  of  paragraph  319C  of   the
      Immigration Rules.
   2. The Entry Clearance Officer  also  concluded  that  the  claimant  had
      knowingly sought to mislead  during  his  interview  and  refused  the
      application  under  the  provisions  of  paragraph  320  (7A)  of  the
      Immigration Rules because he had employed deception  by  making  false
      representations. Furthermore, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
      satisfied that the claimant's marriage  was  subsisting  and  that  he
      intended to live together  permanently  with  his  sponsor,  that  the
      marriage  had  not  been  entered  into  for  the  sole   purpose   of
      facilitating re-entry to the UK or that he did not intend to  stay  in
      the UK beyond any period of leave granted to him.


   3. The claimant appealed and the FTTJ heard the  appeal  on  6  September
      2013. The claimant was represented by counsel but the Entry  Clearance
      Officer was not represented. The FTTJ heard  oral  evidence  from  the
      claimant's spouse and sponsor ("the  sponsor").  The  FTTJ  found  the
      sponsor to be a credible witness. In relation to  the  record  of  the
      claimant's interview she found that it; "clearly does not set out  the
      whole of the interview"  and  "I  have  to  conclude  that  the  entry
      clearance officer has been selective as to what was  included  in  the
      written record". As a result she found that the report "is of  limited
      value and I do not give it full evidential weight."


   4. The FTTJ concluded found that the marriage was genuine and subsisting,
      that the claimant came to the UK with the intention  of  studying  but
      that he had difficulties with his studies and that his command of  the
      English language was unlikely to be at the highest  level.  She  found
      that the claimant made mistakes  and  did  not  deliberately  seek  to
      mislead the Entry Clearance Officer. She concluded that  the  claimant
      had established that he met the  requirements  of  paragraph  319  and
      allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.


   5. The respondent sought and was granted permission to appeal  submitting
      that the FTTJ erred in law in her  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
      claimant had not deliberately sought to mislead  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer. She had failed to consider that  the  claimant  had  admitted
      that he had been working in excess of the permitted 20 hours per  week
      in breach of his student visa conditions. On the evidence it  was  not
      open to her to accept the claim that the interview had lasted for  two
      and a half hours which was more likely to refer to the total time  the
      claimant spent in the  High  Commission.  There  was  no  evidence  to
      support the claim that the lack of an interpreter would have made  the
      claimant anxious and his answers to  the  standard  questions  in  the
      interview indicated otherwise and that he could have but did  not  ask
      for an interpreter. As the Entry Clearance  Officer  having  to  prove
      that the claimant had deliberately used a falsehood  it  is  submitted
      that he admitted, in terms, that he had lied.


   6. Mr Tufan relied on the grounds of appeal and submitted that the FTTJ's
      decision was either perverse or unsupported by proper reasoning  which
      justified  the  conclusion.  Mr  Khan  submitted  that  at  worst  the
      interview record showed that the  appellant  did  not  understand  the
      questions and that there were language difficulties. It  was  for  the
      Entry Clearance Officer to prove the very serious allegation that  the
      claimant had employed deception by making  false  representations.  It
      had to be shown that the claimant knowingly used  deception.  A  false
      representation was not enough; it had to have been  made  deliberately
      and knowingly not inadvertently or mistakenly. I  was  asked  to  find
      that it was open to the FTTJ  to  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the
      claimant had not employed deception by making false representations.


   7. In reply to my question Mr Khan  confirmed  that  there  has  been  no
      witness statement from the claimant. The evidence as to what  happened
      at the interview was given by the sponsor at second-hand on the  basis
      of what the claimant told her.


   8. I find that the FTTJ erred in law. On the evidence it was not open  to
      her to come to the conclusion that the report  did  not  set  out  the
      whole of the interview or, put another way, that the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer had been selective as to what  was  included  in  the  written
      report.  These  are  very  serious  allegations.  They  amount  to   a
      conclusion either that not all that was  said  at  the  interview  was
      recorded or that it was edited afterwards to delete some of  what  was
      said, or both. There is no first-hand evidence of what was said at the
      interview. There is no evidence as to what might have  been  said  but
      was either excluded from  the  record  at  the  time  or  subsequently
      deleted. Most of the evidence comes from what  the  sponsor  said  the
      claimant had told her. I find it surprising that there is  no  witness
      statement from the claimant. I also have difficulty  with  the  FTTJ's
      reasoning in paragraph 44 in which she said; "in  view  of  the  short
      record of the interview, which I accept lasted  for  two  and  a  half
      hours not only because that was what the  appellant  reported  to  his
      wife in the United Kingdom but also because of the number of questions
      that were asked". On the one hand the FTTJ seems to be saying that the
      record would be longer for an interview lasting two and a  half  hours
      and on the other that the number of  questions  and  answers  actually
      recorded (41) are likely to have taken two and a half hours.


   9. I find that it was not open to the FTTJ  to  make  these  findings  in
      relation to the interview report or to conclude that it was of limited
      value such that she should not give it  full  evidential  weight.  The
      error is compounded because the FTTJ  then  went  on  to  examine  the
      report as the basis for her conclusion that the claimant made mistakes
      and did not deliberately seek to mislead the entry clearance officer.


  10. I find that the FTTJ erred in  law  and  I  set  aside  her  decision.
      However, the Entry Clearance Officer has not  sought  to  dispute  the
      FTTJ's findings except in relation  to  the  interview  report  and  I
      preserve her other findings of fact including  the  finding  that  the
      sponsor was a credible witness.


  11. I said that I would re-determine the appeal without adjournment  which
      is what, after taking instructions, Mr Khan asked me to do.  He  asked
      that the sponsor be allowed to give further brief  oral  evidence.  Mr
      Tufan submitted that I should  send  the  appeal  back  for  rehearing
      before the First-Tier Tribunal. I do not consider it necessary  to  do
      so. I have not set aside the decision of the FTTJ in its  entirety  or
      come to the conclusion that the decision is so flawed that  in  effect
      there has been no proper hearing of the appeal.


  12. I heard oral evidence from the sponsor  in  English.  She  was  cross-
      examined and re-examined and I asked some questions for the purpose of
      clarification. Her evidence is set out in my record of proceedings.


  13. Mr Tufan submitted that  what  the  claimant  said  at  his  interview
      clearly brought him within the provisions of paragraph 320 (7A). After
      the time he had spent in the UK and his studies  here  he  should  not
      have had any difficulty using the English language. It was not that he
      did not know the answers to the questions but he had been  caught  out
      and in the circumstances did not know what to say. Mr  Tufan  accepted
      that the decision under paragraph 320  (7A)  was  the  only  surviving
      issue. I was asked to dismiss the appeal.


  14. Mr Khan relied on his earlier submissions in relation to the  question
      of the error of law. He emphasised that the threshold  for  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer to establish that the claimant had  fallen  foul  of
      paragraph 320 (7A) was a high one. He accepted that the  claimant  had
      made mistakes but said that they were not lies. The questions to which
      he failed to give a response were consistent with  his  claims  to  be
      tired, surprised at being interviewed and nervous.  Having  said  that
      the arrangements for sending him money in the  UK  were  made  by  his
      brother it was understandable that he did  not  know  the  answers  to
      these questions. I was asked to find that the Entry Clearance  Officer
      had not established that the claimant had employed deception by making
      false representations and to allow the appeal.


  15. I reserved my determination.


  16. I share the view of the FTTJ that the sponsor is a credible witness. I
      believe that she gave evidence to me to the best of her knowledge  and
      recollection. I accept that the claimant had  to  travel  for  six  or
      seven hours during the night to reach the High Commission in time.  He
      arrived at approximately 7 am local  time  and  waited  outside  in  a
      queue. The sponsor was speaking to the claimant on  his  mobile  phone
      until he had to turn it off to go inside at about 9 am. She next spoke
      to him at about 11:30 am which was very soon after he  left  the  High
      Commission. He told her that he had had his fingerprints  taken  after
      which the interview started. He also said that he had been asked a lot
      of questions and that  all  the  time  had  been  taken  up  with  the
      interview. He did not tell her the precise time at which the interview
      started or finished. The sponsor said that the claimant did not have a
      watch and the only way he was able to tell the time was from the  time
      on his mobile phone which was switched off whilst he was in  the  High
      Commission. It  is  not  surprising  that  if  the  claimant  was  not
      expecting to be interviewed what was clearly, to  put  it  in  neutral
      terms, a difficult interview would have seemed to him to have lasted a
      long time with a lot of questions. I find that  the  sponsor's  honest
      recollection of what the claimant said to her provides  no  sufficient
      evidential basis  for  a  conclusion  that  the  interview  record  is
      incorrect or incomplete or that it lasted for two and a half hours. On
      such an important issue, going to the heart of the reasons for refusal
      I am surprised that there is no witness statement from the claimant. I
      have not been told why this has not been  provided  and  there  is  no
      obvious or good reason for the lack of one.


  17. The head note to the interview record form directs the interviewer  to
      ensure that all of the standard questions are asked, that a record  is
      made if the interviewee cannot answer a question or the  question  has
      to be repeated and finally, whether it  becomes  necessary  to  switch
      into a language other than English.  The  opening  standard  questions
      ("are you fit and well?", "do you understand English?"  and  "are  you
      fit and well and  happy  to  be  interviewed  in  English?")  are  all
      answered in the affirmative. There are a number  of  indications  that
      questions had to be repeated (for example "x3"). Four  questions  were
      repeated once or more. There is no  indication  that  the  interviewer
      switched to a language other than English or that the  claimant  asked
      that this be done. There are 41 questions and  answers.  Many  of  the
      questions are answered clearly and relevantly. For  example  when  the
      claimant was asked where he lived after he got  married  he  gave  the
      number of the house and the name of the road  in  London  and  how  it
      could be reached by bus. There are a number of questions to  which  he
      made no response. At question 37 he was asked; "why did  you  tell  me
      you last studied in June 2012?" To which he replied "sorry  it  was  a
      lie". At question 39 he was asked; "you lied when you  said  you  were
      studying at Apex College until June 2012?" To which he replied; "yes".
      At the end of the interview the claimant agreed that he was happy with
      the way the interview had been conducted, he had  understood  all  the
      questions and had no questions to ask or anything to add.


  18. The claimant has not provided a witness statement to set out  what  is
      put forward on his behalf by way of explanation for what  he  said  at
      the interview. It is said that he was  tired,  having  had  to  travel
      through the night to get to the High Commission and surprised, nervous
      and anxious because he was not expecting  to  be  interviewed.  It  is
      argued  on  his  behalf  that  he  was  confused,   that   any   false
      representations were genuine mistakes and that he had no intention  to
      deceive.


  19. In an  appeal  arising  from  the  refusal  of  an  application  under
      paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules, the  burden  of  proof  is
      upon the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  establish  on  a  balance  of
      probabilities that the requirements of that paragraph are made out. AA
      (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ
      773 makes it clear that there has to be dishonesty or deception.  This
      is not a case where it is suggested that there was dishonesty  on  the
      part of anyone other  than  the  claimant.  If  dishonesty  is  to  be
      established it must be his and he must have known that  he  was  using
      dishonesty or deception.


  20. Bearing in mind where the burden of proof lies, the standard of  proof
      and the very serious consequences for the  claimant  of  a  conclusion
      that the requirements  of  paragraph  320(7A)  are  made  out  I  have
      examined the interview record in the light of all the evidence  before
      me. The clear and logical answers which the claimant gave to  most  of
      the questions point towards a proper understanding  of  the  questions
      and an ability to express his answers in English. At no stage did  the
      claimant ask to switch from English to his first  language.  Whilst  I
      accept that the claimant might not have expected to be interviewed and
      he could have been tired he did say that he was fit  and  well  to  be
      interviewed at  the  beginning  and,  at  the  end,  that  he  had  no
      complaints about the way in which it had been conducted. He also  said
      that he had understood all the questions and had  nothing  to  add.  I
      have considered whether, for example between questions 22  and  26  he
      did not respond because he did not understand the question or know the
      answer. However, if either of these was the reason he could  have  but
      did not say so. In his answer to question 37 he volunteered the answer
      "sorry it was a lie". The word was not suggested to him.  There  could
      have been no error in translation because he was  using  English.  The
      context gives no support for his contention that  he  meant  something
      else, perhaps "mistake". Question 36 was; "you lied when you said  you
      were studying at Apex College until June 2012?" To  which  he  replied
      "yes".


  21. Looking at all the evidence in the round I  conclude  that  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer has established to the standards of the  balance  of
      probabilities that the claimant has employed deception by making false
      representations. He has been knowingly dishonest.


  22. I have not been asked to anonymise this determination  and  I  see  no
      good reason to do so.


  23. Having set aside the decision of the FTTJ I remake it and dismiss  the
      claimant's appeal.











      .............................................
            Signed                                    Date 8 November 2013
            Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

