
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02955/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th December 2015                |On 5th January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - KINGSTON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                DARIEN CLARKE
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs D Clarke (the Sponsor)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appealed against a decision of  Judge
    Shamash of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on  15th  June
    2015.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    FtT and I will refer to him as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is a male Jamaican citizen born 18th May 1986 who  applied
    for entry clearance to enable him to join his British  spouse,  Deborah
    Clarke (the Sponsor) in the United Kingdom.

 4. The application was refused on 5th February 2014.  The  ECO  considered
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and refused the  application  with
    reference to E-ECP.2.6 and 2.10 not accepting that the parties were  in
    a genuine and subsisting relationship, nor that they intended  to  live
    together permanently in the UK.

 5. The application was also refused with reference to E-ECP.3.3(b)  as  it
    was not accepted that evidence had been provided that the Sponsor could
    adequately maintain and accommodate the Appellant  and  any  dependants
    without recourse to public funds and E-ECP.3.4, as it was not  accepted
    evidence had been submitted to  prove  that  there  would  be  adequate
    accommodation  without  recourse  to  public  funds,  for  the  family,
    including other family members not included in the application but  who
    live in the same household.

 6. The Claimant's appeal was heard by the FtT on 24th April  2015,  and  a
    finding  made  that  the  Claimant  and  Sponsor  are  in   a   genuine
    relationship, and intend to live together as husband and wife.  The FtT
    also found that adequate financial maintenance would be available,  but
    the appeal was dismissed under the Immigration Rules  for  one  reason.
    This was that the FtT found that, at the date  of  refusal,  there  was
    insufficient evidence to prove adequacy of accommodation.

 7. The FtT then went on  to  consider  Article  8  of  the  1950  European
    Convention  on  Human  Rights  (the  1950   Convention)   outside   the
    Immigration Rules.  The FtT found that to refuse entry clearance  would
    be disproportionate, and noted that at the date of the  hearing,  there
    was further evidence in relation to accommodation, which postdated  the
    refusal, but which indicated that adequate accommodation would  now  be
    available.  The appeal was allowed pursuant to Article 8.

 8. The ECO applied for and was granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  In summary it was  contended  that  the  FtT  had  erred  in
    considering Article 8.  It was contended that the case  law  considered
    by the FtT was not of relevance, that being Hyatt v  SSHD  [2012]  EWCA
    Civ 104, and Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL.  It was contended  that  the
    FtT had misapplied the principles in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and
    had failed to explain what compelling circumstances existed to  justify
    granting the appeal under Article 8, when the Immigration  Rules  could
    not be satisfied.  It was submitted that the FtT had erred  in  failing
    to consider the weight to be afforded to the  public  interest  in  the
    maintenance of effective immigration control, when it was accepted that
    the Claimant could make  a  further  application  for  entry  clearance
    without undue delay.

Error of Law

 9. The error of law hearing took place on 2nd October 2015.  There was  no
    attendance on behalf of  the  Claimant  and  no  explanation  for  non-
    attendance by the Sponsor and no application  for  an  adjournment.   A
    telephone call was made to the Sponsor in an effort  to  ascertain  why
    there was no attendance, but the telephone call was not answered.   The
    hearing therefore proceeded, rule 38 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 having been considered.

10. The ECO's representative relied upon the grounds contained  within  the
    application for permission to appeal, and submitted evidence that  visa
    processing times in Kingston, Jamaica indicated that  all  applications
    are decided within 90 days, and 93% of applications are decided  within
    60 days.

11. It was submitted that the FtT had failed to consider the principles  in
    AS (Somalia) [2009] UKHL 32, which confirm that as this was  an  appeal
    against  refusal  of  entry  clearance,  Article  8  should  have  been
    considered at the date of refusal, and the FtT had erred by considering
    Article 8 as at the date of hearing.

Error of Law Conclusions

12. I found that the FtT had  considered  Article  8  as  at  the  date  of
    hearing, which was an error of law, as AS (Somalia) confirms  that  the
    FtT should have considered the circumstances appertaining at  the  date
    of refusal, both in relation to the Immigration Rules and human rights,
    because this was an appeal against refusal of entry clearance.

13. The FtT erred in allowing the appeal pursuant to Article 8 outside  the
    Immigration Rules on the basis that evidence  had  been  provided  that
    adequate accommodation was available at the date of hearing.   The  FtT
    should have considered the circumstances appertaining at  the  date  of
    refusal of entry clearance, that being 5th February 2014.

14. The FtT erred in considering Hyatt  and  Chikwamba,  which  related  to
    applications and appeals made in-country.  The FtT set out in paragraph
    52 that in Hyatt the court stated that a judge should look  at  whether
    or not someone "will now meet the rules."  That is correct if there  is
    an in-country appeal, but incorrect in an  appeal  against  refusal  of
    entry clearance.

15. I found that the FtT misapplied the principles in SS (Congo) and failed
    in particular to take into account the guidance set out in paragraph 40
    of  that  decision.   The  FtT  did  not  adequately  analyse   whether
    compelling circumstances  existed  which  would  justify  allowing  the
    appeal under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  The FtT did  not
    adequately explain why it would be disproportionate for the Claimant to
    make a further application in order to satisfy the  Immigration  Rules,
    given that it was not contended that there would be an undue  delay  in
    such an application being considered.

16. Therefore the decision of the FtT was set aside.  I considered  whether
    to remake  the decision or whether it was appropriate  to  adjourn  the
    hearing to enable the Sponsor to attend.  I decided on balance, that it
    was appropriate to adjourn  to  give  the  Sponsor  an  opportunity  to
    attend, as the Tribunal file indicated that although there had been  no
    attendance at the error of law hearing, the Sponsor had previously been
    in contact with the Tribunal, and had indicated, before a hearing  date
    was set, that she was anxious to attend the appeal hearing.

17. I therefore adjourned for a resumed hearing to take place.  I  directed
    that the findings made by the FtT that the parties  are  in  a  genuine
    relationship and intend to live together as husband and wife  would  be
    preserved.  Also preserved was the finding that the  appeal  could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules because there was no evidence  that
    the parties would  have  adequate  accommodation  as  at  the  date  of
    refusal.

Re-making the Decision

Preliminary Issues

18. The resumed hearing took place on  11th  December  2015.   The  Sponsor
    attended.  She explained that she had not attended  the  error  of  law
    hearing, because when she received notification of the hearing, she had
    already arranged to travel to Jamaica to spend time with the  Claimant.
    She travelled to Jamaica on 22nd September 2015 staying for two  weeks.
    The Sponsor produced a copy of a fax which she stated had been sent  to
    the Tribunal prior to the error of law hearing, indicating that she and
    her youngest son were travelling to Jamaica,  and  asking  whether  the
    hearing could be adjourned.  The fax indicates  that  the  Sponsor  was
    content for the case to be heard in her absence  if  it  could  not  be
    adjourned.  I explained to the Sponsor that there was no record of  the
    Tribunal having received this fax, and it was not on the Tribunal file.

19. I established that the Sponsor had seen  the  error  of  law  decision,
    which I explained to her.  I explained my reasons for finding that  the
    FtT had been correct to find that the appeal could  not  succeed  under
    the Immigration Rules, but had erred,  for  the  reasons  given  in  my
    written decision, for concluding that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed
    pursuant to Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  I confirmed  that
    the findings made by the FtT in relation to the Sponsor  and  Appellant
    having a genuine and subsisting  relationship  and  intending  to  live
    permanently with each other as husband and wife were preserved and were
    no longer in issue.

20. I established that I had  all  documentation  upon  which  the  parties
    intended to rely, and neither party had any  further  documentation  to
    submit.

21. The Sponsor indicated that she  would  give  evidence  to  confirm  her
    reasons for believing that  the  appeal  should  be  allowed,  and  the
    Claimant should be granted entry clearance as her spouse.

The Sponsor's Evidence

22. The Sponsor confirmed that she had  moved  address  shortly  after  the
    application for entry clearance was made, and she moved to her  current
    address which has three bedrooms.

23. The Sponsor explained that in her view she is entitled to a family life
    in the UK with her husband, the Claimant.   She  did  not  see  why  he
    should make a further application for entry clearance.  She pointed out
    that initially the ECO had not accepted  that  she  was  in  a  genuine
    relationship, but it had now been established that she is.

24. The Sponsor has her two youngest sons living with her, and she  thought
    it was unfair that her youngest son was missing out on the support that
    the Claimant could give.

25. The Sponsor  explained  that  she  had  recently  undergone  two  major
    operations and that she had been forced to recover without the  support
    of the Claimant and she had also suffered a bereavement,  in  that  her
    father had passed away, and she was unable to rely upon the support  of
    the Claimant because he had not been granted entry clearance.

26. The Sponsor was briefly cross-examined  and  asked  the  dates  of  her
    operations, and she replied that she underwent a gastric bypass on 23rd
    August 2015, and that she had an operation on  her  foot  approximately
    two weeks ago.

The Entry Clearance Officer's Submissions

27. Miss Fijiwala relied upon the refusal decision dated 5th February 2014,
    although it was accepted that there was no challenge to the genuineness
    of the Sponsor's relationship with the Claimant.

28. The FtT findings in relation to the relationship and the inadequacy  of
    accommodation had been preserved and therefore  the  issue  before  the
    Upper Tribunal related to Article 8 of the 1950  Convention,  and  Miss
    Fijiwala submitted that this  should  be  considered  at  the  date  of
    refusal of entry clearance.

29. Miss Fijiwala submitted that there were no compelling circumstances  to
    justify allowing this appeal under Article 8  outside  the  Immigration
    Rules.  I was asked to note that there  was  no  undue  delay  in  visa
    processing times in Kingston, and I was asked to dismiss the appeal.

The Sponsor's Representations

30. The Sponsor pointed out that evidence of  her  accommodation  had  been
    provided to the FtT.  There had  been  written  confirmation  that  the
    Claimant could live at the Sponsor's address pursuant  to  the  tenancy
    agreement that she had signed.  That property had  three  bedrooms  and
    therefore there would be adequate accommodation  for  the  Sponsor  and
    Claimant, and the Sponsor's two children.

31. The Sponsor asked that the appeal be allowed.

32. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

33. I have taken into account all of the evidence both oral and documentary
    placed before me and considered that evidence in the round.

34. When considering the Immigration Rules in an appeal such  as  this  the
    burden of proof is on the Appellant and the  standard  of  proof  is  a
    balance of probability.

35. When considering Article 8, the burden of proof is on the  Claimant  to
    show that he has established a family and/or private  life  that  would
    engage Article 8.  It is then for the ECO to prove that the decision is
    lawful, necessary and proportionate.

36. I must consider the circumstances appertaining at the date  of  refusal
    of entry clearance that being  5th  February  2014.   This  is  because
    section 85A(2) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    states that in an  appeal  against  refusal  of  entry  clearance,  the
    Tribunal may consider only the circumstances appertaining at  the  time
    of the decision.  I understand that section 85A  was  repealed  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014, but was in  force  at  the  relevant  time.   The
    issues before me do not  in  fact  relate  to  the  Immigration  Rules,
    because the findings made by the FtT in relation to  the  Claimant  and
    Sponsor having a genuine and subsisting relationship and  intending  to
    live with each other permanently as spouses have been preserved, but so
    has the finding that at the date of refusal, it  had  not  been  proved
    that adequate accommodation was available.

37. By way of explanation, in relation to the issue of accommodation, it is
    apparent  that  there  was  no  satisfactory   evidence   of   adequate
    accommodation before the ECO when the decision was made.  When the  FtT
    heard the appeal, there was evidence that postdated the refusal.   That
    evidence related to a  tenancy  agreement  made  by  the  Sponsor  with
    Affinity Sutton dated 30th April 2014, which  confirmed  that  as  from
    that date the Sponsor had a property with three bedrooms  suitable  for
    occupation by four people.  There was a  letter  from  Affinity  Sutton
    dated 22nd January 2015 confirming that the Claimant could live at that
    address.

38. The FtT was correct to find that this evidence  of  accommodation,  did
    not prove that adequate accommodation existed when the application  for
    entry clearance was refused on 5th February 2014.  That is why the  FtT
    decision dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules was  upheld.
    However if a fresh  application  was  to  be  made,  it  would  appear,
    provided the necessary evidence  is  submitted,  that  the  application
    should succeed as the Tribunal has made a finding in  relation  to  the
    relationship, and  evidence  has  been  submitted  that  there  is  now
    adequate accommodation.

39. I now turn to consider Article 8 outside  the  Immigration  Rules.   AS
    (Somalia) is authority to confirm that the human rights  aspect  of  an
    appeal against refusal of  entry  clearance,  must  consider  only  the
    circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision  to  refuse,  in
    this case, 5th February 2014.  At that time, the Immigration Rules were
    not satisfied because there was no adequate accommodation.

40. In considering Article 8 and the five stage  test  set  out  in  Razgar
    [2004] UKHL, I find that the  Sponsor  and  Claimant  have  established
    family life, and that refusal of entry clearance  does  interfere  with
    that family life and therefore Article 8 is engaged.  I find  that  the
    decision to refuse entry clearance is in accordance with  the  law,  on
    the basis that the Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied, I  then  have
    to decide whether the  interference  is  necessary  and  proportionate.
    This involves considering section 117B of the  2002  Act.   Sub-section
    (1) confirms that the maintenance of effective immigration controls  is
    in the public interest.  I attach weight to this, and attach weight  to
    the fact that the Immigration Rules cannot be satisfied.

41. Sub-section (2) confirms that it is in  the  public  interest  that  an
    applicant can speak English, and I am satisfied that the  Claimant  can
    speak English.

42. Sub-section (3) refers to an applicant  being  financially  independent
    and there was no evidence to submit that that was the case.  I  do  not
    find that sub-sections (4), (5), and (6), are applicable.  I take  into
    account the guidance given in SS (Congo) and set  out  below  paragraph
    40:
         "40. In the light of these authorities, we consider that the  state
             has  a  wider  margin  of  appreciation  in  determining   the
             conditions to be satisfied before LTE is granted, by  contrast
             with the position in relation to decisions regarding  LTR  for
             persons  with   a   (non-precarious)   family   life   already
             established in the United Kingdom.  The Secretary of State has
             already, in effect, made some use  of  this  wider  margin  of
             appreciation by excluding section EX.1 as a basis for grant of
             LTE, although it is available as a basis  for  grant  of  LTR.
             The  LTE  rules  therefore  maintain,  in  general  terms,   a
             reasonable relationship with the requirements of Article 8  in
             the ordinary run of cases.  However, it  remains  possible  to
             imagine cases where the individual interests at stake are of a
             particularly pressing nature so that a good claim for LTE  can
             be  established  outside  the  rules.   In   our   view,   the
             appropriate general formulation for this category is that such
             cases will arise where an applicant  for  LTE  can  show  that
             compelling circumstances exist  (which  are  not  sufficiently
             recognised under the new Rules) to require the grant  of  such
             leave."

43. Therefore an individual claiming leave to enter the United Kingdom, who
    cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules, must show  that  compelling
    circumstances exist which are not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the
    Immigration Rules, to require the grant of such leave.

44. I do not find, considering the circumstances appertaining  in  February
    2014, that it has been proved that any  such  compelling  circumstances
    exist.  At that time the Immigration Rules could not  be  satisfied  on
    accommodation.  I do not find that  there  were  any  relevant  medical
    issues  that  amounted  to  compelling  circumstances  requiring  entry
    clearance to be granted to the Claimant.  The Sponsor and  Claimant  do
    not have any children together.  I take into account what was stated by
    the Supreme Court in Patel and Others [2012] EWCA Civ 741 at  paragraph
    57;
         "57. It is important to remember that Article 8 is  not  a  general
             dispensing power."

45. I accept that the vast majority of visa applications made  to  the  ECO
    Kingston, are processed within 60 days.  All are  processed  within  90
    days.  I  therefore  find  that  there  would  be  no  undue  delay  in
    processing a  visa  application,  and  in  making  that  finding  I  am
    conscious of the fact that these proceedings have  gone  on  too  long,
    taking into account the initial application was refused as long ago  as
    5th February 2014.

46. I appreciate the disappointment expressed by the  Sponsor  because  the
    decision of the FtT was set aside.   I  appreciate  that  although  the
    Sponsor has continued to visit the Claimant in Jamaica, the couple wish
    to live in the UK.  Article 8 does not however extend to  the  parties,
    the right to choose in which country they live.

47. I also appreciate that a further application for entry  clearance  will
    incur further expense, but I find  that  it  is  appropriate  to  place
    weight upon the fact that at the relevant time  the  Immigration  Rules
    were not satisfied, and it is not appropriate to disregard those rules,
    and use Article 8 as a general dispensing power.

48. I therefore do not find that  there  are  compelling  circumstances  to
    require  this  appeal  to  be  allowed  under  Article  8  outside  the
    Immigration Rules, and I find that the ECO  has  established  that  the
    decision is in accordance with the law, necessary in the  interests  of
    maintaining effective  immigration  control,  and  proportionate.   The
    appropriate course is for a further application for entry clearance  to
    be  made,  presumably,  if  the  appropriate  documentary  evidence  is
    submitted with the application, the ECO will take note of the  findings
    made by the Tribunal  in  relation  to  the  relationship  between  the
    parties, and accommodation.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The Claimant's appeal under the Immigration Rules is dismissed.

The Claimant's appeal on human rights grounds is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There has  been
no request for anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal, and I see  no  need  to
make an anonymity order.


Signed   Date 14th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Claimant's appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed   Date 14th December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

