
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02768/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 July 2015                      |On 5 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                            DJUMA PEECHIO BAKARI
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Respondent:    none
For the Appellant:     none


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant is a national of  the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
        (DRC), born on 5 May 1977. He applied for  entry  clearance  as  the
        spouse of a recognised refugee in the UK. This was  refused  on  the
        basis that the respondent was not satisfied the  appellant  and  the
        sponsor were in a genuine relationship or that they were married. An
        appeal hearing was originally set down for  23  October  2014.  This
        hearing however was adjourned as the respondent required  more  time
        to produce a copy of the 'Gateway Interview'  that  occurred  on  22
        October 2012. There was  no  suggestion  that  the  sponsor  or  the
        appellant's representative failed to attend this hearing.

     2. A new hearing date was fixed for 02 December 2014. On this  occasion
        no-one attended on behalf of the appellant.  The  Judge  decided  to
        hear the appeal in the absence of the appellant pursuant to rule  28
        of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and
        Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014. In arriving at this decision  the  Judge
        took into account the fact that the Notice of Hearing was issued  to
        the appellant and the sponsor and that the sponsor had been afforded
        a reasonable opportunity to attend the hearing. The Judge  proceeded
        to consider the evidence before him and found that the appellant and
        sponsor were not validly married, that they were not  in  a  genuine
        and subsisting relationship at the date of the decision,  that  they
        did not intend to live together permanently, and that  the  decision
        would not result in a breach of Article 8 ECHR.

     3. In the Grounds of Appeal the appellant maintained that  neither  he,
        nor his solicitors nor his sponsor received the  Notice  of  Hearing
        for the appeal held on 02 December 2014. This,  it  was  essentially
        claimed, deprived him of a fair hearing as no evidence was given  by
        his sponsor and no representations were made on his behalf.

     4. It was apparent  from  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  the  documents
        contained in the Tribunal file that the appellant was represented by
        his current solicitors since at least 23  October  2014.  By  Notice
        dated 16 February 2015 the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted  that  it
        failed to send the Notice of Hearing to the  appellant's  solicitors
        on  30  October  2014.  The  Notice  of  Hearing  was  sent  to  the
        appellant's address at '15 Sankyry', whereas this should  have  been
        '15 Sankuru', and the statement from the sponsor  dated  17  October
        2014 contained a different address to that given in  the  Notice  of
        Appeal.

     5. When the renewed application for permission to appeal came before me
        I extended time in respect of the lateness of the application and  I
        granted permission to appeal. I indicated in  a  memorandum  to  the
        Grant of Permission that it was  the  Upper  Tribunal's  preliminary
        view that, in circumstances where the  appellant's  solicitors  were
        not informed of their client's appeal hearing, a fact  now  accepted
        by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  a  procedural  error  occurred  that
        deprived the appellant of a fair hearing and  which  constituting  a
        material error of law. I required  the  respondent  to  indicate  in
        writing within 10 days whether they  opposed  the  Upper  Tribunal's
        preliminary view, and if they did not the Tribunal would proceed  on
        the basis that the First-tier Tribunal decision contained a material
        error of law and the appeal would be remitted back to the First-tier
        Tribunal to be considered afresh by a Judge other than Judge  Devlin
        pursuant to section 12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement
        Act 2007.

     6. On 14 July 2015 the Upper Tribunal received a Rule 24 response  from
        the respondent, dated 10 July 2015, indicating that  the  respondent
        did not oppose the appellant's application and inviting the Tribunal
        to determine the appellant with a fresh oral  (continuance)  hearing
        by virtue of a material procedural error of law.

     7. In these circumstances I am satisfied  that  a  material  procedural
        error of law vitiated the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

   Decision & Directions

   The First-tier Tribunal made a material error of law.

   The appeal is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
   hearing, all issues open, before a Judge other than Judge Devlin.




   [pic] 31 July 2015
   Signed    Date


   Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
