
IAC-FH-AR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02220/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 March 2015                     |On 27 March 2015                     |
|Prepared 26 March 2015               |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                               ECO - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             SATYA WATI KAUSHAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Bazini, Counsel, instructed by Gulbenkian
                    Andonian Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of India date  of  birth  12  September  1927,
    appealed against the ECO's decision dated 7  January  20124  to  refuse
    entry clearance with reference to Appendix FM and paragraph EC-DR.1.1.1
    of Appendix FM  of the Immigration Rules as amended.

3.   The  appeal  was  raised  with  particular  reference  to  the  adverse
    decision on the  availability  of  care  for  the  Claimant  in  India.
    Following  the  submission  of  further  information  the  issues  were
    revisited in  an  Entry  Clearance  Manager's  review  which  does  not
    constitute a new decision but nevertheless confirmed the  stance  being
    taken that there was no evidence demonstrating that the claimant's care
    could not continue to be provided being a combination of external  care
    and family visits.

4.   The appeal against the ECO's decision came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Doran who decided on 26 November 2014 that the appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules should be allowed. The  judge  did  not  continue  to
    consider Article 8 outside the Rules.

5.   Permission was given to the ECO to appeal that decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lambert on 28 January 2015.

6.   In granting permission the judge said this:

         "The real difficulty is the nature of the evidence  relied  on  for
         these conclusions.  The judge found the requirements of FM-SE 34 to
         have been met.  I can see no reason why  this  conclusion  was  not
         justified  on  the  basis  of  the  doctor's  report  described  in
         paragraph 53 of the decision.   However  so  far  as  FM-SE  35  is
         concerned, Dr Singh's evidence appears  not  specifically  to  have
         addressed the availability of paid care  in  India.   The  evidence
         that 24 hour nursing residential or domestic care  was  unavailable
         seems to  have  come  from  an  unqualified  neighbour,  Mr  Sharma
         (paragraph 55). The report from Rockland Hospitals  (paragraph  44)
         seems only to have stated that 24 hour  care  needed  'was  usually
         provided by the family' - not that it could not be provided from an
         outside source.  No other independent evidence from  a  central  or
         local health  authority,  doctor,  or  other  health  provision  is
         mentioned."

7.   The grounds essentially reflect the  same  point  upon  permission  was
    granted, namely an absence of evidence to support the  conclusion  that
    the Claimant needed family care as referred to in the Claimant's bundle
    pages 66 and 67, being the letter from Dr Singh written  from  Rockland
    Hospitals which appears to be a group of hospitals in India.  It  would
    perhaps have been more helpful to the person settling  the  grounds  of
    application to have perhaps had more than just the determination of the
    judge in front of them.  It is clear on a reading of  the  letter  from
    Rockland  Hospitals,  which  it  is  accepted  postdates  the  date  of
    decision, to have taken into account, it was  not  just  the  issue  of
    physical health but also the extent to which the claimant was  becoming
    mentally depressed and the likelihood of that becoming exacerbated.

8.   The judge did, however, take into account this  material  and  properly
    explained why he did so at paragraph  54  of  the  determination.   The
    judge also had evidence  from  one  of  the  Claimant's  daughters,  Dr
    Promila Dua, a general practitioner, who gave evidence  concerning  the
    general wellbeing of the Claimant when she had been recently seen,  and
    the evidence is consistent  with  the  previously  identified  physical
    health conditions of the Claimant and the advancement of mental  health
    concerns  and  emotional  depression  arising   from   the   inevitable
    deterioration over time in her health.

9.   The judge had a range of other evidence which dealt with a  variety  of
    the issues, not least the extent to which the judge  found  that  there
    was  a  measure  of  consistency  between  the   information   provided
    previously by way of medical evidence and  family  evidence  concerning
    the Claimant's health.

10.  Ultimately,  I was told by Mr  Bazini  and  it  was  no  disputed,  the
    conclusions reached by Dr Singh who had known of the  Appellant  before
    the past ten years, was expressed in the following terms;

         "In summary, I have no  doubt,  that  Mrs  Kaushal's  physical  and
         emotional state is now at such a  state  that  she  needs  24  hour
         reliable care,  which  in  my  professional  opinion  can  only  be
         provided by her family."

11.  Mr Bazini does not suggest that there is not 24 hour care available  in
    India but rather there is not the kind of  care  necessary  to  address
    both the claimant's physical health problems and those mental  problems
    associated with the deterioration in her  health,  her  loneliness  and
    those other matters recited  in  the  evidence.   As  such,  therefore,
    whereas paragraph 35 and to a degree 34 of Appendix FM-SE  address  the
    issue of the availability and appropriateness  of  care,  they  do  not
    address,  as  the  evidence  did  before  the  judge,  the   particular
    circumstances.

12.  By paragraph 34 of Appendix FM -SE it states

         "Evidence that, as a result of  age,  illness  or  disability,  the
         applicant requires long term personal care should take the form of:
         (a) (independent) medical evidence that the applicant's physical or
         mental condition means they cannot perform every day tasks; and (b)
         this must come from a doctor or other health professional."

13.  Mr Bazini argued that the judge correctly reached  and  considered  the
    evidence. Indeed the grant of permission  does  not  suggest  that  the
    conclusions reached  by  the  judge  are  not  sustainable.  Rather  by
    reference to paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SC was  the  issue  taken:  Is
    there independent evidence that the applicant is unable, even with  the
    practical and financial help of the Sponsor in the UK,  to  obtain  the
    required level of care in the country where they are living  should  be
    from: (a) a central or local health authority; (b) a  local  authority;
    or (c) a doctor or other health professional.

14.  Reading the determination as a whole, and  with  particular  regard  to
    the evidence provided  by  Rockland  Hospitals  through  Dr  Singh,  it
    appeared to me that there was evidence before the judge to conclude  as
    he did that the Claimant met the requirements of  needing  family  care
    which could not, it seems  on  the  evidence  the  judge  accepted,  be
    provided in India.

15.  In those circumstances whilst I might well not have  reached  the  same
    conclusion that is not the basis on which an error  of  law  is  to  be
    established.

16.  In those circumstances, therefore,  I  find  that  the  judge  had  the
    material before him upon which he was entitled to reach the  conclusion
    that the Appellant met the requirements of Appendix FM.   The  original
    Tribunal's decision stands.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal of the ECO is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 26 March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

