
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/02038/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 2nd June 2015                    |On: 13th July 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                          Selam Ghirmai Gebremedhin
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer, Abu Dhabi
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tettey, Counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Eritrea  date  of  birth  25th  February
    1996.  She appeals with permission[1] the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  (Judge  Chambers)[2]  to  dismiss  her  appeal  against   the
    Respondent's decision to refuse to grant her  entry  clearance  as  the
    family member of a refugee.

 2. The Appellant made her application for entry clearance under  paragraph
    352D of the Immigration Rules.  She stated that she wanted to  come  to
    live in the United Kingdom with her mother  and  step-father,  who  had
    been granted refugee status. She was  refused,  by  way  of  notice  of
    refusal dated  21st  January  2014,  because  the  Respondent  was  not
    satisfied that she was related as claimed to her sponsors.  The  reason
    for doubting her claims were a) that when her 'mother' completed a  VAF
    to come to the UK the Appellant was not named therein as her child,  b)
    when her 'step-father' was interviewed in relation  to  his  claim  for
    asylum, he did not mention her either  and  c)  the  birth  certificate
    relied upon was only produced in 2011.

 3. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal in  September  2014
    the Appellant had produced a DNA test report which  purported  to  show
    that the sponsor in the  UK  was  indeed  her  biological  mother.  The
    Respondent did not accept  that  this  report  could  be  relied  upon;
    specifically doubt was cast on whether the two individuals involved  in
    this appeal were the two individuals subject to  the  DNA  test.  There
    was, in the Respondent's view, difficulties  with  the  "identification
    and continuity" processes underpinning the report.  Those parts of  the
    report which might be expected to confirm who took the  test  and  when
    were missing. Paragraph 3 of the determination  records  what  happened
    next:

         "I granted an adjournment for one month with a  return  date  fixed
         for everyone's convenience to enable the respondent's side to  make
         all necessary investigations in order if it was  felt  appropriate,
         for the Home Office to make a challenge to the DNA report findings.
         Doing that gave the appellant's side the opportunity to  serve  the
         missing ID continuity documents. That step had to be taken  because
         less than service of the whole contents of a report does  not  meet
         the directions in the appeal. Without good reason a  party  is  not
         entitled to self edit evidence by act or omission. It is  a  matter
         of all or nothing"

 4. When the matter resumed in October 2014  the  Tribunal  heard  evidence
    from the primary Sponsor, the Appellant's  'stepfather'  Habton  Kidane
    Tesfasilassie. He told the court that he and his wife  had  married  in
    January 2001  and  in  doing  so  had  brought  children  from  earlier
    marriages together.  They had a total of six  children,  including  the
    Appellant. They all lived together in Eritrea. In 2008 he left  Eritrea
    and came to the UK where he was,  by  December  2010,  granted  refugee
    status.  His wife and five of the children then left Eritrea,  crossing
    into Ethiopia by foot; the Appellant could not make this journey due to
    a  disability  and  so  was  left  behind.   She  was  left  with   her
    grandmother.  She was subsequently brought to Sudan by an agent and  is
    now living there with a lady called Mrs Hadas, whom the sponsor pays to
    look after her.  Asked why he had not named her as  a  dependent  child
    when he was interviewed the Sponsor said that the  interview  had  been
    stressful and conducted through an interpreter, who had told  him  that
    he was only to name his biological children.  He had not understood the
    meaning of the term "dependents".  As for the omission  on  his  wife's
    VAF the Sponsor said that she wasn't mentioned "due to  the  disability
    and health problems she had". Because she was not travelling  with  his
    wife she had not mentioned her. They were advised she would be able  to
    make an application  at  a  later  stage.   The  court  heard  evidence
    consistent with that of the Sponsor from  three  other  witnesses:  the
    Appellant's 'mother', 'brother' and a family friend.

 5. In his findings Judge Chambers did not accept  the  explanations  given
    for why the Appellant is not named in either the interview or the  VAF.
    The Appellant's 'mother' said that she had five children, including two
    from her husband's  first  marriage.  Judge  Chambers  finds  that  the
    predicament of the Appellant would have been at the  forefront  of  her
    mind when asked these questions,  and  in  those  circumstances  it  is
    unlikely she would have forgotten to mention her.  Similarly  when  the
    Sponsor was interviewed he named five children, and was  able  to  give
    their places and dates of birth. He was  specifically  asked  if  there
    were any other family members that he had not mentioned; he  said  that
    there were not.

 6. The evidence was therefore found to be unsatisfactory, and the  success
    of the appeal rested on the DNA report.  That report was produced by an
    approved testing organisation and the company contend  that  a  "strict
    chain of custody is maintained at every step including verification  of
    documentation by the sampler".  Participants are  required  to  produce
    two recent passport photographs  and  ideally,  identity  documentation
    such as a passport. These documents are then  copied,  and  are  to  be
    attached to the report. In this case, that page, or pages, is  missing.
    At paragraph 27 it is noted that the Appellant's representative had  an
    opportunity during the adjournment to produce these  pages.  They  were
    not forthcoming: "the purpose sought to be  achieved  in  granting  the
    adjournment was not achieved".   The  burden  of  proof  lying  on  the
    Appellant to show that the DNA test could be relied  upon  as  actually
    relating to her and her mother, that burden  was  not  discharged.  The
    appeal was dismissed.

 7. The Appellant now appeals on the grounds that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in:

      i) Failing to take relevant material into account  in  particular  the
         evidence of the Appellant's 'mother' as to why  the  Appellant  was
         not named on the VAF, and the evidence of the two witnesses;

     ii) Attaching undue weight to a screening  interview  contrary  to  the
         guidance in YL (Reliance of SEF) China [2004] UKIAT 00145;

    iii)  Misdirecting  itself  as  to  the  record  of   proceedings.   The
         determination suggests that the adjournment  had  been  granted  in
         order that the 'missing' parts of the DNA report be served. In fact
         the adjournment was granted to the Respondent  so  that  she  could
         consider whether she wished to challenge the report;

    Criticism is also made of the Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appeal
    on Human Rights grounds. Given that the success of these grounds  would
    depend on the central matter in issue under the Rules being resolved in
    the Appellant's favour,  Mr  Tettey  did  not  before  me  pursue  this
    submission.

 8. For the Respondent Mr McVeety accepted that the determination  did  not
    directly address the evidence of the witnesses but it was  implicit  in
    the overall reasoning  that  their  evidence  could  not  displace  the
    omissions  in  the  forms  and  the  -  in  Mr   McVeety's   submission
    suspiciously  -  selective  DNA  report.   It  is  accepted  that   the
    adjournment application had been made by the Respondent  but  not  that
    anything turned on that.

    My Findings

 9. The Appellant relied on the evidence of two  witnesses,  her  'brother'
    and a family friend, who were called upon to confirm that  she  is  who
    she says she is and that she had always been part of this family  unit.
    It is  agreed  that  these  witnesses  were  not  substantively  cross-
    examined. Mr Tettey submits that the effect of this is  to  render  the
    rest of the reasoning unsafe.

10. I have considered this submission carefully. It is an error  to  ignore
    material evidence; the question is whether this evidence, had  it  been
    factored in more explicitly  into  the  findings,  would  have  made  a
    difference.  I am not satisfied that this is the case. The fact is that
    there were three very good reasons why this appeal was dismissed.

11. The first is that the woman claiming to be the Appellant's  mother  had
    not mentioned her in the course  of  her  own  application  for  family
    reunion. The grounds protest that insufficient attention  was  paid  to
    her account of a slapdash agent and her own inability to speak or write
    English. The Tribunal was entitled to reject this explanation  for  the
    reasons it gave.  There had been a space on the  form  specifically  to
    record additional information where the  applicant  had  explained  the
    situation in respect of  her  stepchildren  but  had  inexplicably  not
    mentioned the plight of  her  own  disabled  daughter  left  behind  in
    Eritrea.  It could not credibly be claimed that the agent  had  ignored
    the Appellant. The agent was apparently attentive enough  to  carefully
    record the details of the other five children in  the  family,  two  of
    whom were not even her biological children.   The determination did not
    fail to consider her explanations; it rejected them.

12. The second was that her 'stepfather'  had  been  interviewed  and  had,
    again, mentioned the other five children but had failed  to  name  her.
    The grounds argue that as a SEF interview little weight should be given
    to that record. This is a misconceived argument. The point made  in  YL
    (China) is that the SEF asks claimants for asylum to set out  the  bare
    bones of their  case,  and  in  doing  so  they  cannot  reasonably  be
    criticised for failing to put  on  the  flesh.  For  instance  where  a
    claimant is asked "why did you leave your country of origin" he  should
    not be criticised for failing to particularise each and every  instance
    of  persecution  he  has  suffered.  This  is  qualitatively  different
    material from biographical details such as the names of your  children.
     The interview record shows that the details were entered with  clarity
    in respect of each of the five, and the Appellant  is  not  there;  nor
    does she feature in the 'additional information' section.

13. The third reason was the missing identification documents  in  the  DNA
    report. Mr Tettey may be right  to  say  that  he  had  understood  the
    purpose of the adjournment was so that the Respondent  could  make  her
    own enquiries and take  a  decision  about  whether  to  challenge  the
    report, but it must have been quite clear to everyone what the  problem
    was. If the report could not be shown to relate to the  two  people  it
    was supposed to relate to, it was worthless. As Judge  Chambers  notes,
    this was not a complex matter of shifted burdens or standard of  proof.
    Did the document, in  the  form  in  which  it  was  finally  tendered,
    discharge the ordinary burden on the Appellant? It did not, and it fell
    even further short in light of the first two problems identified above.

14. It is against this background  that  the  point  about  the  additional
    witnesses must be evaluated. I cannot see how  the  evidence  of  these
    witnesses,  taken  at  its  highest  and  placed  alongside  the  birth
    certificates,  could   possibly   have   outweighed   the   substantial
    difficulties in the Appellant's case.   For that reason  any  error  in
    omitting to make express findings on their evidence is  not  such  that
    the decision should be set aside.

    Decisions

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law
    and it is upheld.

16. I was not asked to make an order for anonymity.



                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              19th June 2015
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 13th January 2015 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Grant-Hutchinson
[2] Determination promulgated on the 3rd November 2014

