

                                    [pic]
ST
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
  Appeal Number: OA/02490/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8 March 2016                        |On 5 April 2016                     |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     B G
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Respondent:    Mr Jesurum, counsel
For the Appellant:     Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge S D Rodger ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 11 March 2015, in
    which the FTTJ allowed the appeal of the respondent (hereinafter called
    "the claimant") on human rights grounds.

Background

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Nepal. He appealed against the decision of
    the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) to  refuse  him  entry  clearance  to
    settle in the UK as the dependent  son  of  his  father,  an  ex-Gurkha
    soldier, who has settled here.
 3. It was accepted, before the FTTJ, that the claimant did not fulfil  the
    criteria in the Immigration Rules for entry  clearance.   The  claimant
    pursued his appeal on human  rights  grounds  on  the  basis  that  the
    decision placed  the  UK  in  breach  of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  The appeal was  allowed:  the  FTTJ  found
    that Article 8 was engaged because there was a  "high  emotional  bond"
    between the claimant and his father and that  they  were  a  close-knit
    family.   He  accepted  the  submission  for  the  claimant  that   the
    claimant's circumstances were compelling and exceptional because of his
    particular circumstances as a Gurkha dependent.  The grounds of  appeal
    assert that the FTTJ arguably failed to  provide  adequate  reasons  to
    establish the engagement of Article 8.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

            "2. The grounds of appeal complain that  the  Judge  failed  to
           give adequate reasons for finding that Article 8 was engaged  as
           between the Appellant and the sponsor.


           3. An arguable error of law is disclosed by the application."


 5. Thus the matter comes before me.

Submissions on Error of Law


 6. I noted at the outset of the hearing that the ECO did not challenge the
    finding of the FTTJ that the circumstances of the claimant were such as
    to merit consideration outside the Immigration Rules and in  accordance
    with the Article 8 jurisprudence. Ms Willocks-Briscoe confirmed that to
    be the case. She submitted that the sole issue is the reasoning for the
    engagement of Article 8; there was no challenge to  the  assessment  of
    proportionality. She accepted that the threshold for engagement  was  a
    low one.  However, she submitted that the FTTJ should have  taken  into
    account cultural issues when  considering  whether  the  emotional  and
    financial ties  "went  over  the  limit".   This  was  not  a  case  of
    dependency over and above the norm.  She  accepted  that  there  was  a
    degree of attachment. The decision could also be criticised because the
    FTTJ had not looked at the situation when both the sponsor and claimant
    were living together in Nepal.


 7. Mr Jesurum, for the claimant, submitted that, at its heart, this was  a
    reasons challenge by the ECO.  There was no challenge to  the  findings
    of fact.  The decision referred to the sponsor and claimant being close
    emotionally. The FTTJ had resolved conflicts identified  by  the  ECO's
    Presenting Officer and had  rejected  those  challenges.   If  cultural
    matters were to be taken into account, this would assist the claimant.

Discussion


 8. The threshold for engagement of Article 8 is a low one.  The FTTJ found
    the sponsor to be a wholly credible and reliable witness  and  accepted
    his evidence  of  a  close  relationship  with  the  claimant  and  the
    existence of emotional ties over and above the norm for  a  father  and
    his adult son.  The FTTJ has taken into account the cultural background
    of the claimant and  his  father  (paragraphs  24,  25  and  30).   The
    decision is comprehensive and well-reasoned.  There is no challenge  to
    the findings of fact and the finding  that  Article  8  is  engaged  is
    soundly based on those facts.  There is no challenge to the  assessment
    of proportionality.  The ECO merely disagrees with the outcome.


 9. For these reasons, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
    contain an error of law.  The FTTJ's decision stands.

Decision

10. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


11. The decision is not set aside.


12. Whilst no anonymity direction was  made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    given my  references  to  the  claimant's  personal  circumstances,  an
    anonymity order is appropriate now.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dated: 18 March 2016



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
  Dated: 18 March 2016
