
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02852/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 February 2016                            |On 1 June 2016                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                               MOBBEEN KOUSAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - islamabad

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Hussain, instructed by Trent Centre for Human
Rights
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mobbeen Kousar, was born on  8  August  1993  and  is  a
    female citizen of Pakistan.  She applied to enter  the  United  Kingdom
    for settlement as the spouse of Bilal Mahmood (hereafter referred to as
    the sponsor).  The application  was  refused  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer (the ECO) by a decision dated 31 December 2014.   She  appealed
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  North)  which,  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 17 August 2015 dismissed the appeal.  She  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge noted there were two issues before him in  the  appeal.   The
    first concerned the genuineness and  subsistence  of  the  relationship
    between the appellant and  sponsor  [6].   The  judge  found  that  the
    relationship was subsisting and that the  appellant  intended  to  live
    permanently with the sponsor.  The second issue concerned the financial
    requirements  of  Appendix  FM-SE.   The  parties   agreed   that   the
    application of the ECO was defective in that the  appellant  failed  to
    supply the sponsor's bank statement and wage  slips  for  August  2014,
    being a date within the period of time  for  which  the  appellant  was
    required to supply complete documentary evidence in  order  to  satisfy
    Appendix FM-SE (A1.1(l)).  In  granting  permission  to  appeal,  Judge
    Hodgkinson stated [3] that "the documents before me indicate that it is
    probable that the missing specified  documents  were  lodged  with  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal even though the Entry  Clearance  Manager
    in the review statement appears  to  indicate  otherwise."   The  Entry
    Clearance Manager's review recorded that,

         "... having reviewed the decision in the light of  the  grounds  of
         appeal, I note that no new evidence has been submitted  in  support
         of the appeal or to address the issues raised about  the  financial
         requirements.  The documents submitted now  are  those  which  were
         provided and available at the time of the decision.  As no  further
         evidence has been submitted, I am not prepared to concede  on  this
         point ... The appellant states that additional  documents  will  be
         submitted at a later stage."

    The ECM goes on to make the point that, should the appellant adduce the
    additional evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge,  the  ECO/ECM
    would have been given  no  opportunity  of  considering  the  documents
    before a decision was made on the appeal.

 3. The missing documents were put before me in the Upper Tribunal hearing.
     With respect, I believe that Judge Hodgkinson is wrong when he  states
    that it  is  probable  the  documents  were  also  submitted  with  the
    application (and, by implication, lost by the ECO).  I say that because
    at [8] of Judge North's  decision,  he  records  that,  "the  appellant
    submitted that it was an oversight that the sponsor's  wage  slips  for
    August had not been included with the application."  That seems  to  me
    to be a fairly clear  record  of  an  admission  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant that the required  documents  were  not  submitted  with  the
    application.   Further,  I  note  that  Appendix  FM-SE  (paragraph  D)
    provides that the ECO "will only consider documents submitted after the
    application where a sequence of documents or some of the  documents  in
    the sequence have been omitted where the decision  maker  is  satisfied
    that valid reasons have been given why a specified document  could  not
    be supplied."

 4. The rule anticipates the submission of  additional  evidence  after  an
    application has been filed with the ECO; it does not,  in  my  opinion,
    cover the present circumstance where the appellant has not supplied the
    document with the application and has then, in effect, refused to  send
    it to  the  ECO  but  rather  has  kept  it  back  for  use  in  appeal
    proceedings.  The appellant has not, therefore, submitted the  document
    at all to the ECO so I do not  see  that  Appendix  FM-SE  paragraph  D
    applies.  Furthermore, sub-paragraph (f) provides that a decision maker
    may contact  the  applicant  or  their  representative  in  writing  or
    otherwise  request  further  information  or  documents.   It  was  not
    necessary, in my opinion, for the ECO or ECM to exercise  a  discretion
    in favour of the appellant where the missing documents were, in effect,
    being withheld.

 5. These considerations in mind, I find that it was open to Judge North to
    conclude at [8] that the appellant's  appeal  should  be  dismissed  on
    account of failure to comply with Appendix FM-SE.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 30 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.






Signed                              Date 30 March 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
