
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02868/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th January 2016                          |On 4th May 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                           mr hari bahadur gurung
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Puar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Nepal  born  on  14th  March  1982.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance  to  settle  in  the  UK  as  the
    dependant  son  of  Gaj  Bahadur  Gurung  an  ex-Gurkha  solider.   The
    Appellant's application was considered as an adult  dependant  relative
    under paragraph EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  His
    application was refused in a very detailed Notice  of  Refusal  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer on 29th January 2014.  In an  equally  detailed
    review the Entry Clearance Manager upheld the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in a review dated 19th June 2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Andrew sitting at Birmingham on  14th  May  2015.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated  on  27th  May  2015  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed both under the Immigration Rules and under Article
    8.

 3. On 9th June 2015 the Appellant through his instructed solicitors lodged
    Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  That application was  refused
    by Immigration Judge Grant-Hutchison on  11th  August  2015.   On  19th
    August 2015  renewed  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 4. On 17th November  2015  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Archer  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Archer noted  that  the  grounds  asserted
    that the Judge had erred by failing to  consider  the  specific  Gurkha
    factors that arose and that whilst the Judge had referred  to  relevant
    case law he  had  arguably  failed  to  adequately  consider  and  make
    findings in relation to  the  historic  injustice,  Gurkha  policy  and
    Gurkha specific case law.  In particular Judge Archer noted that  there
    was no finding as to whether the Appellant's father would have  settled
    in the UK in 1967 when he left the British Army had he  been  permitted
    to do so.

 5. On 31st December 2015 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal under Rule 24.  In the Rule  24  response  the  Secretary  of
    State  contended  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had   clearly
    considered the relevant case law at paragraphs 12, 13, 16 and 17 of the
    determination and had made a reasoned finding  based  on  the  evidence
    that was presented at the appeal.  The Rule 24 response contended  that
    the Grounds of Appeal were  merely  a  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
    findings.

 6. It is on that basis that the appeal comes back before me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellant  is  represented  by  his
    instructed Counsel Mr Puar.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Walker.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Mr Puar submits that there are two relevant authorities Ghising (family
    life - adults - Gurkha policy) [2012] UKUT 00160 (IAC) and Ghising  and
    Others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC).
     Whilst Mr Puar acknowledges that there is brief reference  within  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to the  first  of  these  two
    authorities he submits that  the  decision  overall  is  littered  with
    errors of law.  He starts by referring me to the basis  of  the  appeal
    brought under Section 85A(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 as set out at  paragraph  3  and  then  at  paragraph  18  the
    reference to out of date medical evidence, pointing  out  that  it  was
    irrelevant to the determination as  to  what  the  Appellant's  present
    condition was in 2015.

 8. Thereafter he takes me to paragraph 6 of the decision.  In  many  ways,
    he submits, this is the key paragraph.  He submits that the  Judge  has
    made no findings of fact, has not considered Ghising (number 2) and has
    failed to consider the role of  proportionality.   Further  he  submits
    that for some reason the Judge has gone on to give due consideration to
    the decision in JB (India) [2009] EWCA Civ 234.  He points out that the
    Ghising authority is about historic injustice and  proportionality  and
    that the Judge has failed to make findings  of  fact  as  to  when  the
    Appellant's father would have settled in the UK and to follow the  test
    set out therein.  Consequently he submits that there is  a  substantial
    error of law and that the court  needs  to  set  aside  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision and order a new hearing.

 9. He then goes on to consider the aspect of family life.  He  appreciates
    at paragraph 13 the First-tier Tribunal Judge has made reference to the
    authority of Ghising but he has not set out the appropriate test  which
    he reminds me is one of more than emotional normalities as in Kugathas.
     Further he then turns  to  paragraph  18  of  the  First-tier  Judge's
    decision where the Judge has considered whether the Appellant's medical
    condition is an exceptional factor.  He points out to me that  this  is
    not the test and that the test is more than normal emotional ties  i.e.
    an objective test.  He consequently  contends  that  by  following  the
    wrong test the Judge has in any event made a material error of law.

10. He states that the Appellant has always lived with his parents save for
    a two year period of separation in 2012 and reason has been provided as
    to why the application was delayed.  The Judge he points  out  made  no
    findings of fact regarding this issue but  in  any  event  submits  the
    family bond has not been broken.  He asked me to find that there  is  a
    material error of law and to submit the matter back to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for re-hearing.

11. Mr Walker in very brief submissions agreed with the points made  by  Mr
    Puar particularly with regard to the failure of the  Judge  to  address
    the authority of Ghising [2013] and  to  make  a  proper  proportionate
    assessment regarding those issues.  He acknowledges that the errors are
    material and that the approach suggested  by  the  Appellant's  Counsel
    should be followed.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

14. I am gratefully assisted in this matter by the approach adopted  by  Mr
    Walker on behalf of the Secretary of State who concedes that there is a
    material error of law for the reasons set out in the  submissions  from
    Mr  Puar  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   In
    particular the Judge has failed to take due note of the guidance  given
    in Ghising [2013] but where it is found that Article 8 is engaged  and,
    but for the historic wrong, the Appellant would have  been  settled  in
    the UK long ago, this will ordinarily  determine  the  outcome  of  the
    Article 8 proportionality assessment in an  Appellant's  favour,  where
    the matter relied on by the Secretary of State/Entry Clearance  Officer
    consists  solely  of  the  public  interest  in  maintaining   a   firm
    immigration  control.   The  Judge  has  failed  to   carry   out   the
    proportionality assessment and has failed to address this  particularly
    at paragraph 6 of his decision.

15. In addition the Judge's approach to the consideration of  family  life,
    and particularly his analysis that the test is not one  of  exceptional
    factors, is wrong.  It is an objective test of more than emotional ties
    that is the test as set out within Ghising [2012]  and  the  Judge  has
    wrongly applied the test in this instance.

16. For all the above reasons there are material  errors  of  law  and  the
    correct approach is to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal
    for re-hearing.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains  material  errors  of
law and is set aside.  The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for re-hearing with the following directions:

      1) None of the findings of fact are to stand.


      2) The appeal is to be re-heard on the first available  date  28  days
         hence at Birmingham Hearing Centre with an ELH of two hours  before
         any First-tier  Immigration  Judge  other  than  Immigration  Judge
         Andrew.


      3) That there be leave to either party to file and  serve  an  updated
         bundle of documents upon which they seek to  rely  at  least  seven
         days pre-hearing.


      4) A Nepali interpreter be available.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

