

                                    [pic]


|Upper Tribunal                                |Appeal number: OA/02605/2011 |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              |                             |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided at  Field House                       |Sent to parties on:          |
|                                              |4th October 2013             |
|On 3rd October 2013                           |                             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between


                                 Khan Zaman
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent


          Notice of withdrawal of case pursuant to paragraph 17 of
       The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended)

1. The appellant appealed against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  who
   dismissed his  appeal  against  a  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  entry
   clearance for 27 months as the spouse of a British Citizen settled in the
   UK.

2. The appellant was granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and
   on 2nd October 2012 DUTJ Pickup found that there was an error of law such
   that the decision be set aside to be remade. He adjourned the hearing and
   made directions for the resumed hearing

3. On 5th September 2013 the respondent's representative wrote to the  Upper
   Tribunal notifying them  that  the  respondent  had  confirmed  that  the
   appellant's application had been received on 5th October  2010  and  thus
   did not fall within the transitional arrangements;  the  Entry  Clearance
   Manager had made arrangements to withdraw the  decision  and  that  entry
   clearance would  be  issued.  A  letter  dated  6th  September  from  the
   appellant's representatives confirmed they had received confirmation from
   the respondent that the 'matter has been withdrawn  and  entry  clearance
   will be issued'. Accordingly they said they  would  not  be  attending  a
   resumed hearing.

4. The respondent may withdraw her decision under rule 17 of the Asylum  and
   Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  (as  amended);  however,  in
   order to withdraw an appeal before the Upper Tribunal, under paragraph 17
   of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as  amended),  the
   consent of the Upper Tribunal is required.

5. In  the  circumstances  set  out  above  the  Tribunal  consents  to  the
   withdrawal of this appeal before the Upper Tribunal.  Since  the  refusal
   decision has also been withdrawn, there is now  no  valid  appeal  before
   either the First-tier Tribunal or the Upper Tribunal.

   Date:                                     Signed




                                            Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
