
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02824/2014
                                                               OA/02825/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 February 2015                           |On 24 March 2015              |
|Decision given 26 February 2015               |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   A M S D
                                   H M S D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr C Lane, Counsel instructed by TRP Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondents are referred to as the Claimants.

2.   The Claimants, nationals of Eritrea,  respectively  dates  of  birth  1
    January 1997 and 1 January 1999, are brothers who appealed against  the
    decisions of the ECO Abu Dhabi of  23  January  2014  to  refuse  entry
    clearance to join their sister, J D for a family reunion.  Refusal  was
    under paragraph 319X of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).  The
    reasons for refusal were identical in respect  of  both  Claimants  and
    turned on the issues of the adequacy of maintenance  and  accommodation
    in the United Kingdom.

3.   The Claimants appeals came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  Pacey
    (the judge), who on 4 November 2014 allowed their appeals on Article  8
    ECHR  grounds  but  dismissed  their  appeals  with  reference  to  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The Secretary of  State  sought
    permission to appeal the decisions of the judge.  On 22  December  2014
    Upper Tribunal Judge Martin, sitting  as  a  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, granted permission to appeal.

4.   At the hearing of the appeal it was made plain  to  me  that  the  sole
    issue was whether or not the judge had properly considered the  appeals
    with reference to Article 8 ECHR outside of the Rules.  The  judge  set
    out factual matters and in considering Article 8  determined  that  the
    Secretary of  State's  decisions  were  an  interference  by  a  public
    authority with the right of respect and with the intention of  enabling
    reunion  of  families.   It  is  clear  from  the  judge's   reasoning,
    particularly at paragraph 35 of the decision, that the judge had regard
    to the very sad circumstances in which both Claimants  were  living  in
    Sudan: Which certainly could be characterised as seriously deprived and
    little short of destitution.

5.   The judge considered the accommodation that would be available  to  the
    Claimants were they to come to the United Kingdom and concluded that it
    was adequate and certainly better than those  in  which  the  Claimants
    presently lived.

6.   The judge did recognise that the Sponsor's income derived  from  income
    support, it  appearing  she  was  also  being  in  receipt  of  housing
    benefits, there was not adequate funding to enable them to live at  the
    recognised minimum level; by way of the financial provision  of  family
    support.  Nevertheless  the  judge  concluded  at  paragraph  40:  "The
    Claimants would not be entitled to public funds and hence would not  be
    to that extent a burden on taxpayers.  Their Sponsor is in  receipt  of
    public funds in her own right."

7.   It is most unfortunate  that  there  was  no  analysis  of  the  public
    interest other than by those words.  The judge  said  at  paragraph  39
    when dealing with proportionality "I have had regard to Section 117  of
    the 2002 Act", that is the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act.

8.   Unfortunately there is not  a  Section  117  of  the  Act.   There  are
    Sections 117A, 117B, 117C and 117D added  as  amendments  of  the  NIAA
    2002.  However, even if that is simply infelicitous language  the  fact
    is the relevant considerations directed to a  decision-maker  arise  in
    respect of the considerations listed in Section 117B.   Those  identify
    amongst other  things  the  interests,  the  public  interest,  in  the
    economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom by persons seeking  to  enter;
    in being able to speak English because by doing so they are less  of  a
    burden on taxpayers and better able to indicate.  Furthermore it is  in
    the public interest, particularly  in  the  interest  of  the  economic
    wellbeing of the United Kingdom, that persons  who  seek  to  enter  or
    remain in the United Kingdom are financially independent  because  such
    persons are not a burden on taxpayers and are better able to  integrate
    into society.

9.   It is clear that simply being not entitled to receive public  funds  in
    any direct claimable way is not the end of  the  matter  as  the  judge
    thought.  It is plain that as a fact and it was worthy of  analysis  by
    the judge that these Claimants were Eritrean nationals with  apparently
    no English language skills, of very limited education, no experience of
    reading or writing English and who would come to the United Kingdom  at
    an age when plainly they would have to have recourse to  education  and
    English language instruction.  They would also potentially be requiring
    medical  healthcare,  adequate  maintenance   and   accommodation   and
    additional clothing costs.  In those circumstances the public  interest
    and not being a burden on the United Kingdom as well as  being  to  its
    economic benefits were  demonstrably  matters  that  should  have  been
    considered by the judge.

10.  In considering the sufficiency of the judge's  reasoning  I  apply  the
    approach identified in R (Iran) [2005] EWCA Civ  982,  which  clarified
    the need for proper reasoning being provided.  I regret to say that the
    reasoning provided by the judge did not  properly  address  the  public
    interest.  Given the lack of reasons I cannot speculate as  to  whether
    or not the decision might have been the same if the  reasons  had  been
    better expressed.  On  the  contrary,  the  lack  of  adequate  reasons
    demonstrates that there was a material error of law.

11.  The Original Tribunal's decision cannot stand.  The decision will  have
    to be remade. Case to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    remade.


12.  Findings  of  fact  concerning  the  family  relationship  between  the
    Claimants and Sponsor to stand.   Findings  of  fact  contained  within
    paragraphs 35, 36 and 37 of the decision to stand.  The finding of fact
    in relation to the  disappearance  of  the  second  Claimant  were  not
    adequately reasoned with reference to the evidence  before  the  judge,
    should not stand, will  need  to  be  reconsidered  and  analysed  with
    reasons.

13.  Finding of fact in paragraph 40 of the decision to stand.

14.  No interpreter required.

15.     Time estimate 2 hours.

16.     Given the age of the Claimants an anonymity order is necessary.


DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless  and   until   a   Tribunal   or   court   directs   otherwise,   the
Appellants(Claimants)  are  granted   anonymity.    No   report   of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both parties.  Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 20 March 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey






