
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02614/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated        |
|on 21st July 2016                   |On 04th August 2016                     |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                           Joan Osayemwenre Ogbomo

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer, Nigeria

                                                                  Respondent



For the Appellant:     Mrs J Moore, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria, born on 12th August  1970.   She
    has not asked for an anonymity order.

 2. The appellant sought entry clearance as a partner under Appendix FM  of
    the  Immigration  Rules.   By  decision  dated  5th  January  2015  the
    respondent refused the application in terms of the Rules for absence of
    evidence of a genuine relationship with the sponsor and of intention to
    live together permanently in the UK, and for  absence  of  evidence  to
    meet the  English  language  requirement.   The  application  was  also
    refused by reference to Article 8 of the ECHR, outwith the Rules.

 3. In her grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the appellant  said
    that the decision  breaches  Article  8  rights,  is  contrary  to  the
    Immigration Rules, and otherwise is not in  accordance  with  the  law.
    She insists that she  provided  evidence  of  a  genuine  relationship,
    including evidence of the birth of an infant son.

 4. The appellant and sponsor say that they also have three older children,
    two of whom are still minor.  The youngest child is a British  citizen,
    but not the others.

 5. First-tier Tribunal Judge McGavin  dismissed  the  appeal  by  decision
    promulgated on 2nd December 2015.  The judge found the evidence to lack
    credibility in almost every respect.

 6. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal are  based  in  part  on  a
    "derivative EU law right of residence".

 7. Mrs Moore submitted that the appellant ought to  have  succeeded  on  a
    direct application of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006, or  based
    on EU law in light of the Zambrano case, or under Article 8 in  respect
    of some analogy with the Zambrano case.

 8. The appellant did not apply under the regulations, and did not refer to
    them in the grounds put to the FtT.  I am unable to detect any case  on
    the basis of the regulations, of EU law more generally, or of  Zambrano
    which might sensibly have succeeded in the First-tier  Tribunal  or  in
    the Upper Tribunal.  The case fell to be decided under the  Immigration
    Rules, or under Article 8 of the ECHR.

 9. The appellant sought to support her case in the FtT with a letter  from
    a senior academic of the SOAS, University of London.   His  credentials
    are principally as an expert in the history of African art, but also in
    social anthropology, with a considerable record  of  research  in  West
    Africa and a substantial history of publications.  The letter says that
    the author is a friend of the sponsor and family.

10. The judge found it extremely  unlikely  that  an  academic  would  have
    written a letter which contained numerous errors of expression  and  of
    grammar, and concluded that it was a concoction made up of text from an
    expert's  report  (in  another  case)  and  material  from  a   genuine
    academic's website, together with insertion by someone else of material
    intended to be favourable to the appellant.

11. Without doubt, that scepticism influenced the judge's view of the  rest
    of the evidence.

12. In the Upper Tribunal the appellant tenders evidence from  that  senior
    academic to show that he does know the family and was willing to attend
    to give evidence on their behalf in the FtT, but this was not  possible
    due to short notice and his absence on holiday.  He explains  that  the
    letter was prepared in haste and was intended as a draft only, not  for
    production in proceedings.

13. There would be no reason to doubt the evidence now offered.   It  would
    make a dramatic difference to the credibility of  the  case  (although,
    for reasons later explained, it would not change the outcome).

14. The judge had to decide the case on the evidence put before her.  There
    is nothing to suggest that she went wrong as a matter of  law  on  that
    material.  Her conclusions about it were sensibly open to her  for  the
    reasons she gave.

15. The appellant has not sought to construct an argument that this  is  an
    instance where evidence should be admitted to show that a judge made an
    error of fact, through no fault of her own, which may constructively be
    held to be an error of law.  No such case  is  available,  because  the
    responsibility for the error lies entirely with the appellant.

16. In any event, there was no real scope for this appeal to have succeeded
    in the FtT or in the UT, even recognizing the letter as  genuine.   The
    appellant  was  bound  to  fail  under  the  rules  on   the   language
    requirement.  She says she can now meet that requirement as well as the
    financial and other stipulations of the rules.  On  that  basis,  there
    would be no scope for allowing her appeal outside the rules.  It cannot
    be a disproportionate interference to have to make an application.

17. I deal for future purposes, as requested by Mrs Moore, with other parts
    of the grounds, although they would not serve to set aside the decision
    or reach another outcome.

18. The judge went rather  far  in  doubting  whether  the  appellant  even
    intended to enter the UK.  There is no  sensible  explanation  for  her
    application and for the pursuit of the appeal in the FtT and in the  UT
    other than that she does intend to enter the UK.

19. The fourth child has been established by DNA evidence to be  the  child
    of the appellant and sponsor.  The judge went astray in  her  treatment
    of the evidence regarding the  other  three  children.   She  found  it
    significant that the sponsor obtained a British passport for the fourth
    but not for the three older children.  It  was  common  ground  between
    representatives in the UT that as a matter of law the  older  children,
    born before the sponsor obtained indefinite leave to remain in the  UK,
    are not entitled to  UK  citizenship.   There  is  no  element  of  the
    sponsor's choice.

20. The judge erred also in rejecting the sponsor's explanation of  why  he
    had not returned to Nigeria in recent years.   It  was  further  common
    ground that  the  respondent  took  several  years  to  deal  with  the
    sponsor's application for indefinite leave to remain, during which time
    his passport remained in their hands, and the rules stipulate  that  it
    could not be borrowed without the application being deemed to have been
    abandoned.

21. I record therefore that the adverse findings of the judge on the nature
    of the claimed family relationships should  not  be  held  against  the
    appellant in any future application.  Any such  application  should  be
    considered on its own merits under the rules.

22. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

23. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



                           [pic]


                           3 August 2016
                           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
