
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/02048/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|23 July 2015                         |3 September 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

                            Mrs Azamalsadat Davar
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No Appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Matthews, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant's partner did not appear at the  hearing  of  his  wife's
    appeal.  I was satisfied that he had been served in accordance with the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  I   therefore
    proceeded in the absence of any explanation for his non attendance.

 2. The appellant who is a national of Iran, born 25 March  1987  has  been
    granted permission to appeal the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    JC Grant-Hutchison.  For reasons given in her  determination  dated  22
    September 2014, the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision refusing the  appellant's  application  as
    the unmarried partner of the sponsor which was considered in  Istanbul.
    In his decision dated 13 January 2014, the respondent gave his  reasons
    why he  was  not  satisfied  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 352AA(i) and (ii) which are in these terms:

          i) "The applicant is the  unmarried  or  same-sex  partner  of  a
             person who is currently a refugee granted status as such under
             the Immigration Rules in the United Kingdom  and  was  granted
             that status in the UK on or after 9 October 2006;

         ii) The parties have been living together in a  relationship  akin
             to  either  a  marriage  or  a  civil  partnership  which  has
             subsisted for two years or more; ..."

 3.  In  granting  permission  to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   P
    Hollingworth observed that an arguable error of law had arisen  in  the
    judge's decision in the context of the period of time during which  the
    parties  had  lived  together  as  opposed  to  the   length   of   the
    relationship.  He also considered that the judge had arguably erred  in
    connection with the application of Section 117C of the Immigration  Act
    2014.

 4. There were four grounds of challenge and I take each in turn:

Ground 1

 5. Reliance is placed on Fetle (Partners:  two  year  requirement)  [2014]
    UKUT 00267 (IAC), as proposition for the principle that the  period  of
    two years referred to in paragraph 352AA referred to the  length  of  a
    the relationship as opposed to the length of time the parties had lived
    together.  It is argued the judge had focused on how long  the  parties
    had lived together and whether they had lived together for two years.

 6. The Tribunal in Fetle observed that the proper construction of the rule
    did not require two years cohabitation but two years subsistence of the
    relationship. As observed by the Tribunal at [9]:

         "A relationship said to be a akin to marriage,  but  in  which  the
         cohabitation has been minimal, may not be able to be established as
         'subsisting' so there is no danger of our interpretation leading to
         a view that (for example) one nights cohabitation will be enough to
         claim entitlement under the rules."

 7. The judge did not refer to Fetle in her decision which was  promulgated
    23 September 2014.  There is no indication that it  was  drawn  to  her
    attention although as a specialist Tribunal Judge she would be expected
    to be aware of it.

 8. The case before the judge was that the parties had lived  together  for
    two years between February 2010 and February 2012 and that  was  relied
    on to demonstrate that the provisions in paragraph 352AA had been  met.
    The sponsor claimed that he had last seen the appellant  in  July  2012
    before leaving Iran.  They had met in Istanbul subsequently  between  3
    and 7 November 2013 during which the application  for  Entry  Clearance
    was made.

 9. The judge was required to making findings on the evidence  advanced  in
    support of  the  application.  It  is  clear  from  a  reading  of  her
    determination that she had doubts about the claim that the parties  had
    lived together at all. This view is  reinforced  by  her  consideration
    under Article 8 from which I quote:

         "For the reasons already given the  parties  have  not  established
         that they were living together before the sponsor  left  Iran  thus
         forming their own family unit.  There is some  evidence  that  they
         had been in contact between 2013 and 2014  from  the  emails  which
         have now been lodged and that they met briefly  for  four  days  in
         November 2013.  I am prepared to accept that they met for four days
         between 3 and 7 November 2013."

10. The judge did not approach the case on a misunderstanding of the  rule.
    There is no indication that she considered the  appellant  and  sponsor
    were required to demonstrate that they lived together but as  this  was
    the basis on which the case was advanced, the  judge  was  required  to
    make a finding whether this was  true.  After  making  observations  on
    other aspects of the evidence including an answer given in a SEF by the
    sponsor dated 9 November 2012 that he was single, the  judge  concluded
    that the burden of proof had not been discharged.

11. On the findings of fact  by  the  judge,  it  is  unarguable  that  the
    appellant had demonstrated that the relationship relied on came  within
    the criteria of 352AA (i) and (ii).

12. The Second, Third, and Fourth Grounds relate to the Article 8 findings.
     They may be taken together.  I find no arguable error.  The  challenge
    to the Article 8 conclusions is on the basis  of  the  relationship  as
    found by the judge.  Ground Four  argues  that  the  judge  erroneously
    excluded evidence as post dating of the decision, although  it  related
    to the circumstances of attaining at the time the refusal.

13. As to the Fourth Ground, this does not identify any evidence the  judge
    excluded  on  this  basis.   It  was  opened  to  the  sponsor  or  the
    appellant's representatives to attend  to  indicate  the  material  the
    judge should have taken into account but failed to do so.

14. As to the overall Article 8 approach, I find  no  error  by  the  judge
    bearing in mind  the  limited  nature  of  nature  and  extent  of  the
    relationship she found existing.  There was nothing  before  her  of  a
    compelling nature to require a grant of leave outside the rules.

15. It may be that the judge erred in applying Part 5A of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to this out of country case,  but  this
    does not assist  the  appellant.   On  application  of  the  principles
    clearly set out  in  respect  of  leave  to  enter   cases  in  SSHD  v
    SS(Congo)& ORS [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and  taking  account  of  a  limited
    scope of the relationship which the Judge had found subsisting.   There
    were no compelling circumstances, not sufficiently recognised under the
    Rules to justify a grant of leave to enter.

16. Accordingly, I am not persuaded that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred;
    this appeal is dismissed.


Signed
     [pic]    Date: 26 August 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

