
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02928/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 14 April 2015                              |On 27 April 2015             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                               LORD BANNATYNE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer, new delhi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                RANJEET SINGH
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Singh, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant before this Tribunal  was  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    (hereinafter referred to  as  "the  ECO").   Mr  Singh  is  hereinafter
    referred to as "the applicant".

2.   The appeal was against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dated  22
    December 2014 which allowed on human  rights  grounds  the  applicant's
    appeal against the decision  of  the  ECO  to  refuse  to  grant  entry
    clearance as a partner under App FM of the Immigration Rules.

Background

3.   The applicant is a citizen of India, aged 31.  He is sponsored  by  his
    wife, Mrs Manjinder Kaur, who is a British citizen.

4.    The  applicant  appealed  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   under   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002,  against  a  decision  to
    refuse entry clearance under the Immigration Rules.  The  decision  was
    made by the ECO on 10 February 2014.

5.   The basis of the  decision  of  the  ECO  was  that  the  ECO  was  not
    satisfied that the applicant met the requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules in the following respects:

    (i)  that, subject to  section  S-EC,  Suitability  -  Entry  Clearance
        Requirements, he is subject to an unrevoked deportation  order  (S-
        EC.1.3); and
    (ii) that, subject to section E-ECP, the applicant's relationship  with
        the sponsor is genuine and subsisting or that they intend  to  live
        together permanently in the UK.

6.   Two matters were argued on behalf of the applicant  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal: first, in terms of the Immigration Rules.  This argument
    failed before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  formed  no  part  of  the
    argument before this Tribunal.

7.   Secondly, it was argued that Article 8 ECHR was engaged  and  that  the
    applicant's  right  to  a  family  live  would  sustain   an   unlawful
    interference if he  was  refused  entry  clearance  to  the  UK.   This
    argument was successful before the First-tier Tribunal.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

8.   The First-tier Tribunal heard the evidence of the sponsor and in  light
    of that and the documentary  evidence  before  it  made  the  following
    findings of fact at paragraph 14 of the determination:

     "(i)     The Appellant is subject to an unrevoked deportation order.

      ii) The Appellant and the  Sponsor  are  clearly  in  a  genuine  and
          subsisting relationship, for the following reasons:

           a. they have known each other for approximately eight years.   I
              accept the Sponsor's explanation for any confusion about  the
              commencement date of their 'relationship', based as it is  on
              an inherently ambiguous term.

           b. there is ample and not seriously contested evidence that they
              have sustained that relationship both in UK,  and  since  the
              Appellant's return to India, in that country.  The  Sponsor's
              home address was given for his bail surety, she  has  visited
              him four times since his return, [to India on 14 April 2013],
              providing photographic evience [sic], sent him money and they
              have maintained an active and frequent correspondence".

9.   The above findings in fact were not challenged on  behalf  of  the  ECO
    before this Tribunal.

Procedure since the Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

10.  The ECO sought permission  to  appeal  and  this  was  granted  on  all
    grounds.

Submissions on behalf of the ECO

11.  It was Mr Clarke's position that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in
    law in a number of respects:

         . First, no consideration had been given by the First-tier Tribunal
           to Immigration Rule 398
         . Secondly that it was made clear  in  Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  00640
           (IAC) that the Article 8 assessment should only  be  carried  out
           when there are compelling circumstances  not  recognised  by  the
           Immigration Rules.  He submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had
           failed to identify why  the  applicant's  circumstances  were  so
           compelling  that  they  amounted  to  exceptional   circumstances
           outside the Immigration Rules.  He in addition referred to  Nagre
           [2013] EWHC 720 Admin which had endorsed the Secretary of State's
           guidance on the meaning  of  exceptional  circumstances,  namely:
           ones where refusal would lead to an unjustifiably harsh  outcome.
           He submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had not  followed  this
           approach and thereby had erred in law.  He went on to  submit  in
           development  of  the  above  submissions  that   the   First-tier
           Tribunal's  findings  were  wholly  inadequate  given  that   the
           applicant was subject to a deportation order which had  not  been
           revoked.  The applicant had been fully aware of  his  deportation
           order and yet rather than seek to revoke this had chosen to apply
           for entry clearance.  The applicant did not meet the requirements
           of the Rules due to his deportation order and  his  circumstances
           in no way warranted the First-tier Tribunal's  findings  that  it
           was disproportionate to  refuse  him  entry  and  outweighed  the
           public interest.  He submitted  that  the  starting  point  in  a
           deportation case was that  it  was  in  the  public  interest  to
           continue to exclude a person subject to such  an  order  and  the
           First-tier Tribunal had approached  the  matter  from  a  neutral
           starting point, instead of one  heavily  weighted  in  favour  of
           maintaining his exclusion while this remained in force.
         . Thirdly, in carrying out the proportionality exercise  no  proper
           consideration had been given to Section 117B of  the  Immigration
           Act 2014.  In particular no consideration had been given  to  the
           fact that the relationship between the applicant and the  sponsor
           had begun while the applicant's immigration status was  unlawful,
           he having entered  the  UK  illegally.   The  applicant  and  the
           sponsor were fully aware of that fact and were fully  aware  that
           he was subject to a deportation action.  Therefore  he  submitted
           in terms of said provisions little weight should have been  given
           to their relationship.  That was not the course  which  had  been
           followed by the First-tier Tribunal.

Reply on behalf of the Applicant

12.  Mr Singh began his submissions by directing our attention to  paragraph
    14 of the First-tier Tribunal's determination where he submitted at  an
    early stage in the determination the Tribunal found that the  applicant
    was subject to an unrevoked deportation order.  Thus he contended  that
    this was at the  forefront  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  mind  when
    reaching its decision.

13.  He then directed our  attention  to  paragraph  16  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's determination.  Here he submitted  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had looked, if briefly, at the issue of compelling  reasons  and  dealt
    with the issue properly.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  had  applied  the
    correct test in terms of Gulshan and  Nagre.   He  submitted  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had set out Section 117B  of  the  2014  Act  (see:
    paragraph 21 of the determination) and accordingly had  had  regard  to
    this.

14.  He accepted  that  the  determination  was  short  but  said  that  any
    criticisms of the decision related more to its form rather than to  the
    substance of the decision.  It was his  position  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had had  regard  to  the  correct  test  and  the  appropriate
    statutory provisions.  He submitted that it had  produced,  although  a
    short decision, a properly reasoned one and that it had  not  erred  in
    law.

Discussion as to Error of Law

15.  Without difficulty we  are  persuaded  that  there  are  a  substantial
    number of material errors of law in the determination of the First-tier
    Tribunal.

16.  First, paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules  is  never  referred  to.
    This was the essential background to the core issue  which  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was considering.  It is in light of these Rules that  the
    First-tier Tribunal required to decide whether there  were  exceptional
    circumstance such that the public interest in deportation is outweighed
    by other factors.

17.  The court in MF (Nigeria) 2013 EWCA Civ 1192 in the context of  a  case
    where the main issue before it concerned circumstances in all  material
    senses the same as in the instant  case,  namely:  where  an  appellant
    could not succeed substantively under paragraphs  398  or  399  of  the
    Rules, where he was subject to a deportation order.  Thus the  question
    before the court was whether  there  were  "exceptional  circumstances"
    such that the public interest in deportation was  outweighed  by  other
    factors.  The court said this:

        "the reference to exceptional circumstances serves the  purpose  of
        emphasising that, in the balancing exercise, great weight should be
        given to the public interest in deporting foreign criminals who  do
        not  satisfy  paragraphs  398  and  399  or  399A.   It   is   only
        exceptionally that such foreign criminals will succeed  in  showing
        that their rights under Article 8(1) trump the public  interest  in
        their deportation".  (See: paragraph 40).


    Having regard to the above guidance it is in  our  view  impossible  to
    understand how a  proper  consideration  of  proportionality  could  be
    carried out in the absence of a consideration of paragraph 398.   There
    was no recognition within the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal
    that it would only  be  exceptionally  where  a  person  subject  to  a
    deportation order would succeed in  showing  that  their  rights  under
    Article 8(1) would trump the public interest in their deportation.

18.  Secondly it is correct as advanced by  Mr  Singh  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the course of its determination  refers  to  the  issue  of
    compelling reasons.  However, its decision, with respect to this issue,
    is we are satisfied wholly untenable.  All that is said on  this  issue
    by the First-tier Tribunal is the following:

        "[The applicant] is the Sponsor's husband and his  separation  from
        his wife amounts to a compelling enough  reason  to  consider  this
        appeal under Article 8."  (See:  paragraph  16  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal's determination).


    If the foregoing assertion is correct then in any case where a  husband
    is separated from his wife as a result of a decision made on behalf  of
    the Secretary of State there would be compelling reasons; that  is  not
    the  law.   This  bald  statement  renders  the  tests  of  "compelling
    circumstances" and "exceptional circumstances" set out in  Gulshan  and
    Nagre meaningless.

19.  Thirdly at paragraph 20 of the First-tier Tribunal's  determination  it
makes the following finding:

        "I find therefore, on the basis that the Appellant  has  a  genuine
        and subsisting relationship with his wife and her children that  it
        is manifestly not proportionate to interfere in either his or their
        family life".

     This finding with respect to proportionality is made on the basis of  a
    consideration of that issue as set in  paragraphs  18  and  19  of  the
    determination.  At no point either in those two paragraphs or elsewhere
    is any consideration given by the First-tier  Tribunal  to  the  public
    interest in continuing  to  exclude  a  person  who  is  subject  to  a
    deportation order.  The First-tier Tribunal completely fails to  engage
    in the proportionality exercise.  There is only  consideration  of  one
    side of the equation, namely: the interest of  the  applicant  and  his
    family.  The First-tier Tribunal has not carried out a  proportionality
    exercise.

20.  Moreover, there is no reasoning, far less  adequate  reasoning,  as  to
    why it is not proportionate to interfere in either his or his  family's
    family life.  The reasoning amounts to no more than  a  mere  assertion
    that where a subsisting relationship is interfered  with  that  is  not
    proportionate.  That is clearly not a sufficient reason on its own.  In
    particular it cannot be adequate reasoning given the approach which the
    First-tier Tribunal was bound to take having regard to  the  fact  that
    the applicant was subject to a deportation order.  Beyond that we would
    also observe that it is impossible to  understand  how  the  First-tier
    Tribunal could have come to the conclusion that it was "manifestly  not
    proportionate" (our emphasis).

21.  In paragraph 21 of the determination the First-tier  Tribunal  goes  on
    to refer to the Immigration Act 2014 and the amendments made  in  terms
    thereof to the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  by  the
    introduction of Section 117A - 117D.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  states
    within its determination that in the consideration of Article 8 it  has
    to have regard to these sections of the Act.   It  is  noteworthy  that
    reference to the foregoing statutory provisions comes after the  First-
    tier Tribunal has made its decision on proportionality at paragraph 20.
     We observe that paragraph 21 commences as follows:

         "I now refer myself to the 2014 Immigration Act ... ".

     It appears to  us  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  if  it  considered
    certain parts of these provisions at all, considered them after  having
    made its  decision  on  proportionality.   Again  this  is  clearly  an
    incorrect approach.  Moreover, there appears when the determination  is
    examined to be no consideration  of  certain  central  parts  of  these
    provisions.  There is so far as we can identify: no consideration given
    to the fact that the  applicant's  relationship  was  formed  with  the
    sponsor when the applicant was in the UK unlawfully and that  this  was
    known to both of them.  Nor is there any  consideration  given  to  the
    maintenance of immigration control being in the public interest.

22.  In addition to the above no consideration is given  in  the  Article  8
    assessment to the fact that the factual matrix in this case is somewhat
    unusual and is this:  the applicant was not in this country at the time
    of the matter coming before the First-tier Tribunal and on the basis of
    the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal family life had been  able
    to be maintained, although the applicant and  sponsor  were  apart,  by
    visits to India and by modern means of electronic  communication.   The
    question of whether family life against that factual  matrix  could  be
    maintained by these means is not  even  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  We are satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal ought to  have
    considered that matter.

23.  When all of the above is taken together we are in no doubt  that  there
    has been a material  error  of  law  on  the  part  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Overall we are persuaded that there was a total  failure  to
    grapple with the  various  issues  which  were  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Decision

24.  For the foregoing reasons we grant the appeal.  Having  been  addressed
    on the issue as to whether we should re-hear the matter or remit it  to
    a differently constituted First-tier  Tribunal  we  have  decided  that
    given the extent and nature of the criticisms which we have made of the
    First-tier Tribunal's determination it was appropriate that the case be
    remitted to a freshly constituted First-tier Tribunal.

25.  We make no anonymity direction.





Signed                                  Date



Lord Bannantyne
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
