
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02471/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6 February 2017                    |On 2 June 2017                        |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                     entry clearance officer - islamabad
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     a s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ahmed, instructed by Jusmount & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, AS, was born in 2011 and is a  male  citizen
    of Afghanistan.  The appellant's father is present and settled  in  the
    United Kingdom as a refugee.  The  other  members  of  the  appellant's
    family (including his mother and siblings) came to the  United  Kingdom
    on a family reunion visit visa.  The sponsor  had  visited  the  family
    before they departed for the United Kingdom and the appellant had  been
    conceived during  that  visit.   Having  been  born  "post-flight"  the
    appellant was not eligible to join the rest of  his  family  under  the
    family  reunion  provisions.   He  was  left  living  abroad  with  his
    grandmother.

 2. The application by the  appellant  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  for
    settlement was rejected by the ECO on maintenance grounds and  also  in
    respect of accommodation.  By the time the appeal  reached  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in Birmingham on 18 December 2015, the judge recorded [9]
    that "the only live issues are the adequacy of accommodation;  and  any
    Article 8 issues".  The Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) produced a report
    dated 20 April 2014 in which he/she only refers  to  the  accommodation
    issue.  It appears that the First-tier Tribunal proceeded on the  basis
    that only accommodation was at issue under the Immigration  Rules;  Mrs
    Aboni before the Upper Tribunal did not suggest otherwise.

 3. The judge found [16]  that  if  the  appellant  joined  the  family  in
    Birmingham then the  property  in  which  they  were  living  would  be
    overcrowded.  He therefore dismissed the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules but went on to consider Article  8  ECHR.   At  [28],  the  judge
    considered the accommodation issue in the context  of  Article  8.   He
    noted that the two elder siblings had planned to move out of the  house
    which would make room for the appellant.  He also considered that,

         the legitimate aim of lawful immigration  control  is  narrowed  in
         this case because the remainder of the family has been brought over
         on a family reunion visa.  If this child had been  born  pre-flight
         would have qualified without  the  stringent  Rules  being  applied
         under Appendix FM

    The judge allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 4. The respondent submits that, if the accommodation was not adequate  for
    the purposes of the Immigration Rules, it cannot have been adequate for
    the appellant under Article 8; it would not be in the best interests of
    the child (section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
    2009) not  be  met  by  his  being  expected  to  live  in  overcrowded
    accommodation.   The family should find  a  larger  property  and  then
    apply again for entry clearance.

 5. Mrs Aboni accepted the submission of Mr Ahmed, for the appellant,  that
    the grounds of appeal are incorrect stating that the relevant date  for
    assessing the evidence in the appeal was the date of  the  application.
    Section 85(4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  (as
    amended) provides for all human  rights  appeals  (including  those  in
    respect of appellants living abroad) be considered at the date  of  the
    appeal (see Section 85(4) of the 2002 Act (as amended)).

 6. Given that that is the case, it is arguable that the judge erred by not
    taking into account circumstances at the  date  of  the  hearing  which
    would be favourable to the appellant's case.  The judge had before  him
    at the date of hearing an assured short hold  tenancy  agreement  which
    had been entered into by the family in the United Kingdom  which  would
    commence on 1 March 2016.  I  understand  that  the  family  have  duly
    entered that property and, notwithstanding the expiry of the fixed term
    of five months, continued to live  in  the  property  presumably  on  a
    periodic tenancy.  There appears to be no argument that the property in
    which the family is now  living  is  large  enough  for  all  of  them,
    including the appellant.  There was no need, therefore, for  the  judge
    to consider prospective events in his Article 8 analysis; he  was  able
    to consider events appertaining at the date of the hearing, namely that
    the family had already signed the new tenancy  agreement.   Indeed,  if
    the Upper Tribunal were now to remake the decision on the basis of  the
    evidence today, it would be compelled to find  that  the  accommodation
    available for the appellant is adequate.  The grounds also do raise the
    question of maintenance by reference to Section 117B of  the  2002  Act
    (as amended) but, as I recorded above, there is no challenge before the
    First-tier  Tribunal  but  the  only  issue  before  it  is   that   of
    accommodation; maintenance was not a live issue before the judge.

 7. In the light of what I have said above, I find that, even if the  judge
    had erred in law, I should exercise my discretion in not setting  aside
    this decision.  I am, in any event not persuaded  that  the  judge  has
    erred either for the reasons given in the grounds of appeal or at all.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 20 May 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





