
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/02626/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly             |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 20 November 2014                        |On 23 April 2015           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                         RAJESH FRANKLIN KHANDAVALLI
                           (ANONYMITY NOT ORDERED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Miss A Faryl counsel instructed by JMR Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  A  D  Smith  promulgated  on  14
   August 2014 which allowed the Appellant's appeal  under  the  Immigration
   Rules although this was clearly a typographical error as the case was  an
   appeal against an decision under the EEA Regulations.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 13 July 19080 and is a citizen of India.
4. On 10 April 2013 the  Appellant  applied  for  admission  to  the  United
   Kingdom, a family permit, as a family member of an EEA national  who  was
   exercising treaty rights in the United Kingdom, in essence as the  spouse
   of Emanuela Dorobantu a Romanian citizen.
5. On 22 January  2013  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons: the  Respondent
   stated that theirs was a marriage of convenience; the parties had at  the
   time of application only lived together for 7 days; there was no evidence
   of their relationship prior to their  marriage  in  2013;  there  was  no
   evidence of contact.


The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  case  came
   before First-tier Tribunal Judge Smith. The Appellant was represented  by
   Ms Faryl and there was no  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer.  The  Judge
   recorded at paragraph 6 of his decision why he dealt with the case in the
   absence of a Presenting Officer. After  hearing  evidence  from  the  EEA
   sponsor the Judge found that  the  marriage  in  issue  was  not  a  sham
   marriage and therefore allowed the appeal.
7.  Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  3  September  2014  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Osbourne gave permission to appeal stating that it was
    "arguable that in proceeding in the absence of  representation  for  the
   Respondent when the Respondent would have wished to have been represented
   amounts to an arguable error of law."

8. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Mc  Veety  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) He relied on the grounds of appeal.

   b) He conceded that the grounds were drafted by someone  who,  unlike  Ms
      Faryl, was not present in court when the decision in issue  was  made.
      He conceded that if no application was made for an  adjournment  there
      was no error of law. He had to concede there was no 'paper trail '  in
      his file to suggest that the Respondent had made an application for an
      adjournment.

9. On behalf of the Respondent  Ms Faryl submitted that :

   a) There had been no error of law because the Respondent had notice  that
      the matter was to go before a court which had  no  Presenting  Officer
      but made no application for an adjournment.

   b) In the absence of such  an  application  the  Judge  was  entitled  to
      proceed in the absence of a Presenting Officer if it was  just  to  do
      so.

   c) This was merely a disagreement with the outcome of the appeal.

The Law

10.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible.

Finding on Material Error

12. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

13. This was an appeal against a refusal of a family permit  and  the  basis
   of the refusal was,  in  essence,  that  the  marriage  underpinning  the
   application was a sham marriage.

14. The Judge recorded the circumstances in which the case came to be  dealt
   with without a Presenting Officer at paragraph 6 of his determination:

   "No Home Office Presenting Officer was in attendance. This was not due to
   any fault on the part of the Respondent. This case  had  been  originally
   listed as a 'floating hearing' and the respondent would have  anticipated
   that it would have been dealt with in a court were  they  already  had  a
   representative  in  attendance.  The  respondent  could  not  provide   a
   representative on short  notice.  The  file  was  reviewed  by  a  Senior
   Immigration Judge who took the view that the  case  was  suitable  to  be
   dealt with without a representative for the respondent. The  reasons  for
   refusal were clearly stated by the Respondent in the refusal letter and I
   can give them due consideration."

15. The Procedure Rules require  that  cases  are  dealt  with  taking  into
   account the overriding objective which is to deal with cases  fairly  and
   justly.  This is defined as including "(a) dealing with the case in  ways
   which are proportionate to the importance of the case, the complexity  of
   the issues, the anticipated costs and the resources of the parties and of
   the Tribunal. There  is  no  absolute  right  to  have  a  representative
   present.

16. What is clear from the decision is  that  the  Judge  did  not  have  an
   application for an adjournment before him. Mr Mc Veety  confirmed  to  me
   that there was no record on his file of any such application having  been
   made. I have checked the court file. There is no document  on  that  file
   and no endorsement on the file cover which suggests that the  Respondent,
   who had as Ms Faryl suggests, some notice albeit 'short notice' that this
   case would proceed without a Presenting Officer, made an application  for
   an adjournment. The Respondent argues  in  the  grounds  that  they  were
   disadvantaged by the loss of opportunity to cross examine the sponsor but
   at the earlier stage of listing this case there is no suggestion that the
   Respondent had indicated that this was a case that they  required  should
   only be placed in a list that had a Presenting Officer.

17. In determining whether the court had acted fairly I  am  satisfied  that
   that the Respondent  was made aware that the case would  be  put  into  a
   court without a Presenting Officer but made no application to adjourn the
   case. It is clear from the decision that the Judge  understood  that  the
   Respondent's challenge was that this was a sham marriage and he  asked  a
   number of questions of the sponsor which were focused on that  issue  and
   these are set out at paragraph  9  of  the  determination.  I  find  that
   talking  into  account  all  of  the  circumstances  there  has  been  no
   procedural unfairness and the decision must therefore stand.

CONCLUSION

18. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

19. The appeal is dismissed.

20. There is no order for anonymity.

Signed                                                              Date 25
.11.2014
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

