

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02878/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                       |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7th May 2015                      |On 15th May 2015                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                         ZUHAL ADAM ZAKRIA GARELZAIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs  Stirton Thomas of All Nations Legal Services.
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety - Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1.  On  30th  October  2014  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  D  Dickenson
         dismissed the appeal against the  refusal  of  an  Entry  Clearance
         Officer (ECO) to grant leave to enter for the purposes  of  refugee
         family reunion.

      2. The basis of the refusal was the lack of evidence of marriage or of
         the time the applicant lived with  her  sponsor  in  Sudan  and  no
         evidence to show a pre flight relationship - 352A (i).  It was also
         found there was lack of evidence of contact between  the  applicant
         and her sponsor leading to doubt about the ability to satisfy  352A
         (iv).

      3. The Judge was satisfied the parties were  legally  married  on  the
         basis of the marriage certificate  from  Sudan  which  confirmed  a
         marriage on 5th March 2007. It was also found there was evidence of
         funds being sent by the sponsor by electronic transfer to Sudan and
         it was accepted the sponsor and appellant speak to  each  other  on
         the telephone and communicate through Skype  and  other  electronic
         means.

      4. The Judge was not satisfied that the  appellant  intended  to  live
         permanently with the sponsor in the UK and  that  the  marriage  is
         subsisting. This is said to be the case for the reasons set out  at
         paragraphs 18 - 23 of the determination.

Discussion


      5. It is said the finding the parties communicate with each other  and
         the finding they do not intend to live together  is  contradictory.
         It is accepted there  was  a  substantial  bundle  of  evidence  of
         contact since  2012  which  was  accepted.  The  points  the  Judge
         considered relevant are:

           .  Whilst  the  appellant  was  able  to  produce   a   marriage
             certificate confirming the marriage the sponsor in his  asylum
             claim was unable to recall the date of the marriage [17].

           . The sponsor confirmed that whilst he  and  the  appellant  had
             married in 2007  there  remained  stages  that  needed  to  be
             completed before it  could  be  determined  as  a  traditional
             Sudanese marriage. Until the stages  had  been  completed  the
             parties could not live together.  The sponsor said he had  not
             been able to live with the appellant in Sudan before  he  left
             on 1st January 2010 as all such stages had not been completed.
             It was found implausible that for three years the sponsor  was
             not able to pay the requisite monies in order to complete  the
             stages when he was able to raise $750 to pay an agent to leave
             Sudan. The sponsor also gave evidence to  the  effect  he  was
             able to raise a further $3,500 to pay an agent to bring him to
             the UK from Greece indicating his priorities have  not  always
             been with his wife and the need to  complete  the  outstanding
             stages of the marriage [19].

           . The sponsor claimed when in Greece he was homeless  and  could
             only telephone his wife occasionally when he had  spare  money
             yet had the ability to raise the $3,500 to pay an  agent.  The
             sponsor had the means to have paid for telephone calls and the
             fact he  failed  to  do  so  raised  questions  regarding  the
             genuineness of the relationship [20].

           . It is now claimed the various stages have been  completed  but
             no evidence was provided to  show  the  payment  of  the  gold
             required as part of the marriage process or  how  the  sponsor
             was able to accumulate the relevant monetary sums for payment.
             Without such evidence the Judge was not satisfied the relevant
             stages of the marriage process  had  been  completed  and  the
             parties therefore intended to live permanently together [21].

           . Whilst photographs of the appellant have been provided and  it
             is impractical to expect photos of  the  three  years  of  the
             relationship, there is no photographic evidence of them  as  a
             couple. It was  found  implausible  that  there  was  no  such
             evidence, for instance of a wedding  or  birthday.  Had  there
             been a genuine relationship  such  evidence  would  have  been
             retained [22].

           . There is no evidence from the appellant or sponsor's  families
             as to the relationship [23].

      6. It is arguable that the comment relating to photographs should  not
         be determinative as it is not known if there are photographs taken,
         although this is not proven. Mr McVeety  referred  to  the  use  of
         Skype and other electronic  means  of  communication  showing  that
         photographs could be communicated but that depends if  they  exist.
         The Skype printouts have photographic images on  them  taken  by  a
         camera or webcam but Mrs  Stirton Thomas  indicated  that  internet
         access was only available in 2010 which was after the  sponsor  had
         left Sudan.

      7. The burden is upon the appellant to prove the ability to  meet  the
         requirements of the Rules which the Judge found had not occurred on
         the basis of the available evidence. The Judge referred to a number
         of matters of  concern  that  were  considered  determinative  even
         having identified a number of points in the appellants favour.

      8. The existence of communication was not disputed and demonstrates  a
         level of commitment but was not found to be sufficient in light  of
         above matters when the evidence is considered cumulatively.

      9. There is no contradiction amounting to legal error in  relation  to
         the findings regarding the sponsors time in Greece. Even though his
         life there was not pleasant he admits raising the  funds  and  made
         the conscious decision to fund  his  wishes  rather  than  maintain
         contact with his wife. The  sponsor's  priority  was  his  personal
         desire and if his wife was called from the little money left  over,
         as according to paragraph 8  of  the  grounds,  this  supports  the
         sustainability of the findings in relation to priorities.

     10. The grounds confirm evidence of the finalisation of the  stages  of
         the marriage had not been provided. For whatever reason the finding
         this had not been proved has not been shown to be contrary  to  the
         available evidence. The criticism of the Judge for not asking about
         this at the hearing is noted but the burden is upon  the  appellant
         to prove. It was being alleged the stages not previously  completed
         had been finalised and so clear evidence of the same  was  required
         but not provided.

     11. In relation to the decision  under  the  Immigration  Rules  it  is
         asserted the Judge considered irrelevant  material  and  failed  to
         give adequate reasons but neither is formally pleaded as  such  and
         in any event have not been shown to have arguable merit.

     12. Mrs Stirton Thomas was asked if the  true  allegation  was  one  of
         perversity which she confirmed it was. This requires proof that the
         decision was one no reasonable judge being  informed  of  the  true
         facts would  reasonable  be  expected  to  make  which  is  a  high
         threshold. On the fact it has not been reached.

     13. The decisions under the Rules have not been  shown  to  be  outside
         those reasonably available to the Judge on the evidence.

     14. The rejection under Article 8 is also challenged  but  it  has  not
         been shown there is an element not considered under the Rules  that
         requires consideration outside the Rules and as the key finding  is
         that it had not been established that there is an intention to live
         together  family  life  is  not  established  making  the  decision
         proportionate.

     15. No arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
         appeal has been made out on the basis of the grounds and submission
         made.

Decision

     16. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.

    Anonymity.

     17. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
         45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
         2005. I make no such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8th May 2015

