
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02625/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th September 2016               |On 14th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                          OLUFEMI ROSELINE OMOWAYE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Lagos
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Rene instructed by Queen's Park solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Ms Omowaye applied for and  was  refused  entry  clearance  as  the
         spouse of Mr [A] (the sponsor). Her appeal  against  that  decision
         was heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 4 November 2015  and  in  a
         decision promulgated on 10 November 2015, dismissed.

      2. Lengthy grounds of  appeal  identified  what  were  claimed  to  be
         evidence the judge had failed to take into  account  or  failed  to
         place  any  or  any  adequate  weight  upon,  that  the  judge  had
         misinterpreted the evidence before her, had failed to give adequate
         or any reasons for making adverse inconsistency findings, failed to
         put relevant matters to  the  sponsor  and  failed  to  assess  the
         evidence in the context of this couple,  their  ages  and  personal
         situations to the extent that her decision that  the  marriage  was
         not genuine and subsisting was irrational and/or perverse.

      3. Permission to appeal was granted on 9th August 2016,  attention  in
         particular being drawn to the photos and WhatsApp conversations.

      4. Evidence it  was  contended  had  not  been  adequately  considered
         included as follows:

          i) The judge incorrectly characterised as an inconsistency on the
             development of the couple relationship,  their  evidence  that
             they first met in November 2011, that they met  again  in  May
             2012 and it was then that  their  relationship  commenced  and
             thereafter they began communicating by telephone and WhatsApp.
             The judge stated she was unable to identify the dates  of  the
             telephone calls and the WhatsApp messages  because  they  were
             illegible yet the ECO had identified (and accepted) the  dates
             in the decision;

         ii) The judge failed to give  any  or  any  adequate  reasons  for
             reaching the conclusion, contrary to  the  sponsor's  evidence
             that he was not a 'card person', that  it  was  reasonable  to
             expect the couple to have  exchanged  cards  on  birthdays  or
             anniversaries as  visible  reminders  of  their  relationship,
             despite visible reminders existing in the form of WhatsApp and
             text messages; asserts the sponsor's statement that not  being
             a 'card person' was unsatisfactory without providing  adequate
             reasoning for such a conclusion;

        iii) Failed to take account of the photos, which  had  been  before
             the ECO, which clearly showed the couple had met on  different
             occasions;

         iv) Failed to take account of the documentary evidence  of  travel
             to Nigeria as claimed;

          v) Failed to have any or any adequate regard to telephone cards;

         vi) Failed to have regard to the information  from  the  sponsor's
             son that he and the appellant are in contact through Facebook;

        vii) Incorrectly drew an adverse conclusion based upon  two  visits
             after the refusal of entry clearance and no visits between the
             submission of the application and the refusal, without putting
             to the sponsor the reasons for that;

       viii) Failed to have regard to the visits made  by  the  sponsor  to
             Nigeria after the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance,  as
             evidenced by travel documentation and finding the sponsor  had
             changed his evidence.

      5. The First-tier Tribunal considered the evidence but has  failed  to
         consider that evidence in the context of the evidence as  a  whole.
         The issues identified by the judge as creating  the  reasoning  for
         the  adverse  conclusion  are  small   matters   which   could   be
         characterised as 'nit-picking' and do not consider the evidence  as
         a whole. The conclusion drawn from the use of telephone  cards  may
         have stood if it was the only evidence before her, but the  use  of
         telephone cards has to be seen in the context of the evidence as  a
         whole including the WhatsApp messages, the visits and  the  photos.
         The judge has failed to consider the  background  circumstances  of
         the couple, the sponsor's son's evidence and the  application  form
         completed by the appellant.

      6. It is also notable that the judge (in [20]) approached the evidence
         before her as a review of the material before the ECO  and  whether
         the ECO had reasonable grounds for reaching the  decision  he  did.
         The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal is not a  review  of  the
         reasonableness of the ECO's decision but a decision on the evidence
         and facts before it. Although this was not specifically pleaded  it
         is a matter of relevance when the decision as a whole is considered
         in the light of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.

      7. Taking all of these matters into account, and recognising that  the
         threshold to be crossed is a high one,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal was irrational. There has  been
         a material error of law and I set aside the decision to be remade.

      8. When I have set  aside  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
         s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case to the First
         tier with directions or remake it for myself. I  conclude  in  this
         case that the  evidence  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  requires
         assessment as  to  its  credibility  and  weight  to  be  accorded,
         applying the correct legal framework, a matter which in the context
         of this appeal should not be undertaken by the  Upper  Tribunal.  I
         therefore remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal


     Date 13th September 2016
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
