
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02316/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 1 September 2015                    |                On 5 November 2015   |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY

                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - LAGOS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Miss Muibat Morenike Oyeleke
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Bond, Counsel instructed by Freemans Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  ECO  and  the
    Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of Nigeria, date of  birth  3  December  1990,
    appealed against the ECO's decision, dated 10 January 2014,  to  refuse
    entry clearance to the Claimant as an adult  dependent  relative  under
    Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)  with
    particular reference to paragraphs EC-DR.1.1 and EC-DR.2.4 and 2.5 with
    respect to paragraphs EC-DR.1.1(b) of Appendix FM.

3.   The application was  misconceived  and  proceeded  upon  the  erroneous
    basis that  the  Claimant  was  a  dependent  relative  under  the  old
    Immigration Rules (paragraph 317)  and  so  it  was  certain  to  fail.
    However, in the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, Article 8
    ECHR grounds were raised: The terms of those grounds are, it is fair to
    say, discursive and wide-ranging.  Any judge preparing for  an  appeal,
    if those Article 8 grounds were to be pursued,  should  have  clarified
    with the parties at the outset of the hearing of the  appeal  if  those
    matters or some of them were no longer material.

4.   With the appeal grounds the Entry  Clearance  Manager  on  5  September
    2014 set out a substantive response which does not appear to have  been
    raised with First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid (the Judge) at  the  outset
    or what was the true nature of the Article 8 claim being pursued by the
    Claimant.  The Judge allowed the appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.
    Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Cox on 10
    June 2015.

5.   The matter was further complicated to a degree by the fact that in  the
    skeleton argument from a  Ms  Manyarara,  Counsel,  the  issue  of  the
    Appellant's sexuality was raised but not addressed by  the  Judge.   Ms
    Bond tells me, and I fully accept what she has  said,  that  there  are
    'one line' references to the issue in witness statement evidence  which
    the Judge records he has read and taken into account, see paragraph  10
    of the Decision and Reasons.

6.   Nevertheless,  the  Record  of  Proceedings  does  not  show  that  the
    sexuality issue was a matter that was pursued.  I do not have a copy of
    the Record of Proceedings recorded on  the  Judge's  Braille  computer.
    Nevertheless, if it had been raised it would have been  a  matter  that
    should have formed a part of  the  Judge's  reasoning  in  relation  to
    Article 8 issues.  However, as Ms Bond fairly said,  the  position  was
    that the Article 8 decision was not  part  of  the  grounds  that  were
    lodged by the ECO against the decision of  the  Judge  dated  24  March
    2015.  The Specialist Appeals Team only had the decision of  the  Judge
    and it was abundantly plain that the ECO in  drafting  the  grounds  of
    application, which have not been amended, was  attacking  the  lack  of
    reasoning for the appeal being allowed under the Immigration Rules.  It
    is clear beyond any doubt whatsoever that the Claimant could  not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules.  Thus the grounds fairly attack the fact
    that  the  Judge  failed  to  make  clear  in  the  determination  what
    provisions of the  Rules  the  Judge  was  referring  to,  if  he  was,
    purporting to allow the appeal.  Those grounds as settled  by  the  ECO
    make the fair point that that omission amounted to  an  error  of  law.
    However, in the circumstances of the  appeal  before  the  Judge  where
    quite simply compliance with the Rules by  the  Claimant  was  not  the
    issue, the failure to provide reasons does not make any difference.

7.   Instead the  Claimant's  representatives  before  the  Judge  in  their
    skeleton argument essentially argued the matter by reference to Article
    8 in terms of restoring a family/private life between the Claimant  and
    her parents in the UK.  The  case  law  cited,  even  if  not  entirely
    apposite, nevertheless was touching upon  that  issue.   It  was  clear
    beyond doubt that the Judge  understood  the  nature  of  the  skeleton
    argument for he said at paragraph 15 of the decision that the  skeleton
    argument was very useful.  The rest of  that  paragraph  is  less  than
    entirely coherent but that does not undermine the material  facts  that
    the Judge found on the evidence particularly  that  of  the  Claimant's
    mother.  The Judge, it is fair to say,  did  not  set  out  the  public
    interest  issues  and  did  not  display   any   clear   reasoning   on
    proportionality as an issue.  Nevertheless, the Judge went on to  allow
    the appeal with reference to the Article 8 ECHR considerations that had
    been raised.

8.   The ECO's grounds on which permission was granted  do  not  attack  the
    Judge's decision on Article 8 ECHR. In the absence of the grounds being
    amended, which of course could have been  done,  I  am  left  with  the
    judge's findings. It  did  not  seem  appropriate  to  go  behind  such
    unchallenged findings. In  these  somewhat  unusual  circumstances  the
    Judge made no error of law in relation to Article 8.  The finding  that
    the  Claimant  met  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    manifestly wrong, was never an issue and made no material difference to
    the appeal as a whole.   Ms Fijiwala did try to finesse the absence of
    challenge to the Article 8 ECHR grounds by arguing a  general  lack  of
    reasons upon both the Rules and Article 8.  However, it  seemed  to  me
    that on the face of it that was not a ground of  appeal,  nor  a  point
    upon which permission was given by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   In
    those circumstances it is not open to me to interfere with that  aspect
    of the decision whatever I might think of it.

NOTICE OF DECISION

9.   For these reasons therefore I have  concluded  that  the  ECO's  appeal
    succeeds in relation to the issues raised under the Immigration  Rules.
    The Original Tribunal's decision stands in  relation  to  the  Claimant
    succeeding under Article 8 of the ECHR.

10.  I note that an anonymity order was requested of the Judge.  His  reason
    for refusing it was less than fulsome but  an  order  was  not  pursued
    before me.

11.     I regret promulgation has been delayed by the file being mislocated


Signed                                  Date 2 November 2015


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


