
[pic]
IAC-FH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: oa/02188/2013
                                                               OA/02190/2013
                                                               oa/02195/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th February 2016                |On 1st March 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                               mr hADI diallo
                              mr mAMADOU diallo
                              miss aDAMA diallo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr J Knight, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants made applications to join  their  brother,  the  sponsor
    here in the UK.  The appellants are all citizens of Guinea and the  ECO
    refused  their  applications  on  27  November  2012.   The  appellants
    appealed against that decision and their appeals were  allowed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  However that decision has subsequently  been  set
    aside as it contained a material  error of law and the appeals was  re-
    heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Monson  who  dismissed  the
    appeals under the Immigration Rules and Article 8 in  a  decision  that
    was promulgated on 30 June 2015 following a hearing at Taylor House  on
    11 June 2015.  Permission was granted to the appellants by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Fisher on 24 September 2015.

2.   The grounds seeking leave to appeal are succinct.  It is asserted  that
    Judge  Monson   misdirected   himself   because   he   considered   the
    circumstances at the date of the refusal decision and not the  date  of
    the hearing as regards Article 8 and in so  doing  did  not  take  into
    account the incidents that occurred according to the  sponsor  evidence
    in February and March 2015.

3.   The sponsor arrived in the UK in 2003 and he claimed asylum here.   His
    application was refused and in 2010 he was granted indefinite leave  to
    remain and then British citizenship in 2012.  The judge heard  evidence
    from the sponsor and he concluded that the appellants were  related  to
    the sponsor as claimed, but that the evidence relating to the sponsor's
    parents was not consistent because there was inconsistency between  the
    sponsor's oral evidence and the  information  contained  on  the  death
    certificates which were relied upon.  The judge found anomalies in  the
    documents relied upon generally and concluded that the sponsor was  not
    a reliable witness of truth.

4.   The judge properly directed himself at paragraph 46  that  he  properly
    considered the circumstances appertaining at the date  of  the  refusal
    decision and concluded that the appellants had not established that  at
    the time of the refusal decision they were  still  minors  and  in  any
    event, they had not established that there were serious and  compelling
    family or other considerations which  made  their  exclusion  from  the
    United Kingdom undesirable. Thus they could not meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  This decision is not challenged and there is
    no challenge to  the  credibility  findings.   The  judge  went  on  to
    consider Article 8 and he concluded that at the  time  of  the  refusal
    decision the  appellants  were  living  in  an  acceptable  social  and
    economic environment and that there is no evidence of neglect or  abuse
    or of unmet needs which should be catered for and that he was satisfied
    that there were in place stable arrangements for their  physical  care.
    He concluded that the refusal decision maintained the status  quo  (see
    paragraphs 50 and 51).

5.    The  challenge  to  the  decision  and   the   grant   of   permission
    misunderstands the decision of the House of Lords  in  AS  (Somalia)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 32 and  I  refer
    specifically to  paragraph  19.   The  judge  considered  the  evidence
    nevertheless in relation to incidents in 2015 and he found  as  follows
    at paragraph 43:

         "43. The police documents support the  proposition  that  there  is
             currently a feud between the Diallo  family  and  the  Bangura
             family which has led to fights between male  members  on  both
             sides on at least two occasions in the first part of 2015, the
             second of which was  in  late  March  2015  a  bar  where  the
             sponsor's male siblings were watching a football match  -  and
             so not in hiding.  The injuries sustained by the male siblings
             in an earlier fight at the beginning of February 2015 were not
             serious according to the medical evidence.   ([A]'s  claim  of
             sexual assault appears to have been rejected altogether  by  a
             police doctor following an intimate examination).  There is no
             medical evidence that the male siblings sustained any injuries
             in the fight in the bar.  The owner took them to the police in
             order to demand compensation from them for  the  damage  which
             had been caused.  He explained that he had brought them  along
             as the Bangura family were now 'on the run'.

         44.  But the police documents do not support the  sponsor's  asylum
             claim, and they do not support the  proposition  that  at  the
             time of the refusal decision  the  siblings  were  endangering
             Guinea because of a long-running feud with the Bangura family.
              The question which  is  put  to  Mr  Bangura  by  the  police
             interrogator is not that he is seeking revenge because a child
             of his was killed by the sponsor.  The suggestion  is  that  a
             child of his has been killed by the  sponsor's  siblings.   In
             response, Mr Bangura does not claim that a child  of  his  has
             been killed by the siblings or by the sponsor.  His  claim  is
             that his family has  been  responding  to  aggression  by  the
             sponsor's siblings which began as recently as 1 December 2014.
              So, despite the sponsor's efforts to characterise it as such,
             the statement  made  by  Mr  Bangura  to  the  police  is  not
             probative of the account of  past  persecution  which  he  put
             forward in 2003."

6.   The statutory regime requires the judge to consider  the  circumstances
    at the date of the decision.  However, the findings that he made  about
    the evidence relating to post decision events are not  the  subject  of
    challenge. The judge did not  accept  the  case  as  presented  by  the
    appellants and the  sponsor  relating  to  the  post-date  of  decision
    alleged incidents and the connection  between  this  evidence  and  the
    sponsor's claim for asylum.  It is noteworthy that the  judge  rejected
    the evidence relating to Mamadou Savane and Ibrahim Savane generally as
    well as evidence concerning post-decision incidents.   The  application
    is misconceived and the grounds do not disclose  an  error  of  law  in
    Judge Monson's decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 26 February 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
