
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/02220/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th March 2014                              |On 12th March 2014         |
|                                                |                           |



                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                              MR MOHAMMED RUBEL
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A M Shahjahan (instructed by Kalam Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent appeals to the Upper Tribunal, with permission,  against
    a decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Fletcher-Hill) promulgated
    on 17th January 2014 by which it allowed the Appellant's appeal against
    the Entry Clearance Officer's decision to refuse him entry clearance as
    a spouse.

 2. Although the Entry Clearance Officer is the Appellant before the  Upper
    Tribunal, I will continue to refer to the Entry  Clearance  Officer  as
    the Respondent and Mr Rubel as the Appellant for the  sake  of  clarity
    and continuity.

 3. As the application was made on 8th July 2012 the application fell to be
    considered under paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules, namely  before
    the increased maintenance requirements..

 4. By the time the matter came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  the  only
    matters in issue were whether the marriage was genuine  and  subsisting
    and whether the parties could be maintained adequately without recourse
    to public funds.

 5. In the grounds the Respondent contends  that  the  Tribunal  failed  to
    provide adequate reasons for its findings at paragraphs 37 and 38  that
    the Appellant met the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  is
    submitted  that  the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor  failed  to  provide
    sufficient documentary evidence that they had been in contact with each
    other, that evidence produced post-dated the decision and should not be
    taken into account and therefore their marriage  was  not  genuine  and
    subsisting. It is also submitted that the Tribunal  failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons why the Appellant can be adequately maintained,  given
    the issues with regard to the amount the Sponsor earns.

 6. It is true that  the  part  of  the  determination  below  the  heading
    "Consideration of the Evidence, Findings  of  Fact  and  Decision"  are
    contained in two paragraphs  only,  paragraphs  37  and  38.  At  first
    reading it might appear that those findings  are  inadequate.  However,
    when the determination is read  as  a  whole  it  is  clear  that  from
    paragraph 6 the Judge set out the history of the  application  and  the
    grounds of appeal.  She set out the issues before  the  Tribunal.  From
    paragraph 9 the Judge set out the oral evidence and the documents  that
    were before her. She records the evidence as to why the Sponsor had not
    visited her husband since returning in August 2011 after the  marriage,
    namely that they did not anticipate the process would be so lengthy but
    she was  now  planning  a  holiday   and  had  sought  leave  from  her
    employers.  The  Judge  recorded  what  appeared   at   first   to   be
    contradictory answers about the Appellant's work in Bangladesh and then
    recorded the Sponsor's explanation.

 7. The Judge recorded that the Sponsor gave evidence that they had kept in
    contact for five years by telephone and Skype using a web cam. She  did
    not have documentary evidence of this, although to be fair it would  be
    difficult to provide such evidence. She explained that the Sponsor used
    phone cards because that was the most economic way to call  Bangladesh.
    She explained how she had met her husband. The  Judge  noted  that  the
    telephone records that had been produced post-dated the decision. It is
    recorded  that  there  was  no  photographic  evidence  or  documentary
    evidence of the relationship.

 8. The Judge  referred to the evidence she  heard  from  the  Sponsor  and
    evidence from the Sponsor's brother offering  third-party  support  and
    evidence in relation to the Sponsor's income which is in excess of  the
    income support level. The  Judge  set  out  in  detail  therefore  from
    paragraph 9 to paragraph 34 the oral evidence and explanations for  the
    shortcomings in the  documentary  evidence.  She  had  the  benefit  of
    hearing from the Sponsor and at paragraph 37 said that on the basis  of
    the evidence that she had heard from  the  Sponsor  and  the  documents
    considered by the Respondent and those submitted in connection with the
    appeal she found the Sponsor to be a credible and responsible and hard-
    working young woman who she had no doubt wished to be reunited with her
    husband. She accepted the evidence that they married and lived together
    in the period after her marriage until the Sponsor returned to  the  UK
    and he accepted her evidence that she kept in touch with her husband by
    telephone and Skype. On that basis the Judge accepted that the marriage
    was genuine and subsisting. On the basis of the evidence before her and
    having heard oral evidence the Judge was entitled to make that finding.
    True it is that the finding is short but it is sufficient.

 9. The Judge goes on in the next paragraph to say that on the basis of the
    Appellant's earnings and third party support  she  was  also  satisfied
    that the maintenance requirement was met.  Again the Judge was entitled
    to accept the evidence before her

10. I therefore find that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal does
    not contain an error of law and accordingly the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 11th March 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


