

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/02970/2013




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination Promulgated |
|On 29 July 2014                        |On 4 August 2014          |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     CCM
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms P Glass (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS



       1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica.  She was born in  1996  and
          is now 18 years old.  She applied for entry clearance as  a  child
          of a person settled in the United Kingdom (UK) on 10  August  2012
          when she was 16 years old.  In a decision dated  5  November  2012
          the respondent refused to grant the appellant entry clearance.



       2. I have made an anonymity order because this determination  relates
          to sensitive matters during the appellant's minority.



Procedural history



       3. This is a matter that has previously  been  considered  by  First-
          tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy in a determination promulgated  on  29
          April 2014.   The Judge made clear findings of fact and  dismissed
          the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules and  Article  8
          of the ECHR.




       4. The appellant appealed  against  this  decision  in  wide  ranging
          grounds of appeal.  When granting permission to appeal on  2  June
          2014 First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  identified  one  arguable
          error of law - Judge Herlihy did not consider the  best  interests
          of the appellant in accordance with the guidance  in  Mundeba  (s.
          55 and para. 297(1)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC).

       5. The matter now comes before me  to  decide  whether  or  not  the
          determination contains an error of law.

Hearing

       6. Ms Glass asked me to find that the Judge  had  erred  in  law  in
          failing  to  consider  the  appellant's  best  interests  and  in
          reaching her findings on  297(i)(f).   She  however  focused  her
          attention on the appellant's best interests in light of the grant
          of permission and argued that I should  remake  the  decision  by
          allowing the appeal under Article 8 because of a  combination  of
          factors in this case including inter alia the family life of  the
          sponsor, his wife and son in the UK, the fact that there had been
          neglect of the appellant in the past, the  grandmother's  health,
          and the assertion that the appellant did not have a real home  in
          Jamaica.

       7. Mr Whitwell asked me to find that there had not been no error  of
          law because the Judge had considered best interests when  he  was
          considering the relevant circumstances under 297(i)(f).

       8. I reserved my decision, which I now provide with reasons.





Findings

Sole responsibility

       9. For the  avoidance  of  doubt  I  address  this  issue.   Although
          permission to appeal was not granted on this  point  at  times  Ms
          Glass's submissions on best interests strayed into this issue.   I
          have no doubt that Judge Andrew  was  correct  to  find  only  one
          arguable error of law.  The determination is a detailed one.   The
          Judge was entitled to find that the  appellant's  father  did  not
          have sole responsibility for her for the reasons  that  have  been
          provided.  The Judge was prepared to make  a  number  of  findings
          supportive of the appellant's case (para 6.3) but was entitled  to
          find  that  the  appellant's  father  at  most   retained   shared
          responsibility with her grandmother  (para  6.5).   The  appellant
          has lived with her grandmother for a very  lengthy  period  (since
          she was seven  months  old).   Although  there  has  been  regular
          contact with her father they have  only  seen  each  other  for  8
          weeks since she was five years old (when he  stopped  living  with
          her in order to reside in the UK).

297(1)(f)

      10. The Judge was also entitled to find  that  the  evidence  did  not
          establish that there were serious and compelling family  or  other
          considerations which would make the  exclusion  of  the  appellant
          unreasonable for the reasons that have been provided  (para  6.6).
          Ms Glass submitted that the  Judge  did  not  properly  take  into
          account the grandmother's medical condition.  The Judge  expressly
          took into account that evidence and  was  entitled  to  find  that
          there was no evidence that  her  medical  condition  rendered  her
          medically unable to care  for  the  appellant.   On  the  evidence
          available it was fully open to the  Judge  to  conclude  that  the
          threshold in Paragraph 297(1)(f) had not been met.

Best interests / Article 8

      11. I accept  that  the  Judge  has  not  expressly  referred  to  the
          appellant's best interests.  When the determination  is  carefully
          considered as a whole I am satisfied  that  the  Judge  considered
          all  the  relevant  evidence  and  had  a  full  picture  of   the
          appellant's  circumstances  including  her  best   interests   and
          welfare, when carrying out the proportionality exercise.   Mundeba
          (supra) at [36 and 37] makes it clear that  an  application  under
          297(i)(f) as to whether there are family or  other  considerations
          making the child's exclusion undesirable  inevitably  involves  an
          assessment  of  what  the  child's  best  interests  and   welfare
          require.   The  Judge  carefully  weighed  a  number  of   matters
          relevant to the appellant's welfare and best interests both  under
          297(1)(f) (para 6.6) and under Article 8 of the ECHR  (para  8.6):
          (i) the appellant was living for nearly the entirety of  her  life
          with her grandmother and continued to do so; (ii) at the  date  of
          decision the appellant was an  older  child   and  required  'less
          hands-on  assistance';  (iii)  in  any  event  there  were  others
          available to provide assistance; (iv) the appellant  received  the
          emotional  and  financial  support  from  her  father  and   would
          continue to do so;  (v)  although  the  appellant  has  a  father,
          stepmother and brother in the UK she has seen her father for  very
          limited periods and has never met his wife  and  young  son;  (vi)
          the appellant enjoyed good health; (vi) there was  an  absence  of
          compassionate and compelling circumstances in which the  appellant
          is currently living.

      12. Ms Glass asked me to note  that  as  a  starting  point  the  best
          interests of a child would normally be served by  a  child  living
          with one of its  parents.   However  as  pointed  out  in  Mundeba
          (supra) at [38] continuity of residence is another  factor  as  is
          change in the place of residence where a child has grown up for  a
          number of years when socially aware.  The Judge  plainly  regarded
          continuity of residence with  grandmother  as  important  in  this
          case.   Ms  Glass's  skeleton  argument  urged  the  Tribunal   to
          "reunite" the family.  However the appellant has never lived  with
          her father's family in the UK or anywhere else.   Indeed  she  has
          not lived with her father since she was five and has  consistently
          lived with her grandmother since a baby.

      13. Even if I am wrong in my assessment that the Judge has  not  erred
          in failing to expressly address best interests, I  would  not  set
          the decision aside.  Taking the Judge's findings of fact at  their
          highest, she is being looked  after  by  a  grandmother  that  has
          always looked after and she continues to enjoy  support  from  her
          father.  This is a case in which the appellant's father  has  seen
          his daughter infrequently since she  turned  five.   This  is  not
          case in which the appellant is being deprived of a reunion with  a
          recent carer or needs admission to supply unmet  needs.   Although
          no doubt it might be beneficial for the appellant to see  more  of
          her father and his new family, relocation to the UK would  mean  a
          change in her living arrangements and leaving behind her  life  in
          Jamaica and her grandmother in circumstances  where  the  evidence
          does not demonstrate any risk of harm there.

      14. I find that there was no error of law in the  Judge's  conclusions
          and in any event no  material  one  as  taking  the  case  at  its
          highest I would have reached the same decision  on  Article  8  on
          the material available.


Decision

      15. I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  I
          dismiss the appellant's appeal.

Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
30 July 2014
