
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03319/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 October 2016                    |On 05 October 2016                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                           MR HUSSEIN YUSUF SHARIF
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Amina Ali Awad (sponsor)
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

   1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  K
      Swinnerton, promulgated on 10 February 2016. Permission to appeal  was
      granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies on 17 August 2016.

Anonymity

   2. No direction has been made previously, and there is no reason for  one
      now

Background

   3. On 13 November 2014, the appellant sought leave to  enter  the  United
      Kingdom as the partner of a British citizen, namely  Amina  Ali  Awad,
      hereinafter referred to as the sponsor.

   4. That application was refused on 13 January 2015 as the Entry Clearance
      Officer (ECO) did not accept that the appellant met  the  suitability,
      eligibility, financial or English language requirements of the  Rules.
      The ECO considered Article 8  of  the  ECHR  but  concluded  that  the
      appellant's exclusion from the United Kingdom was proportionate.

   5. The appellant's grounds of appeal argued that the Rules were met  save
      for the English language requirement, in relation to which he  claimed
      an exemption because there were no English language testing facilities
      in Somaliland. Supporting documents were enclosed.

   6. The ECO's decision was reviewed by an Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) on
      31 July 2015 however, the original decision was maintained in full.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

   7. At the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  sponsor  gave
      evidence and submissions were made  to  the  effect  that  the  appeal
      should be allowed under Article 8, it appearing to  be  conceded  that
      specified evidence, in the form of payslips, had not  been  submitted.
      The judge  concluded  that  the  Rules  were  not  met  and  that  the
      respondent's decision was not disproportionate.

The grounds of appeal

   8. The grounds of appeal in support of the  application  argued  firstly,
      that the appellant met the financial requirements, in  particular,  in
      that six months' worth of payslips were submitted with the application
      in relation to the sponsor's  two  jobs;  secondly  that  the  judge's
      decision lacked detail and reasoning; thirdly that the judge failed to
      consider the appellant's family life with the sponsor and lastly, that
      the judge did not consider  the  sponsor's  ability  to  maintain  and
      accommodate the appellant.

   9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that  it  was  "arguable
      that the findings and reasons made by the Judge are so brief  that  he
      did not properly consider the evidence that was before him and to have
      disregarded evidence."

  10. The respondent's Rule 24  response,  received  on  2  September  2016,
      indicated that the appeal was opposed.  The said response  noted  that
      the concession recorded by the judge at [48] of the decision  appeared
      to be dispositive of the appeal. Mention was made of the  other  bases
      for refusal with which the grounds did not take issue. It was said  to
      be hard to see how the judge's Article 8 decision was  material  in  a
      claim which stood or fell with the claim under the Rules.



The hearing

  11.  The  sponsor  attended  the  hearing  unrepresented  and  unable   to
      communicate in English to the extent required to argue the appellant's
      case. The matter was put back in the list in order to enable a  Somali
      interpreter to be arranged.

  12. The sponsor maintained that she had  provided  payslips  dating  until
      immediately prior to the application to her previous  representatives.
      She stated that these had not all been sent with the  application  but
      that her previous representatives had told her that they had sent them
      to the ECO following a request for further documents. With  regard  to
      the confirmation letter from each of her two employers, she had  never
      been asked to provide these. Furthermore, she was  often,  albeit  not
      always, paid in cash by her employer. In relation to  Article  8,  she
      had told the judge about her difficult circumstances, in that she  had
      been widowed shortly after arriving in  the  United  Kingdom  and  had
      raised four children alone. In addition, she had emphasised  that  she
      was keeping in contact with the appellant; was sending him  money  and
      that she was able to  maintain  and  accommodate  him  in  the  United
      Kingdom. The sponsor also mentioned that  she  was  diagnosed  with  a
      brain tumour, which was operated on earlier this year.  The  diagnosis
      post-dated the ECO's decision.

  13. For her part, Ms Ahmed  identified  two  issues.  The  first  was  the
      appellant's ability to meet the Immigration Rules in view of the  fact
      that the employers' letters were never requested and therefore it  was
      difficult to see how the judge could have found that  the  Rules  were
      met. In relation to Article 8 outside the Rules, she accepted that his
      reasoning was very brief but contended that his findings were open  to
      him.

Decision on error of law

  14. At the end of the hearing, I announced  that  the  judge  had  made  a
      material error of law on the following basis.

  15. The judge's finding that the Rules were not met, in  relation  to  the
      specified evidence were ultimately correct. While the sponsor contends
      that she provided all the payslips  required,  she  accepts  that  the
      employers' letters were not. Therefore, any  error  by  the  judge  in
      dealing with the payslips was not material as  the  appeal  could  not
      have succeeded under the Rules in any event.

  16. The judge's error relates to the human rights claim outside the Rules.
      His findings which amount to three paragraphs of one sentence  between
      [49] and [51] of the decision and reasons  are  devoid  of  detail  or
      analysis. It is unclear whether  he  accepts  there  was  family  life
      between the appellant and sponsor. This is important, given the  ECO's
      view  that  the  relationship  was   not   genuine   and   subsisting.
      Furthermore,  there  is  a  lack  of  reference   to   the   sponsor's
      circumstances as set out in her witness  statement  in  the  extremely
      limited proportionality assessment that there was. Those circumstances
      include her bereavement and struggles as a single mother of four.  One
      of the three sentences refers to the sponsor's surgery, yet  this  was
      not a relevant issue given that at the time of the  visa  application,
      she had yet to be diagnosed with this illness.

  17. There is also the matter of the extent to which the Rules were not met
      which is relevant to  the  proportionality  assessment.  Clearly,  the
      judge  was  wrong  to  say  that  this  matter  was  not  in  dispute.
      Regardless of counsel's apparent concession,  the  sponsor's  evidence
      was that the Rules were met in large part. There is no  assessment  by
      the judge of the extent to which  the  Rules  were  met,  despite  the
      wealth of supporting evidence in relation  to  the  sponsor's  income,
      which if accepted was above the minimum maintenance threshold.

  18. For the foregoing reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
      set aside, with no  findings  preserved.  I  considered  remaking  the
      decision however, the  sponsor  needed  to  leave  for  work  and  she
      indicated that  she  had  additional  documents  at  home  which  were
      relevant to the matter.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross, with a time estimate of 2 hours by any judge except  First-
tier Tribunal Judge K Swinnerton. A Somali interpreter is required.


Signed                              Date: 4 October 2016

T Kamara
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


