

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03371/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Phoenix House, Bradford              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17th August 2015                           |On 30th December 2015        |
|And by video link at Field House              |                             |
|On 14th December 2015                         |                             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SOUTHERN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     G J
                           (Anonymity order made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Cyprus
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Syed, legal representative, The Taylor
Partnership on 17th August 2015
For the Respondent:    Ms S Petterson on17th August 2015 and by Mr M
Diwnycz on 14th December 2015, Senior Home Office Presenting Officers

                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. The appellant sought, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  a
        decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly dismissing an appeal by
        Ms J against a decision refusing her entry  clearance  as  a  'pre-
        flight  partner  of  a  refugee'  under  paragraph  352AA  of   the
        Immigration Rules. Permission was also granted on the  ground  that
        the judge had failed to adequately consider Article 8 and that  the
        judge  had  failed  to  adequately  consider  the  application   in
        accordance with paragraph 319O of the immigration Rules.


     2. Before us on 17th August 2015 Mr  Syed  withdrew  reliance  on  the
        appellant's grounds seeking permission to appeal  the  decision  on
        Article 8 and under paragraph 319O of the  Immigration  Rules.  The
        appeal before us was thus limited, on the  grounds  pleaded,  to  a
        challenge to the findings and conclusion of the judge in respect of
        the application under paragraph 352AA.


        Background


     3. Ms J, a Zimbabwean citizen studying in Cyprus at the  date  of  the
        decision, is the unmarried  partner  of  J  M,  also  a  Zimbabwean
        citizen, who is recognised as a refugee in the  UK  with  leave  to
        remain until 19th September 2017.


     4. Judge Kelly  made the following findings of fact  which  now  stand
        unchallenged:


        a) GJ, who we shall refer to as Ms J hereafter, had not, as alleged
           by the SSHD,  used  deception  in  a  previous  entry  clearance
           application. Therefore her appeal against the mandatory  refusal
           under paragraph 320(7B) Immigration Rules was allowed.
        b) Ms J and Mr M entered into a customary marriage in South  Africa
           in October 2007 and began to live together in November 2007. The
           couple cohabited in a relationship akin to marriage for a period
           in excess of two years between November 2007 and December 2009.
        c) Mr M left Zimbabwe and moved to South Africa in  December  2003;
           he travelled to the UK in June 2012 for an interview in  the  UK
           to join the British Army.
        d) Neither Mr M nor Ms J were forced to flee South  Africa  whether
           for reasons of persecution or otherwise.
        e) Ms J left South Africa in December 2009 and went  to  Cyprus  to
           study.


     5. The evidence upon which Mr M  was  recognised  as  a  refugee  was,
        according to the Statement of Evidence Form ("SEF") submitted in Ms
        J's appeal, that on arriving in the UK he  had  received  telephone
        calls from his family who warned him that Zanu  elements  in  South
        Africa and Zimbabwe were threatening to kill  him  because  of  his
        intention to join the British Army. He refers in  his  SEF  to  his
        intention, prior to hearing of those threats,  to  return  back  to
        live and work in South Africa.

      Error of Law

     6. Mr Syed relied upon AA (Marriage - country of Nationality)  Somalia
        [2004] UKIAT 00031. He submitted, even though the evidence from his
        SEF was clearly to the contrary, that Mr M had  fled  South  Africa
        because of a fear of persecution; that South Africa was his country
        of former habitual residence; and that because the couple were in a
        relationship akin to marriage for a period in  excess  of  2  years
        prior to Mr M fleeing South Africa,  Ms  J  fell  within  paragraph
        352AA(iii)  because:


             " the relationship existed before the  person  granted  asylum
             left the country of his former habitual residence in order  to
             seek asylum"


     7. AA considers the question of habitual residence and  the  House  of
        Lords decision in Nessa v Chief Adjudication  Officer  [1999]  UKHL
        41. As was observed in AA [36]:


             "...In that case, whilst not coming  to  the  conclusion  that
             "ordinary residence" and "habitual residence" were synonymous,
             their Lordships found that  there  was  a  degree  of  overlap
             .....That expression connoted "residence in a place with  some
             degree of continuity and apart from  accidental  or  temporary
             absences."


     8. Paragraph 352AA reads as follows:


        352AA. The requirements to be met by  a  person  seeking  leave  to
        enter or remain in the United Kingdom as the unmarried or the same-
        sex partner of a refugee are that:
        (i) the applicant is the unmarried or same-sex partner of a  person
        who is currently  a  refugee  granted  status  as  such  under  the
        immigration rules in the United Kingdom and was granted that status
        in the UK on or after 9th October 2006; and
        (ii) the parties have been living together in a  relationship  akin
        to either a marriage or a civil partnership which has subsisted for
        two years or more; and
        (iii) the relationship existed before  the  person  granted  asylum
        left the country of his former habitual residence in order to  seek
        asylum; and
        (iv) the applicant would not be excluded from protection by  virtue
        of paragraph 334(iii) or
        (iv) of these Rules or article 1F of the Geneva  Convention  if  he
        were to seek asylum in his own right; and
        (v) each of the parties intends to live permanently with the  other
        as his or her unmarried or same-sex partner and the relationship is
        subsisting; and
        (vi) the parties are not involved in a consanguineous  relationship
        with one another; and
        (vii) if seeking leave to enter, the applicant holds a valid United
        Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity.


     9. Mr M had been resident in South Africa  since  December  2003.  His
        evidence in his SEF was that he was living and  working  there  and
        although he suggested that he may not have had a  residence  permit
        he did not assert that he was living there unlawfully  or  that  he
        was at risk of removal or deportation to Zimbabwe. He and Ms J  had
        cohabited there for two years and there was no indication that they
        had had any problems from the authorities. Judge Kelly  found  that
        the reference to 'habitual residence in paragraph 352AA referred to
        and was defined by the Refugee Convention and was  a  term  of  art
        applied where appropriate to stateless individuals'.


    10. We do not agree.  In  the  context  of  paragraph  352AA  the  term
        habitual residence  is  a  term  which  is  to  be  interpreted  in
        accordance with the normal use and meaning of the  words  and  this
        means, as explained in  Nessa, "residence  in  a  place  with  some
        degree  of  continuity  and  apart  from  accidental  or  temporary
        absences". For these reasons we are satisfied that  the  First-tier
        Tribunal judge erred in law in finding that Mr M was not habitually
        resident in South Africa. We are reinforced  in that conclusion  by
        the finding in AA that the  appellant  in  that  appeal,  a  Somali
        national, had lived in Ethiopia  for  some  three  years  prior  to
        leaving Ethiopia to claim asylum in the UK and had  been  found  to
        have been habitually resident in Ethiopia. We are also  aware  that
        the origin of the Rule lies in the Final Act of the United  Nations
        Conference on the Status of  Refugees  and  Stateless  Persons.  As
        referred to in AA [19]


             "[19]...As set out in Annex  I  of  the  UNHCR  Handbook,  the
             Conference, considering that the family was "the  natural  and
             fundamental group of society" and that unity of the family was
             "an  essential  right  of  the   refugee"   recommended   that
             Governments...take the necessary measures for  the  protection
             of a refugee's family, especially with a view  to  ...ensuring
             that  the  unity  of  the  refugee's  family   is   maintained
             particularly in  cases  where  the  head  of  the  family  has
             fulfilled  the  necessary  conditions  for  admission   to   a
             particular country".
             [20] Prior to the coming into force of paragraph  352A.....the
             Government of the United Kingdom had sought to give effect  to
             the recommendation  of  the  Conference  by  means  of  policy
             statements."


    11. Mr M did not however flee South Africa to claim asylum in  the  UK.
        He left South Africa with the intention of returning  there,  after
        his interview to join the British Army had taken place in  the  UK.
        It is therefore plain that Ms J does not meet 352AA(iii) - Mr M did
        not leave the country of his former habitual residence in order  to
        seek  asylum  (our  emphasis).   [39]   of   AA   reinforces   that
        interpretation of 352AA(iii) (albeit in an earlier version  of  the
        rule) because the sponsor in that case left Ethiopia "in  order  to
        seek asylum".


    12. Paragraph 352AA  exists  to  enable  family  reunion  for  families
        fractured because circumstances have occurred which have  caused  a
        person to flee persecution, leaving close  family  members  behind.
        The Rule requires the fracture in the family  to  have  been  as  a
        direct result of the persecution, not because of some event in  the
        future  which  subsequently  led  to  that  disturbance  in  family
        relations.


    13. In  consequence  therefore  Judge  Kelly  arrived  at  the  correct
        conclusion but for the wrong reasons. He dismissed  the  appeal  on
        the basis that the sponsor had  not  been  habitually  resident  in
        South Africa and the couple had not cohabited in Zimbabwe;  whereas
        on the proper interpretation of the Rule, the  appeal  fell  to  be
        dismissed on the basis that the appellant simply did not  meet  the
        requirements of the paragraph 352AA. Thus, although the judge  made
        an error of law, as the outcome, for different reasons,  was  bound
        to be the same, his error was not a material one.


    14. That however is not a complete answer to this appeal.


    15. Although it was effectively conceded by Mr Syed that Ms J could not
        succeed in her appeal under  the  Rules,  the  First-tier  tribunal
        judge had  not  considered  whether  there  was  a  policy  of  the
        respondent that might benefit her. The Tribunal invited submissions
        from both parties as to whether the position of refugees sur  place
        was adequately accommodated by the  framework  of  the  immigration
        rules and if not whether there was a relevant published  policy  to
        deal with the apparent lacuna in the rules. The rules  do  not,  on
        their face, appear to make any provision for spouses or partners of
        sur place refugees. There is no reason immediately apparent why the
        spouses/partners of those entitled to be recognised as refugees  on
        the basis of a sur place claim should be  treated  less  favourably
        than those whose need to flee  persecution  to  seek  international
        protection arose while still in their country of nationality.


    16.  When asked by the Tribunal if there was such a policy Mr Syed said
        he  thought  there  was  but  didn't  know  what  it  said.  It  is
        regrettable that a legal representative seeks to argue a  case  not
        only by attempting to make submissions that did not  form  part  of
        the sponsor's evidence as a consequence of which he was  recognised
        as a refugee but also by failing to research adequately and present
        his client's case  both  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  in
        seeking  permission  to  appeal.  Although  not  pleaded,  we  were
        concerned to establish the correct position  and  adjourned  for  a
        short time to enable Ms Petterson to see  if  she  could  establish
        whether there was a relevant policy. Ms Petterson, quite  properly,
        raised no objection to the Tribunal pursuing this line  of  enquiry
        and herself tried to identify the relevant policy but  was  unable,
        given the resources available to her, to do so.


    17. Fortunately, the Tribunal itself was able to obtain a copy  of  the
        respondent's policy: the Asylum Policy and  Visas  and  Immigration
        Operational  Guidance/Asylum  Instructions  on  how  UK  Visas  and
        Immigration  makes  decisions  about  asylum/Family  Reunion  which
        states - to the extent relevant:


             2.2 Family reunion entitlements (leave not status)
             Successful family reunion applicants will be granted leave  in
             line with the sponsor but they will not be granted  status  in
             line as they themselves  are  not  necessarily  recognised  as
             refugees.  This leave will be granted to expire  at  the  same
             time as the sponsor's  leave  expires.   If  the  sponsor  has
             indefinite leave to remain  (ILR),  the  successful  applicant
             will be granted ILR in line.
             ....


              2.4 Refugees sur place
             A "refugee  sur  place"   is  someone  who  falls  within  the
             Convention definition of a refugee some time after  they  left
             their home  country  or  place  of  habitual  residence.   For
             instance, a person already outside  their  country  of  origin
             when a change of circumstances occurs in  their  home  country
             which gives rise to a well-founded fear of persecution  for  a
             Convention reason.
             Individuals who are granted  refugee  status  or  humanitarian
             protection on  sur  place  grounds  are  eligible  for  family
             reunion.  For such individuals, as long as the family unit was
             formed before the claim of asylum, it will be treated as 'pre-
             flight'.


    18. The policy enables the respondent  to  consider  a  family  reunion
        application where the sponsor is a sur place refugee in  accordance
        with the requirements of paragraph 352AA of the Immigration Rules -
        see paragraph 8 above.


    19. Consideration in all sur place cases should be given to whether the
        requirements of the Rules are met (save  for  the  last  clause  of
        352AA(iii) - leaving in order to seek  asylum).  The  fact  that  a
        person is the unmarried or same-sex partner of a sur place  refugee
        (or indeed the spouse or civil partner who would be covered by  the
        policy and have to meet rule 352A) does not, of itself,  result  in
        the grant of entry clearance or leave to remain. In the case of sur
        place refugees this would include  consideration  of  the  reasons,
        circumstances and intentions resulting in  the  separation  of  the
        family when and after the sponsoring refugee left  his/her  country
        of former habitual residence and thus whether the family unit meets
        the requirements of 352AA(v) (or 352A(iv)).


    20.  Where the policy has not been considered and consideration has not
        been given to all the requirements of paragraph 352AA (or 352A) the
        Tribunal will have to be satisfied whether  or  not  the  appellant
        meets the requirements of paragraph 322AA (or 322A).  There  is  no
        discretion imported into the policy or the Rule and  thus  this  is
        not a case where AG and others  (Policies;  executive  discretions;
        Tribunal's powers) Kosovo [2007] UKAIT 00082 applies.


    21. In so far as Ms J is  concerned,  it  is  plain  from  Mr  M's  SEF
        evidence, as accepted by the respondent because he  was  recognised
        as a refugee, that he was a refugee sur place. Judge Kelly was  not
        provided with a copy of the relevant  policy  and  it  appears  the
        appellant's appeal was argued on a basis that could not, given that
        Mr M is a sur place refugee,  succeed.  Nevertheless  there  is  no
        indication that Ms J's application  was  considered  by  the  Entry
        Clearance Officer in accordance  with  the  respondent's  published
        policy.  The  decision  to  refuse  her  entry  clearance  is   not
        sustainable because a decision that is taken without an  applicable
        policy being taken into account is an unlawful one. Accordingly  we
        are satisfied that, when the decision of Judge Kelly is  considered
        as a whole, it is plain that his decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
        discloses material legal error.  Of course the appeal before us was
        brought under the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
        before it was amended by the Immigration Act 2014.


    22. In summary therefore, the Immigration Rules provide only for family
        reunion of a pre-flight spouse/partner of a refugee, not of  a  sur
        place refugee. The Rules  cannot  be  'read  down'  to  accommodate
        family reunion for sur  place  refugees.  The  respondent's  policy
        enables the wide variety of circumstances  that  may  result  in  a
        person being recognised as a refugee sur place to be considered  by
        the respondent in reaching her decision. The Tribunal is  required,
        in determining an appeal, to take account of a relevant policy.


    23. We therefore set aside the decision of Judge Kelly and will  remake
        the decision. We sent out various directions and on  14th  December
        the matter was listed for hearing of oral evidence and submissions.



     REMADE DECISION    ON 14th DECEMBER 2015

    24. On 14th December 2015 the appellant was not legally represented and
        we heard from the sponsor on her behalf and Mr  Diwnycz  via  video
        link. Mr M had filed a further  witness  statement,  as  previously
        directed in which he confirmed the level of contact claimed between
        him and Ms M and the birth of their baby  on  16th  February  2015.
        Also filed was a copy of the baby's birth certificate naming  MR  M
        as the father and copies of  pages  from  his  passport  showing  a
        number of visits to Cyprus since he obtained his travel document in
        June 2013.


    25. As we said at the hearing on 17th August 2015, the findings of fact
        set out in paragraph 4 above are preserved.


    26. We indicated to both parties that our  view  was  that  the  appeal
        should be allowed as not in  accordance  with  the  law  given  the
        failure of  the  respondent  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  take  a
        decision  taking  account  of  the  policy  referred  to  above  in
        paragraph 17.


    27. We discussed with the parties whether we should hear evidence  with
        regard to the subsistence of the relationship and the intention  of
        the parties to live together. Given the age  of  the  decision  the
        subject of the appeal and the birth of the baby we  suggested  that
        it may well be more appropriate for the respondent Entry  Clearance
        Officer to consider the subsistence of  the  relationship  and  the
        couple's intentions (together with  the  preserved  findings)  when
        considering the application in accordance with  the  policy  rather
        than for us to reach a  decision  on  the  rather  sparse  evidence
        before us as to a situation which is, it appears, so  different  to
        the current situation. The Entry Clearance Officer  will  be  in  a
        better position than us to consider the evidence as it  is  now  in
        this particular case and will in any event have  to  take  a  fresh
        decision.


    28. Both parties agreed to this course of action.


    29. Accordingly we allow the appeal  on  the  basis  that  this  was  a
        decision made not in accordance with the law.


      Conclusion


    30.  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve
        the making of an error on a point of law.


    31. We set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.


    32.  We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing the appeal,  the
        decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  having  been  not  in
        accordance with the law.

[pic]
                                    Date 16th December 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
