

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03482/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Field House                                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|11 March 2014                                 |13 March 2014                |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                   Zaheer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         The Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. At the request of the Home Office, I have decided to determine  this
       appeal without a hearing.


    2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and the husband of a  British
       national. He  sought  entry  clearance  by  way  of  an  application
       submitted prior to changes made to the Immigration Rules which  were
       introduced on 9 July 2012. In order to  meet  the  English  language
       requirements,  the  appellant   submitted   two   English   language
       certificates, one meeting the requirements  for  listening  and  the
       other meeting the requirements for speaking. The two  elements  were
       the subject of two separate certificates. The respondent took  issue
       with the provision of two certificates.


    3. By a letter dated 25 February  2014,  a  member  of  the  Specialist
       Appeals Team on behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  notified  the
       tribunal in the following terms


             "Following  receipt  of  the  application  for  permission  to
             appeal, and having consulted policy advice on the use  of  the
             multiple English language certificates prior to the change  in
             the Rules on 1 October 2013, the respondent does not  wish  to
             challenge this further, and considers that the case should  be
             returned to the ECO to consider issuing a visa.
             It is considered to be Tribunal can issue a  determination  to
             this effect without the need for a further oral hearing.""


    4. I construe this to mean that the respondent is  conceding  that  the
       First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error on a point of law  and  that
       the appeal should be allowed. There is implicit in the  respondent's
       letter a concession  that  the  use  of  multiple  English  language
       certificates was permissible. Accordingly, I allow the appeal  under
       the Immigration Rules. It is no longer open  to  the  respondent  to
       refuse entry clearance  on  the  basis  that  two  English  language
       certificates were provided.


    5. Further, in the grounds of appeal, it is contended that  the  First-
       tier Tribunal Judge erred in concluding that the appellant  did  not
       meet the requirements of paragraph 281. This is  not  challenged  in
       the response by the respondent under Rule 24 set out in  the  letter
       of 25 February 2014. Accordingly, I find that the appellant did meet
       those requirements.

DECISION

    The Judge made an error on a point of law and I re-make the decision in
    the following terms:


        The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.


                                    [pic]
                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL







