
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/03429/2014


                            The Immigration Acts


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 11 August 2015                    |On 16 September 2015                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                     Upper Tribunal Judge Edward Jacobs


                                   BETWEEN

                                 Prakash Rai
                          Anonymity Order Not Made
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M A Rana of counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Avory


                      Decision and Reasons for Decision

    History and background


Mr Rai was born on 16 June 1989 and is Nepalese. He lives  in  Nepal,  where
he is a student studying for a degree in Business Studies His  parents  live
in the United Kingdom, as do all his  family  members.  His  father  is  his
sponsor and works as a security officer, having had a  distinguished  career
in the British Army. He is able to send money to his  son  and  to  maintain
some contact by telephone.

On 20 January 2014, Mr Rai applied for entry  clearance  to  settle  in  the
United Kingdom. This was refused on 11 February 2014. Mr Rai  exercised  his
right of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  tribunal  dismissed  the
appeal, but gave Mr Rai permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

At the hearing, Mr Rana argued on his behalf that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
had gone wrong in law in three respects:

       . by overlooking the methods by which communication happens nowadays;

       . by failing to adjourn;

       . by failing to make appropriate allowance for the historic injustice
         done to Ghurkhas.

We take his arguments in that order.

    Modern methods of communication


    The argument


The sponsor, Mr Rai, attended the First-tier Tribunal and gave evidence.  He
told the judge that he kept in touch with his son by  mobile  phone,  paying
by top up cards. The judge found that 'in  the  absence  of  any  supporting
evidence of contact I do not accept that they have retained regular  contact
since his parent's departure.' Mr Rana argued that the judge had  failed  to
take account of the modern methods of communication, which do  not  generate
evidence that Mr Rai could have produced. We reject Mr Rana's argument.

    Analysis


The Upper Tribunal's jurisdiction is limited initially to issues of law.  An
appeal to this tribunal lies on 'any point of law arising  from  a  decision
made by the First-tier Tribunal' (section 11(1)  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts
and Enforcement Act 2007). And it can only set aside  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal if 'the making of the decision  concerned  involved  the
making of an error on a point of law' (section  12(1)).  The  assessment  of
the evidence  is  essentially  a  matter  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  A
disagreement with the way that the tribunal assessed the evidence  does  not
of itself show an error of law. The Upper Tribunal has power to re-make  the
decision  rather  than   remit   it   to   the   First-tier   Tribunal   for
reconsideration (section 12(2)(b)(ii)) and, in doing so, it 'may  make  such
findings of fact as it considers appropriate' (section 12(4)(b)). But  those
powers do not arise unless and until the Upper Tribunal sets the  First-tier
Tribunal's decision aside, and it can only do that for  error  of  law,  not
for an error of fact.

On analysis, Mr Rana's argument is no more than a challenge to the way  that
the judge assessed the evidence given by the sponsor, Mr Rai. The judge  was
aware of the method of payment used by Mr Rai, because he told the judge  in
his oral evidence, and the judge must surely have  understood  that  top  up
cards do not generate evidence. The  passage  we  have  quoted  records  the
judge's conclusion having heard the whole of the evidence and had  a  chance
to judge Mr Rai's reliability as a witness.  The  passage  has  to  be  read
against that background. It is not, as Mr Rana argued, evidence  of  a  lack
of understanding on the judge's part. Rather, it is evidence of the  judge's
overall conclusion after hearing the evidence that on this issue he was  not
persuaded that  regular  contact  had  been  maintained  without  supporting
evidence. On  this  analysis,  Mr  Rana's  argument  is  outside  the  Upper
Tribunal's jurisdiction.

    The refusal to adjourn


    The arguments


Mr Rana argued that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  have  adjourned  the
hearing. There were a number of strands to this argument.  Mr  Rai  had  not
prepared the case and told the judge so. He had recently obtained funds  for
a  representative  and  was  thinking  of  instructing  one.  He  was  at  a
disadvantage in not being represented and doubly disadvantaged by having  to
act through an interpreter. He needed to obtain evidence in support  of  his
case that he had provided financial support for his son.  Finally,  Mr  Rana
emphasised that an adjournment would not prejudice the Home  Office  in  any
way.

Mr Avory argued that: (i) Mr Rai had had sufficient time to get his case  in
order; (ii) the tribunal had taken all relevant factors  into  account  that
were relevant to the adjournment; and (iii) it had, in any  event,  accepted
that Mr Rai had sent money to his son.

We reject Mr Rana's argument and accept Mr Avory's.

    The rules of procedure


These are the relevant provisions  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier
Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chambers) Rules 2014 (SI No 2604):

    2 Overriding objective and parties' obligation to co-operate  with  the
         Upper Tribunal

    (1)    The overriding  objective  of  these  Rules  is  to  enable  the
         Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.

    (2)    Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-

         (a)      dealing with the case in ways which are  proportionate  to
             the importance of the case, the complexity of the issues,  the
             anticipated costs and the resources of the parties;

         (b)      avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility  in
             the proceedings;

         (c)      ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are able
             to participate fully in the proceedings;

         (d)      using any special expertise of the  Tribunal  effectively;
             and

         (e)       avoiding  delay,  so  far  as  compatible   with   proper
             consideration of the issues.

    (3)    The  Tribunal  must  seek  to  give  effect  to  the  overriding
         objective when it-

         (a)      exercises any power under these Rules; or

         (b)      interprets any rule or practice direction.

    (4)    Parties must-

         (a)       help  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  further  the   overriding
             objective; and

         (b)      co-operate with the Tribunal generally.

    4 Case management powers

    (1)    Subject to  the  provisions  of  the  2007  Act  and  any  other
         enactment, the Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.

    (2)    The Tribunal may give a direction in relation to the conduct  or
         disposal  of  proceedings  at  any  time,  including  a   direction
         amending, suspending or setting aside an earlier direction.

    (3)    In particular, and without restricting  the  general  powers  in
         paragraphs (1) and (2), the Tribunal may-

         ...

         (h)      adjourn or postpone a hearing;

    10     Representatives

    (1)    A party may be represented by any  person  not  prohibited  from
         representing by section 84 of the 1999 Act.

    Analysis


Rule 4(3)(h) confers on the First-tier  Tribunal  the  power  to  adjourn  a
hearing. That power must be exercised judicially and in particular  it  must
be exercised in a manner  that  seeks  to  give  effect  to  the  overriding
objective. There are a number of elements to that objective.  One  important
element is participation in the proceedings. This  is  given  more  concrete
expression in the right for a party to appoint a  representative.  But  that
is not all there is to the overriding  objective.  The  tribunal  must  also
seek to avoid delay and to devote a proportionate time to each case,  taking
account of the complexity  of  the  issue.  This  case,  whilst  undoubtedly
important to the Rai family, does not involve  any  complicated  matters  of
fact or law. Inherent in the proportionate allocation of  resources  is  the
need to take account of other parties in  other  cases.  An  adjournment  of
this case would have meant that another case would be  delayed  waiting  for
its turn to come before the First-tier Tribunal, and so on  down  the  line.
Finally, and importantly,  the  tribunal  must  use  any  special  expertise
effectively. These various elements may have to be balanced,  but  they  are
not necessarily in conflict. All judges of the First-tier  Tribunal  have  a
special expertise not only in the law relevant to  their  jurisdiction,  but
also in assisting unrepresented parties to put their case in the  particular
jurisdiction as effectively as they can, thereby enhancing their  access  to
the proceedings, avoiding delay, acting proportionately in the interests  of
all users of the tribunal system, and adopting a flexible  approach  to  the
proceedings to meet the particular needs of  the  party  in  the  case.  For
those reasons, Mr Rai was not put at a  disadvantage  by  not  having  legal
representation.

The duty on the parties under rule 2(4) is  also  relevant.  They  must  co-
operate with the tribunal. Part of this duty involves preparing  a  case  in
advance. In this case, the hearing took place on 5 November 2014 and Mr  Rai
had had since he decided to appeal against the decision refusing  him  entry
clearance in February 2014. That was ample time within which to prepare  the
case and assemble the necessary evidence.

We are not saying that the judge would have been wrong to adjourn.  That  is
not how the overriding objective works. All we are saying is that the  judge
was entitled to refuse  to  adjourn.  Whether  to  do  so  is  a  matter  of
judgment. Our analysis shows that the judge was entitled  to  exercise  that
judgment in favour of continuing with the hearing.

As to the evidence that Mr Rai  wanted  to  produce,  this  related  to  the
payments he said he was making to his son. He had asked for  an  adjournment
on the ground that the relevant office of the  college  where  his  son  was
studying would be shut until the end of November. In  the  event,  this  did
not matter, because the judge accepted his oral evidence that he was  making
these payments. The absence of the evidence did not affect  the  outcome  of
the case. In legal terms, it was not material. Materiality is  an  essential
element of an error of law, as Brooke LJ explained in R (Iran)  v  Secretary
of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982. After  setting  out  a
list of the most common ways in which a tribunal may make an error  of  law,
he concluded

    "10.   Each of these grounds for detecting an error of law contain  the
    word 'material' (or 'immaterial'). Errors of law of  which  it  can  be
    said that they would have made no difference  to  the  outcome  do  not
    matter."

    The historic injustice


Mr Rana argued  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  failed  to  apply  the
guidance given by the Court of Appeal in R (Gurung)  v  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ 8. He also produced a  copy  of  the
decision of the Upper Tribunal in Ghising and others v  Secretary  of  State
for the Home Department and  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  for  New  Delhi
[2013] UKUT 00567 (AAC). Mr Avory argued that the tribunal  had  dealt  with
those cases in paragraphs 25 to 28 of its reasons.

We  reject  Mr  Rana's  argument  and  accept  Mr  Avory's.  The  favourable
treatment that is justified by the historic injustice arises  at  the  stage
when proportionality is considered. In this case,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
did not reach that stage. The judge found  as  a  fact  that  there  was  no
relationship between Mr Rai and  his  father  and  mother.  The  judge  then
considered the discretionary position  outside  the  Immigration  Rules  and
found that the policy had been properly considered. There  is  no  error  of
law in that approach.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal issued on 19 November 2014  did  not
involve the making of an error on a point of law (sections 11 and 12 of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).


|Signed on original                   |Edward Jacobs                         |
|on 13 August 2015                    |Upper Tribunal Judge                  |

