

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: OA/03709/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Field House                |            Decision and Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On: 6th July 2015                     |            On: 4th September 2015   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer, Bangkok
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     NF
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Ahmed, Counsel

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Respondent is a national of Thailand date of birth 27  April  1981.
    On the 23 February 2015 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hussain) allowed
    her appeal against a decision to refuse to grant her entry clearance as
    the spouse of a person present and settled in the United  Kingdom.  Her
    Sponsor is British national F.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  now  has
    permission to appeal against that decision[1].






    Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The Respondent made her application  for  entry  clearance  on  the  27
    November  2013.   She  set  out  the  relevant  information  about  her
    relationship with F, his  income  etc.   Asked  about  her  immigration
    history she stated that she had entered the United  Kingdom  on  the  1
    January 2007 and had left on the 1 January 2011.


 3. The Entry Clearance Officer found that the travel history given in  the
    VAF did not tally with the records held in Bangkok: there was no record
    of the Respondent ever having been granted a visa.

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer contacted the Respondent to ask  her  about
    the discrepancy. She said that she had made arrangements with an  agent
    called Mr J to bring her to  the  UK  so  that  she  could  work  as  a
    masseuse. These arrangements had entailed her changing her name to J so
    that she could pretend to be his daughter. She obtained an  Irish  visa
    in that name and in December 2007 travelled to EIRE  with  this  agent.
    She subsequently entered the UK illegally. The Notice of  Refusal  sets
    out the Entry Clearance Officer's record of the rest of that  telephone
    interview, and the enquiries which followed it:


         "you were asked why you wanted to travel to the UK and you said  to
         work as a 'masseuse'. You stayed in a rented  apartment  with  your
         friend 'B' where you posted pictures on  the  internet  advertising
         your services. If customers were interested in you  they  contacted
         an 'agency' and you provided services in the apartment.


         Records held in this  office  show  that  you  first  came  to  the
         attention of the police on 19 May 2010 when you were  arrested  and
         then bailed in Crawley. You were then arrested on 23 June  2011  in
         Glasgow along with 2 other  Thai  nationals  at  an  address  being
         investigated as a suspected brothel used for prostitution.  On  the
         25 June 2011 you were charged with entering the  UK  illegally  and
         were removed back to Thailand on 8 July 2011."


 5. Further  enquiries  revealed  that  the  Respondent  had  been  working
    illegally as a "masseuse" in Malaysia and Hong Kong.


 6. The Entry Clearance Officer notes that the  Appellant  claims  to  have
    been living with F since 2008 but in light of her  "character,  conduct
    and associations" the ECO considered it undesirable to grant her  entry
    clearance.  Entry was therefore refused with reference to paragraph  S-
    EC.1.5 of Appendix FM:
         S-EC.1.5. The exclusion of the applicant from the UK is conducive
         to the public good because, for example, the applicant's conduct
         (including convictions which do not fall within paragraph S-
         EC.1.4.), character, associations, or other reasons, make it
         undesirable to grant them entry clearance.
 7. Entry was further refused with reference  to  paragraph  320(11)  which
    provides that entry should "normally" be refused:
         (11) where the applicant has previously contrived in a significant
         way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:
         (i) overstaying; or
         (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or
         (iii) being an illegal entrant; or
         (iv) using deception in an application for entry clearance, leave
         to enter or remain or in order to obtain documents from the
         Secretary of State or a third party required in support of the
         application (whether successful or not); and there are other
         aggravating circumstances, such as absconding, not meeting
         temporary admission/reporting restrictions or bail conditions,
         using an assumed identity or multiple identities, switching
         nationality, making frivolous applications or not complying with
         the re- documentation process.
 8.  The Respondent exercised her right of appeal.


    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The First-tier Tribunal heard live evidence from F. He  understood  the
    reasons why  his  wife  had  been  refused  but  considered  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to be prejudiced: he could support her now.


10. The determination deals  first  with  the  suitability  criteria  under
    Appendix FM. The First-tier Tribunal directed itself that paragraph  S-
    EC.1.5 requires the decision maker to consider two  matters.  First,  a
    finding of fact must be  made  about  the  nature  of  the  applicant's
    conduct.  Secondly, consideration must be given to whether  the  nature
    of that conduct is such that it would be undesirable for the  applicant
    to be admitted to the UK.   In addressing question  one,  it  is  noted
    that the ECO has not provided evidence that the Respondent was  working
    in the UK as a prostitute; nor has she admitted as  much.  The  refusal
    notice strongly suggests sex-work but falls short  of  making  such  an
    assertion. The conduct that the Respondent has admitted to consists  of
    illegal entry, having been arrested (but  not  convicted)  and  removed
    from the country.  Turning to question two the determination says this:

         "in my view, given that the appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom
         illegally it is difficult to see what  law  she  broke  by  working
         here. I am not aware that working as a masseuse is illegal  in  the
         United Kingdom and therefore this fact  does  not  take  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer's case any further. In my view,  simply  entering
         the United Kingdom illegally is not a sufficient basis to exclude a
         spouse from the United Kingdom because that would mean  anyone  who
         has either entered the United Kingdom illegally or  has  overstayed
         here would automatically be refused admission....for  an  applicant
         to fall within paragraph S-EC.1.5 their conduct must reach a  level
         of seriousness before they can be considered for exclusion.  Simply
         entering  the  United  Kingdom  illegally  does  not   reach   that
         threshold." [at �21]

11. In respect of paragraph  320(11)  it  is  noted  that  this  is  not  a
    provision that requires automatic refusal. It is a discretionary power.
      The First-tier Tribunal notes that the ECO has made no assessment  of
    whether there is a genuine family life here, and in those circumstances
    the discretion inherent in 320(11) - "should normally be refused" - has
    not been properly exercised. The determination concludes that  such  an
    assessment could only be properly exercised if the ECO had  taken  into
    account the strength of the Respondent's family life in the UK and  the
    extent to which exclusion would interfere  with,  or  show  a  lack  of
    respect for, her relationship with F.  The appeal was therefore allowed
    to the extent that it is 'remitted' to the ECO to make  a  decision  in
    accordance with the law.




    The Grounds of Appeal


12. The ECO submits that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  the  following
    material respects:


        i) Irrationality: the finding that the Respondent did not break the
           law by working illegally is not one that a  reasonable  Tribunal
           could have reached.


       ii) Failure to consider material facts: the reasoning does not  take
           into  account  the  extent  of  the  Respondent's  breaches   of
           immigration  control,  viz  the  fact  that  she  used  a  false
           identity, stayed for four years  and  only  left  when  forcibly
           removed.

13. In his submissions Mr Clarke submitted that in changing her name and in
    assuming a false identity the Respondent  committed  fraud,  which  has
    been defined by parliament as a  "serious  crime"[2].   The  matter  of
    "character" did  not  depend  on  any  convictions:   the  Respondent's
    admission that she  had  committed  these  crimes  revealed  an  innate
    characteristic incompatible with entry being granted to the UK.




    Rule 24 Response


14. For the Respondent Ms Ahmed submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  was
    correct to identify that any exercise  of  discretion  must  involve  a
    balancing exercise.  The  crimes,  character  or  other  countervailing
    factors had to be weighed against the Article 8(1) family life  of  the
    applicant, and in this case this had not been  done  by  the  ECO.  The
    appeal had only been allowed to that extent and it was now for the  ECO
    to consider the provisions in light of his own findings of  fact  about
    the extent and quality of the relationship.  She referred to  the  UKVI
    guidance which indicates that the subject  must  have  contrived  in  a
    significant way to frustrate the intention of the Rules and aggravating
    circumstances had to  be  identified.   She  relies  on  PS  (paragraph
    320(11) discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440.


15. As to the question of illegal working she submitted that  the  Tribunal
    had not acted irrationally. The point being made was that an  applicant
    can be an illegal entrant or someone who has had valid  leave  but  has
    breached the conditions attached to it by working, not both.




    Error of Law


16. Although the ECO only had one reason for refusing  this  application  -
    the Respondent's past conduct  -  the  decision  invokes  two  separate
    paragraphs of the Rules: S-EC.1.5 and paragraph 320(11).


17. In respect of the latter the First-tier  Tribunal  cannot  be  faulted.
    The power to refuse under this paragraph is entirely discretionary  and
    the First-tier Tribunal is supported by the decision in PS  in  finding
    that this involved a holistic balancing exercise, taking  into  account
    the nature and quality of the Respondent's family life.  The  decision-
    maker made no assessment of the relationship  with  F  or  whether  the
    decision to exclude her was the right one  in  all  the  circumstances,
    even if 'aggravating' factors could be identified.   As the decision in
    PS makes clear, the power to refuse under 320(11) is one that  must  be
    exercised with great  care,  taking  all  relevant  circumstances  into
    account. Accordingly I find  no  fault  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    approach to this matter, which was entirely in accordance with PS.  Had
    the application been refused only with reference to paragraph  320(11),
    it would have been entirely appropriate to 'remit' the  matter  to  the
    ECO on the grounds that the decision had not been  in  accordance  with
    the law, since the decision was made without any apparent reference  to
    the Appellant's family life with F.

18. That was not however the only ground for  refusal.  Under  Appendix  FM
    that was S-EC.1.5.

19. The determination recognises that S-EC.1.5 was a different proposition.
    The application of 'suitability' criteria  are  not  discretionary.  S-
    EC.1.5 simply requires an answer to a composite question  of  fact;  if
    answered in the affirmative  the  application  must  be  refused  under
    Appendix FM. The question falls into  two  parts,  the  nature  of  the
    conduct, character or associations,  and  whether  it  is  sufficiently
    serious to justify refusal.

20. It is the factual assessment of this composite question that the First-
    tier Tribunal has erred. The closing sentence of paragraph 21  sums  up
    those  matters  of  conduct  weighed  against  the   Respondent   (then
    Appellant): "simply entering the  United  Kingdom  illegally  does  not
    reach that threshold".    The ECO is justified in complaining that this
    sentence does not adequately reflect the evidence. The  admitted  facts
    are that the Respondent i) changed her name to  enable  her  to  use  a
    passport to which she was not entitled,   ii)  used  this  passport  to
    deceive the Irish authorities when she obtained a visa for  EIRE,  iii)
    deceived the Irish authorities a second time when she  entered  Dublin,
    iv) deceived the  UK  authorities  when  she  entered  the  country  at
    Gatwick,  v) worked in the UK for over four years without permission to
    do so,  vi) did nothing to regularise her position or reveal  her  true
    identity despite being apprehended twice by the police.  It is  further
    alleged that she was eventually forcibly removed.   It may be  that  in
    the final analysis the outcome of this appeal might have been the same,
    but the Tribunal was required to take all of these facts  into  account
    when assessing whether the exclusion threshold was  reached.   Had  the
    Tribunal properly directed itself to the facts, it is possible that  it
    would have reached a different outcome. For that reason I find that the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal did contain an error of law and the
    decision must be set aside. I need  make  no  finding  on  whether  the
    Tribunal's approach to the illegal working was irrational;  it  may  be
    that Ms Ahmed is right to suggest that this was simply poor wording.




    The Re-Making

21. The Entry Clearance Officer alleges that  by  virtue  of  her  conduct,
    character and associations the applicant's exclusion  is  conducive  to
    the public good.  It is for the Respondent to establish  that  this  is
    the case, and the standard of  proof  is  at  the  higher  end  of  the
    spectrum of a balance of probabilities. There is no authority of  which
    I am aware dealing specifically with paragraph  S-EC.1.5  but  see  for
    instance JC (Part 9 HC395, burden of proof) China [2007] UKAIT 00027:

         "13. So far as the standard of proof is concerned, we consider that
         what the Immigration Appeal Tribunal said in Olufosoye  [1992]  Imm
         AR 141 still holds good: "insofar as the justification consists  of
         deception or other criminal conduct the standard of proof  will  be
         at the higher end of the spectrum of balance of  probability"  (see
         also R v IAT ex parte Nadeem Tahir  [1989]  Imm  AR  98  CA).  This
         approach reflects that of the House of Lords in R  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department ex p.Khawaja  [1984]  AC  74  and  is
         consistent with subsequent case law (see e.g.  Bishop [2002]  UKIAT
         05532). In  R (AN &  Anor)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ  1605  Richards  LJ  stated  at  [62]:
         "Although there is a single civil standard of proof on the  balance
         of probabilities, it is flexible in its application. In particular,
         the  more  serious  the  allegation  or  the   more   serious   the
         consequences if the allegation is proven, the stronger must be  the
         evidence before a court will find  the  allegation  proved  on  the
         balance of probabilities".

22. In this case the facts as  alleged  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,
    summarised at paragraph 20 above, are not in  substance  disputed.  The
    question is whether the conduct of the  Respondent  is  such  that  her
    exclusion would be conducive to the public good.


23. The term "conducive to the public good" has,  in  the  pre-Appendix  FM
    past, been interpreted to require fairly serious reasons for exclusion.
     For example, persons have  been  refused  entry  clearance  where  the
    Secretary of State  has  personally  deemed  their  presence  "socially
    harmful" by virtue of their toxic  political  views[3],  where  serious
    criminality such as drug  importation  has  been  involved[4],  in  the
    interests of national security[5] or foreign policy[6], or where public
    policy demands it so[7].   It  has  consistently  been  held  that  the
    discretion of the Entry Clearance Officer  to  apply  this  ground  for
    refusal is a wide one[8]. It is not however a provision which should be
    applied  for  trivial  reasons.  It  has  been  held  that  a  relevant
    consideration would be whether the conduct, character  or  associations
    concerned would justify deportation[9].

24. Where consideration is to be given to exclusion  on  conducive  grounds
    UKVI decision makers  are  today  referred  to  the  guidance  document
    entitled 'General grounds for  refusal  Section  1  of  5:  about  this
    guidance, general grounds for refusal and checks'  in  which  (at  page
    100) says the following:
         This page explains what the Immigration Rules say about when
         exclusion is conducive to the public good, which is a general
         ground for refusal.
         What the rules require
         If it is conducive to the public good not to admit a person to the
         UK because of their character, conduct or associations you must
         consider refusing entry or leave to remain.
         Such a person may include:
       . a member of a proscribed group
       . a person suspected of war crimes or crimes against humanity
       . a person whose presence is undesirable because of their character,
         conduct or associations
       . a person whose presence might lead to an infringement of UK law or
         a breach of public order
25. It will  be  observed  that  this  admittedly  non-exhaustive  list  of
    examples does not include use of a false identity to facilitate illegal
    entry; the kind of conduct cited in this guidance as properly  engaging
    the provision appears to be at the  extreme  end  of  the  spectrum  of
    misconduct. There is however  a  further  guidance  document:  "General
    grounds for refusal Section 2 of 5: Considering entry clearance".  This
    advises Entry Clearance Officers to check for evidence of:
           (  adverse behaviour (using deception, false representation,
           fraud, forgery, non- disclosure of material facts or failure to
           cooperate)
           (  non conduciveness, adverse character, conduct or associations
           (criminal history, deportation order, travel ban, exclusion, non-
           conducive to public good, a threat to national security)
           (  adverse immigration history (overstaying, breaching
           conditions, illegal entrant, using deception in an application)
           (  adverse health (medical reasons)
    Here a distinction is drawn between "adverse behaviour",  which  covers
    matters such as false  representation,  and  "non-conduciveness"  which
    covers matters such as national security.  The  broader  term  "conduct
    character or associations" is not defined, although at page 21  of  the
    'Immigration  Directorate  Instruction  Family  Migration  Appendix  FM
    Section 1.0a: Family Life (as a Partner or Parent): 5-Year  Routes'  it
    is noted in this context that "the applicant can meet  the  suitability
    requirements even where there is some criminality".


26. Finally there is the  internal  policy  instruction  document  entitled
    'When can I refuse on character, conduct or associations?' published in
    November 2013. The titular question is answered as follows:


         Paragraphs  320(19)  and  S-EC.1.5.  provide  for  a  discretionary
         refusal of entry  clearance  on  account  of  a  person's  conduct,
         character or associations. ECOs must be aware that there maybe more
         than one factor which would lead to the application  being  refused
         on character, conduct or associations grounds. While a person  does
         not necessarily need to have been convicted of a criminal  offence,
         the key to establishing  refusal  in  this  category  will  be  the
         existence of reliable evidence necessary to  support  the  decision
         that the person's behaviour calls  into  question  their  character
         and/or  conduct  and/or  associations  such  that   it   makes   it
         undesirable to grant them entry clearance.

         A non-exhaustive list could include:

         Low-level criminal  activity.  Association  with  known  criminals.
         Involvement with gangs. Pending prosecutions. Extradition requests.
         Public order risks. Prescribed  (sic)  organisations.  Unacceptable
         behaviours. Subject to a travel ban. War crimes. Article 1F of  the
         refugee convention. Deliberate  debiting.  Proceeds  of  crime  and
         finances of questionable origins. Corruption. Relations between the
         UK  and  elsewhere.  Assisting  in  the  invasion  (sic)   of   the
         immigration control. Hiring illegal workers. Engaging in  deceitful
         or dishonest dealings with Her Majesty's Government.
    And further:


         Examples of the types of cases where refusal under 320(19) may be
         appropriate include:

            . where a person's admission could adversely affect the conduct
              of foreign policy;

            . where the person's admission would be contrary to
              internationally agreed travel restrictions (for example, UN
              sanctions or EU measures) but the relevant resolution or
              common position has not been designated under the Immigration
              (designation of travel bans) order 2000. If it has been
              designated under the order, section 8B(1)(b) of the 1971 Act
              must be used to refuse LTE;

            . the person is a threat to national security;

            . there is reliable evidence the person has been involved in or
              otherwise associated with war crimes or crimes against
              humanity. It is not necessary for them to have been charged
              or convicted a person's admission might lead to an
              infringement of UK law or a breach of public order;

            . a person's admission might lead to an offence being committed
              by someone else, for example, extreme views that if expressed
              may result in civil unrest resulting in an infringement of UK
              law.

         When determining if a refusal under 320(19) is warranted the ECO
         must also take into account any human rights grounds and ensure
         that the refusal is both proportionate and reasonable.
27. This guidance leads me to draw the following  conclusions.   First  the
    burden of proof lies on the  Respondent,  as  it  has  always  done  in
    respect of such allegations, and the standard of proof is at the higher
    end of the spectrum of the balance of probabilities.  Second the  range
    of behaviour which might justify  exclusion  is  a  wide  one.  At  the
    extreme end lie war crimes and terrorist activity; I would suggest that
    here a single incident, proven to the requisite standard, would  likely
    be sufficient justification for exclusion. At  the  other  end  of  the
    range lie matters such as a failure to disclose material facts or false
    representation.  I would suggest, in line with the findings in  PS  and
    the ECO's own guidance that the conduct in question would  need  to  be
    fairly serious, or "aggravated" in order  to  obstruct  entry  for  the
    purpose of settlement with a spouse.   I consider that the analogy with
    deportation is a helpful one: if the conduct, character or associations
    would justify deportation, then it would also justify exclusion under S-
    EC.1.5.


28. In this case the Respondent  engaged  in  a  deliberate  and  prolonged
    deception of the immigration authorities in Thailand, EIRE and the  UK.
    There is no suggestion that in changing her name, using the passport to
    which she was not entitled, flying to Ireland and then to the UK, or in
    any of her contact with the police or immigration authorities whilst in
    the UK, she was acting under duress. It was a  programme  of  deception
    which she actively participated in,  and  the  offences  she  committed
    could have led to conviction for fraud. In  those  circumstances  I  am
    satisfied that there are "aggravating" circumstances such that S-EC.1.5
    applies.

29. That is not however the end of the  matter.  If  S-EC.1.5  applies  the
    Respondent cannot gain entry under Appendix FM,  but  there  remains  a
    residual discretion to assess whether the decision  would  nevertheless
    interfere with her Article 8(1) rights. There is no indication  in  the
    refusal notice that the ECO considered the strength of the Respondent's
    family  life,  or  whether  any   interference   with   it   would   be
    proportionate. It is  possible  that  the  matters  considered  in  the
    context of S-EC.1.5 could definitively answer the latter question,  but
    in line with the reasoning in PS it is hard to see  how  the  balancing
    exercise could be complete without any assessment of the  former.   The
    suitability criteria  in  Appendix  FM  leave  no  room  to  weigh  the
    offending behaviour against the depth and quality of the  family  life:
    to this extent it does not appear to be a  'complete  code'.  For  that
    reason I am driven to dispose of this appeal in the same manner as  the
    First-tier Tribunal, by remitting it to the decision-maker.  It is  now
    for the ECO to consider whether to exercise discretion outside  of  the
    rules and conduct a holistic balancing exercise.  It will  be  for  the
    Respondent and F to provide the  ECO  with  any  relevant  material  to
    support their case  that  the  decision  would  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with their family life. This would  include,  but  not  be
    limited to any evidence as to why the relationship cannot  continue  in
    Thailand.





      Decisions

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law to the
    extent identified above and it is set aside.


31. I remake the decision in the appeal by allowing it on the  ground  that
    the decision of the ECO was not in accordance with  the  law.  The  ECO
    failed to exercise his discretion to consider Article 8 outside of  the
    rules and the matter is therefore remitted to enable this  decision  to
    be made.

32. I make the following direction as to anonymity:

      "Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,   the
      Respondent (FTT Appellant) is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
      proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member of
      her family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant and  to  the
      Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
      contempt of court proceedings".




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              8th August
                                    2015
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pirotta on the 24th
April 2015
[2] See Schedule 1, Section 7(2) Serious Crime Act 2007
[3] R (ono Farrakhan) v SSHD [2002] EWCA Civ 606 (Nation of Islam leader)
[4] Villone v SSHD [1979-80] Imm AR 23 (drugs discovered in baggage on
arrival)
[5] GI v SSHD [2011] EWHC 1875 (Admin) (SIAC case involving allegations of
links of Islamic extremists)
[6] Lord Carlile & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012]
EWHC 617 (Admin) (exclusion of Iranian dissident on the grounds that Iran
may take retribution if the ban was lifted)
[7] R v IAT (ex parte Ajaib Singh) [1978] Imm AR 59 (a man seeking entry to
marry a 14 year old girl)
[8] See for instance Ivlev, R (on the application of) v Entry Clearance
Officer, New York [2013] EWHC 1162 (Admin) at 59
[9] Olufosoye v SSHD [1992] Imm AR 141, R v ex parte Cheema [1982] Imm AR
124, CA.

