
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03464/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 July 2014                               |On 28 July 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE LEWIS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mr Afjal Rahman Rana

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Jack, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Waitte, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on  24  March
    2014.  By that decision  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowed  an  appeal
    against the decision of an Entry Clearance Officer  dated  25  November
    2012 refusing Mr Rana an entry clearance to  join  his  spouse  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 2. The facts can be stated briefly.   The  respondent  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh.  His wife is  a  British  citizen  working  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  The respondent applied for an entry clearance under paragraph
    281 of the Immigration Rules to enable him to  join  his  wife  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 3. There are a number of requirements set out in that Rule.  The applicant
    satisfied the Entry Clearance Officer on that occasion that he met  all
    bar one of the relevant requirements.  By way of example, he  satisfied
    the Entry Clearance Officer that Mr Rana and his wife would be able  to
    maintain themselves without recourse to public funds.  He was satisfied
    of course that they were indeed married.

 4. The one area where Entry Clearance Officer on  that  occasion  was  not
    satisfied concerned paragraph 281(iv) which is in the following terms:

         "There will be adequate  accommodation  for  the  parties  and  any
         dependants without recourse to public funds in accommodation  which
         they own or occupy exclusively."

 5. The Entry Clearance Officer was not  satisfied  that  the  respondent's
    wife had the written agreement of her landlord that her  husband  could
    live  at  her  accommodation  and  he  was  not  satisfied   that   the
    accommodation was  large  enough,  and  he  therefore  considered  that
    281(iv) was not satisfied.

 6. As it happened the First-tier Tribunal considered that matter.  It  was
    satisfied  that  the  accommodation  was  in  fact  large   enough   to
    accommodate the respondent and a verbal agreement had  been  given  for
    the respondent to live there.  In fact, when you look  at  the  written
    tenancy agreement, that itself says that up to seven people may live in
    the property and even with the respondent present it seemed there would
    only be six people.  The First-tier Tribunal therefore did not consider
    that this was a proper basis for refusal of  an  entry  clearance.   No
    permission has been granted to appeal against that conclusion.

 7. The difficulty that has arisen today is this.  As well as appealing, as
    he was entitled to, to the First-tier Tribunal there  was  an  internal
    review by an Entry Clearance Manager.  He  considered  that  there  had
    been problems with the English  language  certificates  that  had  been
    issued prior to a particular  date  in  Bangladesh  that  Mr  Rana  was
    relying upon.  We make it clear that there  is  no  suggestion  in  the
    evidence before us that Mr Rana was in any way himself at fault or  had
    in some way been involved with those deficiencies.  It appeared to  ...
    deficiencies in relation to the way in which testing was being  carried
    out in Bangladesh.  In any event, the Entry Clearance Manager wrote  to
    Mr Rana on 3 February and he said amongst other things this:

         "In reviewing your case it is noted that you provided City & Guilds
         certificates as evidence  that  you  satisfy  the  requirements  of
         paragraph 281(i)(a)(ii).  Although no concerns were raised  by  the
         Entry Clearance Officer at the time  of  decision  with  regard  to
         these qualifications, subsequent investigations conducted by City &
         Guilds  and  UK  visas  and   immigration   Dhaka   have   revealed
         inconsistencies in testing in Bangladesh.  As  a  result  of  these
         investigations I am not satisfied that the documents that you  have
         provided  satisfactorily  demonstrate   you   have   obtained   the
         qualifications mentioned on the certificates.

         The inconsistencies in testing have now been addressed  by  City  &
         Guilds in Bangladesh who have agreed to offer free retesting to all
         affecting visa applicants.  I have included a letter  from  City  &
         Guilds  which  explains  retesting  arrangements  which  have  been
         implemented.  Should you wish to arrange a  retest  please  contact
         City & Guilds using the information provided in the letter."

 8. The First-tier Tribunal  did  consider  the  question  of  the  English
    language certificate notwithstanding the fact that this had not been  a
    matter before the Entry Clearance Officer which caused him concern.  At
    paragraph 20 of his determination the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  said
    this:

         "20. I then turn to the issue of the language certificates  and  it
             is clear from the letter issued by City & Guilds dated 20  May
             2013 and the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's  review  that  false
             certificates relating to examinations conducted in  Bangladesh
             with an issue date  prior  to  1  October  2012  will  not  be
             accepted as evidence of a pass in English language proficiency
             for the purpose of a visa applications.

         21.  Therefore I find that the decision of the respondent  appealed
             against is not in accordance with the law and  the  applicable
             Immigration Rules but whilst I am satisfied on the aspects  of
             accommodation and maintenance, and to that extent  the  appeal
             is allowed, nevertheless before any entry  clearance  visa  is
             issued it will be necessary for the appellant to provide a new
             English language certificate."

 9. In the light of that finding the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    was that the appeal was allowed under  the  Immigration  Rules  to  the
    extent that prior to the issue of the visa the appellant provide a  new
    English language certificate to the respondent.

10. The first question is whether or not the First-tier Tribunal has  erred
    in law in making the decision that it did.

11. Firstly we state that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to  consider
    the matters relating to the inadequacies of the certificates  on  which
    Mr Rana relied.  Section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002 subSection 4 said:

         "On an appeal under Section 82(1) or 83A(2) against a decision  the
         Tribunal may consider evidence about any  matter  which  it  thinks
         relevant to the substance of the decision, including evidence which
         concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision."

    That is then qualified by Section 85A, and in relation to the  decision
    that  we  are  dealing  with  the  Tribunal  may  consider   only   the
    circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision.

12. We are satisfied that  this  matter  concerning  the  English  language
    certificates does appertain to the circumstances at  the  time  of  the
    decision.   True  it  is  that  the  investigation  that  revealed  the
    inconsistencies in testing may have been  carried  out  later  and  the
    inconsistencies may have been detected later  but  the  inconsistencies
    and the fact that certificates cannot be relied upon as evidence of the
    necessary  skills  is  a  matter  that  appertains  to  the   decision.
    Consequently the FtT was entitled to consider the question  of  whether
    or not the language certificates were ones that satisfied paragraph 281
    of the Rules.

13. The difficulty in our judgment is  the  way  in  which  the  First-tier
    Tribunal then dealt with the matter.  Both Mr Jack and  Mr  Waitte  for
    the respondent Mr Rana have accepted very realistically that the First-
    tier Tribunal has erred there.  The First-tier Tribunal had no power on
    the one hand to allow the appeal on the grounds that  the  certificates
    were not adequate and then to say that the appellant could  not  get  a
    visa prior to obtaining a new English  language  certificate.   It  was
    illogical and it was also irrational for a public law  matter  to  take
    that course of action.

14. What should have happened is that the appeal should have  been  allowed
    and then Mr Rana would have had to make a fresh application and  obtain
    a fresh certificate.  We were told this morning that in  fact  Mr  Rana
    has now taken the relevant tests and we were told that he has  obtained
    the necessary scores.

15. In all those circumstances we are satisfied first that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law.  Its  decision  will  therefore  be  set  aside.
    Secondly, we will remake the decision.  In the light of the position in
    relation to the original certificates upon which the original  decision
    was relied the  respondent  is  not  able  to  demonstrate  that  those
    certificates satisfied the requirements of  paragraph  281(ii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

16. We therefore dismiss the appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  That means Mr Rana will in  fact  have  to  make  a
    fresh application to the Entry Clearance Officer satisfying all of  the
    Rules  including  the  relevant  Rules   governing   English   language
    certificates.


Signed                                  Date



Mr Justice Lewis


