


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03945/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : IAC Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On : 30 June 2016                            |On: 12 July 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                                jason kirlew
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms U Sood of Trent Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 27  December  1976.  He
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Colyer, dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's
      decision to refuse to  revoke  a  deportation  order  previously  made
      against him on 1 December 2013.

   2. The appellant's immigration history is lengthy and  is  summarised  as
      follows.

Immigration History

   3. The appellant first arrived in the United Kingdom on  11  August  2001
      and was granted leave to enter as a visitor until 9 September 2001. He
      returned to Jamaica on 8 September 2001 and came back to the UK on  29
      March 2003 in possession of a visit  visa  valid  until  24  September
      2003. On 26 July 2003 he married  [CM]  in  the  UK.  He  returned  to
      Jamaica and came back to  the  UK  on  23  November  2003  with  entry
      clearance as a spouse valid until 21 November 2005.  Applications  for
      further leave to remain were refused.

   4. On 11 November 2010 the appellant was convicted of possession of Class
      A drugs with intent to supply and on 26 November 2010 he was sentenced
      to three years and six months  imprisonment,  on  four  counts.  On  1
      February 2011 he was served with a Notice of  Liability  to  Automatic
      Deportation. He responded with representations based on Article  8  of
      the ECHR. A Deportation Order was signed against  him  on  1  February
      2013. On 8 February 2013 a decision was made to deport him.


   5. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard  on
      12 June 2013 and was dismissed in a determination  promulgated  on  28
      June 2013. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was refused  and
      the appellant became appeal rights exhausted on  13  August  2013.  An
      application for permission to bring judicial  review  proceedings  was
      refused in November 2013.


   6. The appellant was detained on 16 January 2014 in order  to  facilitate
      removal and removal directions  were  then  set  for  his  removal  to
      Jamaica on 3 February 2014. He made an application on 30 January 2014,
      though his current legal representatives, to  revoke  the  deportation
      order previously made against him, on Article 8 grounds. On 1 February
      2014 he made a claim for asylum in person, which  was  treated  as  an
      application to revoke  the  deportation  order  and  was  refused  and
      certified on 2 February 2014, under section 96(1) of the  Nationality,
      Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, with no right of appeal, on the basis
      that he was raising matters which he could have raised in his previous
      appeal  (pages  E22-26).  On  10   February   2014   the   appellant's
      representatives made further asylum and human  rights  representations
      (E27). On 10 February 2014 the respondent made a decision to refuse to
      revoke the deportation order and refused the appellant's human  rights
      claim, for reasons set out in a letter  dated  17  February  2014,  in
      which his asylum and human rights claims  were  certified  as  clearly
      unfounded under section 94(2) of the 2002 Act.


   7. The appellant lodged judicial review proceedings against the  decision
      of 2 February 2014.  Permission  was  refused  on  the  papers  on  21
      February 2014 and the application was renewed to an oral  hearing  but
      then withdrawn at a hearing on 8  May  2014  on  the  basis  that  the
      appellant had since been removed from the UK, with an out  of  country
      right of appeal.


   8. The appellant appealed, from outside the UK, against the  respondent's
      decision of 17 February 2014 to refuse to revoke the deportation order
      and to refuse his asylum and human rights claims. His appeal was heard
      in the First-tier Tribunal on 14 October 2014 and was dismissed  in  a
      decision promulgated on 30 October  2014.  Permission  was  sought  to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal and was initially refused on 11  December
      2014, but was subsequently granted upon a  renewed  application  on  9
      April 2015.


The Appellant's Case

   9. The appellant's case  as  follows.  Following  the  breakdown  of  his
      marriage  to  [CM]  and  their  divorce  in  July  2006,  he  began  a
      relationship with [KP] with whom  he  had  a  son,  [R],  born  on  23
      September 2005. [R] is a British citizen and he shares the care of his
      son with [KP], despite their subsequent  separation.  He  became,  and
      remains, a father figure to [KP]'s daughter  [C],  now  aged  9,  from
      [KP]'s previous relationship with a man who was deported  to  Jamaica.
      In early 2007 he entered a relationship with [KR], a British  citizen,
      who was at the time a law student but who now works  as  a  commercial
      property solicitor for a large firm of solicitors, Eversheds LLP. [KR]
      did not know anything about  his  criminal  activities  until  he  was
      arrested. They lived together following his release in July 2012 until
      his deportation in February 2014.


  10. The appellant said that he was forced into selling  drugs  by  a  drug
      dealer in Nottingham whom he knew only as [M], who used his precarious
      immigration status and threats to tell the  immigration  services  and
      police about him, as a means of getting him to  comply.  When  he  was
      arrested he was in possession of a small amount of drugs  as  well  as
      approximately �12,000 in cash which belonged to [M].  That  money  was
      confiscated with the drugs when he was caught and [M] wants the  money
      and the value of the drugs back and has threatened to kill him  if  he
      does not return them. [M] is a dangerous man who has ordered  killings
      of people and has killed two of his  (the  appellant's)  friends  when
      they returned to Jamaica. [M] was deported to Jamaica whilst  he,  the
      appellant, was in prison, in 2011, and he fears being killed by him if
      he were to return to Jamaica. Threats have already been made  to  him,
      whilst he was in detention as well as through his partner. He did  not
      make an asylum claim previously on that basis,  because  his  previous
      solicitors had advised him that it was more important  to  concentrate
      on his relationship with  his  child.  He  has  since  made  a  formal
      complaint to those solicitors. He instructed  his  current  solicitors
      after his deportation appeal was dismissed  and,  upon  their  advice,
      made an asylum claim. That claim was refused and certified and he  was
      deported to Jamaica on 23 February 2014. Since returning  to  Jamaica,
      he has been threatened whilst in a deportee shelter  in  Kingston,  by
      [M]'s gang members, and has had to move around the island and lie low.
      He now lives in a tenement and remains indoors, afraid to go out. [KR]
      pays his rent and sends him money. The police  in  Jamaica  have  been
      unable to help him. [KP] will not  allow  his  son  to  visit  him  in
      Jamaica as it is too dangerous and for the same reason [KR] is  afraid
      to visit. [KR] has established a successful legal career in the UK  as
      a solicitor and cannot move to Jamaica as she would  have  to  retrain
      and would not be able to find equivalent work.  The  distress  of  the
      appellant's deportation and circumstances has caused her psychological
      problems.

  11. The respondent, in her decisions of 10 and 17  February  2014,  relied
      upon the findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the  appellant's
      deportation appeal in June 2013  and  the  reasons  for  refusing  his
      asylum application on 2 February 2014, finding both asylum  and  human
      rights claims to be clearly unfounded.

Appeal before the First-tier Tribunal

  12. The appellant's appeal was heard in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  14
      October 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Colyer, who had in fact been
      the judge who had heard the previous appeal against deportation  in  a
      panel with a lay member. The parties did not  have  any  objection  to
      Judge Colyer hearing this subsequent appeal. Judge Colyer noted that a
      previous request by the appellant's solicitors for  the  appellant  to
      give evidence by video link had been refused by  the  Tribunal.  There
      was therefore no live evidence from the  appellant  himself,  but  the
      judge heard from the appellant's partner, [KR],  and  another  witness
      [CG], a minister of  the  church  which  she  and  the  appellant  had
      attended. It was  noted  that  two  other  witnesses  had  attended  a
      previous hearing which was adjourned and were not able to attend  this
      hearing, but no adjournment request was made in that regard.

  13. The judge did not accept the appellant's account of the threats from a
      person called [M] to be credible and he found that the appellant would
      be at no risk on return to Jamaica. With regard to Article  8  of  the
      ECHR, he did not accept that the appellant could meet the criteria  in
      paragraph 399(a) or (b) or 399A on the basis of his relationship  with
      his child and his partner or on the basis of  his  private  life,  and
      concluded that his deportation would not be in breach of Article 8.

  14. Permission to  appeal  that  decision  was  sought  on  the  following
      grounds: that the appellant had been denied a fair  hearing  owing  to
      his inability to give live oral evidence via video-link, which in turn
      affected the credibility findings made by the judge;  that  the  judge
      had failed to consider the immigration rules relevant  to  Article  8;
      and that the judge had failed to take into account the  expert  report
      dealing with potential risk of harm in Jamaica.

  15. Permission was initially refused, but was then granted on 9 April 2015
      on all grounds, but primarily with  regard  to  the  first  and  third
      grounds.

Appeal hearing

  16. I heard submissions from both parties.

  17. Ms Sood referred to the previous judicial review proceedings in  which
      the respondent had conceded that the appellant ought to have had an in
      country right of appeal and submitted that Judge Colyer had failed  to
      consider that. The appellant had been denied a fair hearing as he  had
      not been able to give evidence by video-link, despite having agreed to
      organise all practical matters to enable that to take place. The judge
      had failed to make any reference to the expert report and his findings
      on the appellant's asylum  claim  were  completely  lacking.  Ms  Sood
      submitted that Judge  Colyer's  decision  was  too  reliant  upon  the
      findings that he had previously made in  the  appellant's  deportation
      appeal, whereas the appellant's situation had evolved, particularly in
      regard to his relationship with his child and partner. The  judge  had
      failed to have regard to the immigration rules in  paragraph  398  and
      399, and had not considered the exceptions in section 117C of the 2002
      Act. There had been inadequate consideration of the children. Ms  Sood
      referred finally to the fact  that  there  had  been  no  respondent's
      appeal bundle.

  18. Ms Aboni submitted that there was no error of law in the denial  of  a
      video link hearing as it was not always possible to  arrange  one.  As
      far as she was aware there was a respondent's appeal  bundle,  but  in
      any event there were no concerns raised about difficulties due to lack
      of documentation. Judge Colyer was entitled to take into  account  the
      findings of the previous Tribunal in the deportation  appeal.  He  was
      entitled to find the appellant lacking in credibility and had  clearly
      considered all the documents. He had properly considered the  relevant
      immigration rules and the best interests of the children. There was no
      error of law in his decision.


  19. In  response  Ms  Sood  reiterated  the  points  previously  made  and
      submitted further that the judge had failed to make  findings  on  the
      evidence of the witnesses.

Consideration and findings

  20. It seems to  me  that  Judge  Colyer's  decision  is  a  detailed  and
      comprehensive  one,  containing  careful  and  cogent  reasoning   and
      addressing all relevant matters and I find no errors of law.

  21. With regard to the issue raised by  Ms  Sood  as  to  the  lack  of  a
      respondent's appeal bundle, it seems to me  that  that  bundle,  which
      appears to have been before the Tribunal, was in  fact  for  the  most
      part a reproduction of the appellant's appeal  bundle,  together  with
      the relevant immigration decisions. Therefore  there  was  nothing  of
      which the appellant's solicitors were not already  aware  and  clearly
      that did not give rise to any difficulties at the appeal  and  do  not
      now give rise to any concerns.


  22. As to the matter raised by Ms Sood in regard to  the  judicial  review
      proceedings, it seems to me from a careful reading of  the  papers  at
      E74 to E93, that the challenge was to the decision of 2 February 2014,
      the certification of the appellant's asylum claim under section  96(1)
      of the 2002 Act, which deprived the appellant of any right of  appeal.
      Upper Tribunal Judge Lane's Order and Judgment at E93 and E94 makes it
      clear that  the  proceedings  were  withdrawn  not  only  because  the
      appellant had already been removed, but also because it was recognised
      that he had been given a right of appeal, albeit from outside the  UK,
      in the subsequent decision refusing  and  certifying  his  asylum  and
      human rights claims under section 94 of the 2002 Act. It seems  to  me
      that the only concession made by the Secretary of State was in  regard
      to the section 96(1) certificate and that there was no  concession  as
      to an in-country right of appeal, as Ms Sood appeared to suggest.


  23. That an out of country right of appeal is an adequate remedy has  been
      accepted by the Court of Appeal in Kiarie, R (On the Application Of) v
      The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA  Civ  1020,
      and whether or not permission has been granted to appeal that judgment
      to the Supreme Court does not go anywhere near demonstrating that  the
      appellant was denied a fair hearing by not being able  to  attend  and
      give oral evidence at his hearing. Neither is the  fact  that  he  was
      denied an opportunity to give evidence at the hearing by video-link  a
      reason to conclude that there was a denial of justice  or  of  a  fair
      hearing. Contrary to  Ms  Sood's  submission,  the  Tribunal  provided
      reasons for refusing the request  for  a  video  link,  referring  the
      appellant's representatives to  the  guidance  in  Nare  (evidence  by
      electronic means) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 00443, in particular paragraphs
      19, 20 and 21(d) and providing further reasons in a letter of 8 August
      2014.

  24. In Nare the Tribunal stated at [19]:

    "Fourthly, it is for the Tribunal to decide whether to  allow  evidence
    to  be  given  by  electronic  link,  and  to  give   the   appropriate
    directions.  The Tribunal needs to bear in mind  the  interest  of  all
    parties, and the overriding objective of the rules.  The decision  will
    not be taken lightly, and no party has a  right  to  call  evidence  by
    electronic link.  If specific directions are given, they will be  given
    in order to secure the interests of the parties and of justice, and  it
    is therefore very unlikely that the Tribunal will allow the evidence to
    be given by electronic link if the directions have  not  been  complied
    with. "

  25. and gave the following guidance on video linking requests, stating  at
      [21(d)]:

    "If the proposal is to give evidence from  abroad,  the  party  seeking
    permission must be in a  position  to  inform  the  Tribunal  that  the
    relevant foreign government raises no objection to live evidence  being
    given from within its jurisdiction, to  a  Tribunal  or  court  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The vast majority of countries with which  immigration
    appeals (even asylum appeals) are concerned are  countries  with  which
    the United Kingdom has friendly diplomatic relations, and it is not for
    an immigration judge to interfere with those relations by not  ensuring
    that enquiries of this sort have been made, and that  the  outcome  was
    positive. Enquiries of this nature may be addressed to the Foreign  and
    Commonwealth  Office  (International  Legal  Matters   Unit,   Consular
    Division).  If evidence is given from abroad, a British  Embassy,  High
    Commission or Commonwealth may be able to provide suitable facilities."

  26. There is further guidance  in  the  "Upper  Tribunal  Immigration  and
      Asylum Chamber Guidance Note 2013 No 2:  Video  link  hearings"  which
      makes it clear at [6] that the decision whether to conduct  a  hearing
      by video link is a matter for the judge and states at [13] and [14]:

         "Video links in overseas cases


    13. An application to receive  oral  evidence  from  an  appellant6  or
    witness who is  overseas  is  unlikely  to  be  granted  unless  it  is
    established to UTIAC's satisfaction by the party making the application
    that:
    a. the time and effort involved in making those arrangements are likely
    to be reasonable and proportionate, given the nature of the  case  (see
    paragraphs 2, 4 and 5 above);
    b. technological and logistic arrangements are in  place  so  that  the
    evidence can be received at the time required;
    c. The appellant or witness will be giving evidence from a location  at
    which arrangements are in  place  to  satisfy  the  Tribunal  that  the
    circumstances in which the evidence is given are appropriate;
    d. the  identity  of  the  appellant  or  witness  can  be  established
    satisfactorily;
    e. the Tribunal can be satisfied as to who else will be  present  while
    that evidence is being given;
    f. the costs of hearing the evidence will be borne by the party  making
    the application; and
    g. all such inquiries as may be required by  paragraph  14  below  have
    been made and that no objection has been forthcoming from  the  foreign
    government concerned.


    14. It should not be presumed that all foreign governments are  willing
    to allow their nationals or others  within  their  jurisdiction  to  be
    examined before a tribunal in the United  Kingdom  by  means  of  video
    link. If there is any doubt, the party making  the  application  should
    make appropriate enquiries with the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office
    (International Legal Matters Unit, Consular Division), with a  view  to
    ensuring that no objection will be taken at diplomatic level."


  27. In all of these circumstances, considering also that the appellant had
      given live evidence at his deportation appeal only a  year  previously
      before the same judge,  and  that  he  was  able  to  provide  written
      evidence, I find no error of law in the judge's  decision  to  proceed
      with the appeal without the appellant's oral evidence.  Neither  do  I
      find that that undermined his findings on the appellant's credibility,
      given in particular the weight that was,  properly,  attached  to  the
      circumstances and timing of the appellant's asylum  claim,  a  primary
      reason for finding against him in that respect.

  28. With regard to the assertion that the judge failed to take account  of
      the evidence of the witnesses and the  statement  of  the  appellant's
      cousin  in  making  the  adverse  findings  that  he  did  about   the
      credibility of the appellant's account in relation to [M], it is clear
      that he did consider that evidence. He  set  out  [CG]'s  evidence  at
      [15]. At [9] to [11] and [14] of his decision, Judge  Colyer  recorded
      [KR]'s evidence about the threats from [M] in some detail. It is clear
      from his  findings  at  [113]  that  he  had  reservations  about  her
      credibility as a witness, and in particular her  evidence  as  to  her
      knowledge of the appellant's criminal activities. Although he did  not
      set out the appellant's cousin [D]'s evidence, it is clear that he had
      regard to it, and specifically  mentioned  [D]'s  statement  at  [79].
      After giving various cogent  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
      account of the previous and ongoing threats from [M],  not  least  the
      fact that he had failed to mention the matter in any of  his  previous
      applications and appeals and  raised  it  only  two  days  before  his
      proposed removal to Jamaica, the judge, in summing up his  conclusions
      on credibility, referred to the fact that he had,  in  so  doing,  had
      regard to the accompanying accounts. That was  referred  to  at  [68],
      [71] and [72], and it is clear from that that he  considered  all  the
      accounts relating to the matter to be lacking in credibility.

  29. As regards the assertion that the judge had  failed  to  consider  the
      expert report from Rochelle McFee, I would make two  points.  Firstly,
      the judge did not need to refer to each and every piece  of  evidence,
      particularly as the amount of evidence contained  in  the  appellant's
      appeal bundles was substantial,  consisting  of  several  lever-arched
      files. It is clear from the references he did specifically make -  and
      I refer by way of example to [79] and [108] to [110] -   that  he  had
      careful regard to all the evidence before him and that he took it  all
      into account in making his decision. Secondly, having  had  regard  to
      the report myself, I find nothing in it which  could  have  materially
      assisted the appellant. The report is an overview of gang violence  in
      Jamaica and, whilst it does  specifically  refer  to  the  appellant's
      circumstances, that is on the basis that his account of  the  problems
      he faced as a result of his involvement with [M] was true. The reasons
      given by the judge for disbelieving the appellant's account  were  not
      based on plausibility, but on specific matters including the timing of
      his asylum claim and lack of previous mention of the matter, which are
      not issues that the report could explain or redress.

  30.  It  is  also  claimed  that  the  appellant  had  provided  a  proper
      explanation for having failed to mention  a  fear  of  persecution  in
      Jamaica, namely that his previous solicitors, against whom a complaint
      had been made, had advised him not to pursue that matter but to  focus
      on his  relationship  with  his  child.  That  was  clearly  a  matter
      considered by the judge  and  he  recorded  [KR]'s  evidence  in  that
      respect at [5]. However, the judge was nevertheless perfectly entitled
      to conclude that if the appellant had genuinely faced such threats and
      had such  a  fear,  he  would  have  referred  to  that  on  the  many
      opportunities that he had had and to consider that that undermined the
      credibility of his claim. Furthermore, the timing of  the  appellant's
      claim was not the only reason given by the judge for disbelieving  his
      account. Further cogent reasons were given at  [56]  to  [62]  of  his
      decision.


  31. Accordingly, for the reasons cogently given by the judge, and  on  the
      basis that he clearly had regard  to  all  the  relevant  evidence  in
      making his findings, his conclusion, that the appellant's  account  of
      the threats from [M] was not a genuine and credible one, was one  that
      was entirely and properly open to him on the evidence before  him.  He
      was entitled to conclude that the appellant was not at risk in Jamaica
      and to reject his asylum claim and grounds.


  32. With regard to the challenge to the judge's findings on Article  8,  I
      find again that the decision  is  a  detailed  and  comprehensive  one
      containing a careful assessment  of  all  the  evidence  and  cogently
      reasoned findings. Contrary to the submissions made by Ms Sood, I find
      no basis for considering that the judge erred by relying  on  findings
      previously made in the appellant's deportation appeal. The  judge  was
      perfectly entitled to rely on the findings previously made and  indeed
      that was in accordance with the principles in Devaseelan. It is  clear
      that the judge took those findings as a starting point, but then  went
      on to  consider  circumstances  arising  since  the  decision  in  the
      deportation appeal.


  33. Contrary  to  Ms  Sood's  submission,  it  is  clear  that  the  judge
      considered and applied the criteria in paragraphs 399(a) and  (b)  and
      399A before going on to consider the appellant's circumstances outside
      those provisions. At [80] to [94] he gave  detailed  consideration  to
      the appellant's child and the child of his former partner, considering
      their best interests and the effect that his deportation would have on
      them, concluding at [94] that the criteria in paragraph 399(a) had not
      been met. I agree that he considered the rules as  they  were  at  the
      time of the respondent's decision and therefore did  not  specifically
      consider the relevant provisions of "undue harshness" as  appeared  in
      the rules and section 117C at the time of the hearing.  However  there
      can be no doubt, from the findings carefully made, that he  considered
      that it would not be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK
      without him, and that nothing material arises from such  an  omission.
      The same can be said  for  the  judge's  findings  in  regard  to  the
      appellant's relationship with [KR], where extensive consideration  was
      given to the question of her relocation to Jamaica  and  the  problems
      that would entail, and to the effects of separation  if  she  did  not
      elect to relocate, with the conclusion at [117] that the  criteria  in
      paragraph 399(b) were not met.


  34. The judge went on to  consider  the  appellant's  private  life  under
      paragraph 399A and again, whilst considering that in  the  context  of
      the rules as they were at the time of refusal, it is  clear  from  his
      findings  that  he  concluded  that  there  would  be  no  significant
      obstacles to the appellant integrating in Jamaica. Having  found  that
      the appellant could not meet the criteria in paragraph  399  and  399A
      the judge did not specifically refer to the test in paragraph  398  or
      to the factors in section 117, but is clear  from  his  findings  from
      [121] to [132] that he  considered  all  relevant  matters  and  found
      nothing about the circumstances  of  the  appellant  to  outweigh  the
      public interest in his  deportation.  Accordingly,  in  light  of  the
      findings fully and properly  made  by  the  judge  in  regard  to  the
      appellant's circumstances in terms of his family and private life, and
      to the circumstances to which he would return in Jamaica, I find  that
      his Article 8 assessment was one that was lawfully made.


  35. Accordingly, I find no errors of law in the judge's decision such that
      it should be set aside, and I uphold his decision.

DECISION

  36. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.









Signed
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  12 July 2016
