
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA034192015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 21st July 2017                     |On 03rd August 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                               miss FOSIYA ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A A Mohamed - Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia born on 1st  January  1997.   The
    Appellant made application for entry clearance to join her  parents  in
    the United Kingdom for  settlement.   Her  application  was  considered
    under paragraphs 297 and  320(3)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  her
    application was refused by the Entry Clearance  Officer  by  Notice  of
    Refusal dated 22nd January 2015.

 2. The Appellant appealed the  Notice  of  Refusal  and  that  appeal  was
    initially considered by the Entry Clearance Manager.  By appeal  review
    dated 19th August 2015 the original decision to refuse entry  clearance
    was maintained.

 3. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Ross sitting at Taylor House on 18th October 2016.  In  a
    brief decision and reasons dated 21st  November  2016  the  Appellant's
    appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 4. On 8th December 2016 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those Grounds of Appeal noted that  the  Appellant
    was seeking to join the Sponsor, her father, in the UK  and  to  reside
    with him, his spouse and his seven other children.  It was  noted  that
    the Appellant resided in a three bedroom property.  In terms of meeting
    the accommodation requirements the Secretary of  State  contended  that
    the judge had not properly taken into account the number of  occupants,
    the size of the Sponsor's property and the number of rooms it  contains
    in order to establish whether the property would be overcrowded  within
    the definition as set out at Part X of the Housing Act 1985.

 5. On 31st May 2017 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ransley  granted
    permission to appeal.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  For the  purpose  of  continuity  throughout  the
    appeal process Miss Ali is referred to herein as the Appellant and  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent albeit that this is an  appeal  by
    the Secretary of State.  The Secretary of State  appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Mr Duffy.  The Appellant  is  represented  by
    her father and Sponsor Mr Mohamed.

Preliminary Issues

 7. Mr Duffy sought to amend the Grounds of  Appeal  which  were  given  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Ransley under Procedure Rule  5(3)(c).
    I gave due consideration  to  the  application  and  granted  it.   The
    Sponsor was present.  I explained the process to him and enquired as to
    whether he had any comments to make.  He did not  with  regard  to  the
    application but did generally with regard to the appeal.   I  intimated
    that I would hear from him in due course.

Submissions/Discussion

 8. Mr Duffy indicated the First-tier Tribunal Judge had noted that Counsel
    instructed by the Secretary of State had agreed that Rule 319R was  the
    applicable Rule and he submitted that  that  manifestly  was  not,  and
    could not be, the case.  He points out that the application was made on
    29th December 2014 and therefore Rule 297 was the  applicable  Rule  as
    identified by the Entry Clearance Officer.  I accept this.  Mr  Ahmed's
    concession was wrong in law and should not have been  followed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge as the Appellant did not meet the criteria to
    engage with Rule 319R in the first place.  Mr Mohamed indicated he  did
    not understand or follow the Rule but  he  understood  the  basis  upon
    which the Notice of Refusal had  originally  been  made  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  I consequently agreed to the amendment.

Submissions/Discussion

 9. Mr Duffy refers to me Part X of the 1985 Housing Act which sets out the
    definition of  overcrowding  to  include  at  paragraph  325  the  room
    standard to persons of the opposite sex per room subject to leaving out
    children under the age of 10 and to  the  space  standard  set  out  at
    paragraph 326.  He points out  that  there  is  no  reference  to  this
    analysis or any reasoned findings regarding it in the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  He points out that this is an Appellant who
    lives with his wife and seven children and that the judge has failed to
    give any reasoned reasons for making  any  findings  the  accommodation
    could be reasonable.  He  submits  that  given  that  conclusion  which
    includes an error of law then it is necessary to look  at  the  amended
    Grounds of Appeal and that  the  application  is  one  that  should  be
    considered under paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules  and  that  the
    issues raised in detail by the Entry Clearance Officer as  endorsed  by
    the Entry Clearance Manager have not been addressed.  Further he points
    out that the refusal pursuant to paragraph 320(3)  that  the  Appellant
    had failed to provide a national passport or other documentary evidence
    establishing her identity and nationality had not  been  addressed  and
    the Appellant had not engaged with at all the Notice of Refusal  letter
    and that this had  not  been  properly  addressed  by  the  judge  thus
    constituting a further error of law.

10. Mr Mohamed pointed out that he had now moved property on  6th  February
    2017 to his current address at 8 Chester  Road,  N19.   He  produced  a
    rental agreement.  That agreement did not display any evidence  of  the
    size of  the  accommodation  albeit  that  he  indicated  that  it  was
    sufficient now to house his family to enable  him  to  accommodate  his
    daughter.  He made an impassioned plea that her appeal be  allowed  and
    thereby that the Secretary of State's appeal be dismissed.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

13. I explained carefully to Mr Mohamed the issues that were outstanding on
    this appeal.  I explained to him the matters of law that needed  to  be
    addressed and that the Secretary of State's submissions were that these
    issues had not been  properly  addressed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  I am quite satisfied that  the  judge  has  not  addressed  the
    appropriate issues.  I am equally satisfied that  there  was  an  error
    made by the Secretary of State's  legal  representative  in  suggesting
    that this matter should be dealt with under Rule 319R rather than  297.
    Mr Mohamed indicates and suggests that the  accommodation  problem  has
    been addressed by his moving to new accommodation.  This I pointed  out
    to Mr Mohamed does not assist.  It does not  assist  for  two  reasons.
    Firstly as the move takes place after the date of decision the Tribunal
    will be limited under this application to address issues that relate at
    the  date  of  decision.   Secondly,  even  if  I  were  to  give   due
    consideration to the documents provided they do not  show  in  any  way
    that the accommodation could now meet the requirements of Part X of the
    Housing Act 1985.

14. It is not however only with regard to the manner in which the judge has
    addressed the issue of accommodation where he has erred in law  but  he
    has also failed to address maintenance.  He has not engaged at all with
    regard to the maintenance level and he has  not  given  proper  or  due
    consideration to the issue of sole responsibility.  The  only  findings
    which would appear  to  be  unchallenged  relate  to  the  decision  on
    paternity.

15. The correct approach therefore is to find that there are, for  all  the
    above reasons, material errors of law in the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  I also  consider  it  appropriate  to  set  aside  the
    decision and to remit the matter back for rehearing before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal with none of the findings of fact to stand.   The  reason
    that I address this rather than to go on and remake the decision  today
    is because of the following reasons

      i) The Appellant is represented by her Sponsor.  There are  issues  of
         law here.  I accept the difficulty the Sponsor may have in  funding
         such an appeal but he must be advised that he would be  far  better
         to be represented on this matter than to appear in person and to be
         asked to address issues of law which with the greatest  of  respect
         to the Sponsor he has already indicated he does not feel that he is
         in a position to do.

     ii) Bearing in mind that the manner in which  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge addressed the issue was under  the  wrong  Immigration  Rule,
         albeit that the judge was led down that route by  the  Home  Office
         Presenting Officer, it is clear that there has not been a proper or
         full analysis of an appeal as it should have been  presented  under
         the correct Immigration Rule.

16. It is on those bases I consider  it  appropriate  that  the  matter  be
    remitted for rehearing and  I  set  aside  the  decision  having  found
    material errors of law for the reasons given above and give appropriate
    directions.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
is set aside.  The appeal is remitted back to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
rehearing and the following directions are to apply.

 1) The appeal is to be reheard remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting
    at Taylor House on the first available  date  28  days  hence  with  an
    estimated length of hearing of two hours before any First-tier Tribunal
    Judge other than Immigration Judge I Ross.

 2) That there be leave to either party to  file  at  the  Tribunal  and/or
    serve on the other party an up-to-date bundle of such subjective and/or
    objective evidence upon which they seek to rely  at  least  seven  days
    prior to the restored hearing date.

 3) That in the event the Appellant's representative i.e. her Sponsor or on
    the instruction of such legal representatives that she should  seek  to
    instruct through her Sponsor that an interpreter is required to  attend
    the restored hearing then such legal representatives and/or the Sponsor
    should notify the Tribunal of  the  language  requirement  of  such  an
    interpreter within seven days of receipt of these directions.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 27th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date 27th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



