
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03683/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th August 2014                             |On 9th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              MR HANIFI BOZDAG
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ISTANBUL


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss M Chargar (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Camp promulgated on 23rd  April  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 16th April 2014 in which the judge dismissed  the  appeal
    of Hanifi Bozdag.  The Appellant  subsequently  applied  for,  and  was
    granted, permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of  Turkey,  who  was  born  on  5th
    February 1972.  He applied for entry clearance from Turkey in order  to
    establish a business under the Turkey - European Community  Association
    Agreement.  His application was refused on 19th December 2012.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he has applied to establish a business in
    the UK under the Turkey -  European  Community  Association  Agreement,
    which contains a "standstill clause" which means that the  UK  may  not
    impose conditions on entry  for  business  applicants  which  are  less
    favourable than those which were in force when the agreement came  into
    effect in the UK in 1973.  Instead, what had to be looked at  were  the
    provisions in HC 509.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge was struck by the fact that the decision in relation  to  the
    Appellant had been "prepared from a template  giving  various  options.
    Some options, in particular relating to audited accounts, do not appear
    to have  been  adequately  selected  or  adjusted  to  the  Appellant's
    situation" (para 3).  This is clearly an unsatisfactory feature of  the
    decision against the Appellant in this case.  The judge also had regard
    to the Entry Clearance Manager's review dated 12th August  2013,  which
    referred to the fact that the Appellant  had  been  living  in  the  UK
    illegally as an absconder for a number  of  years,  and  there  was  no
    evidence as to when he returned to Turkey.

 5. Moreover, an education report provided in his application was forged as
    the document verification report made clear.  In any event, there was a
    lack of evidence regarding the Appellant's experience in  the  line  of
    business that he had chosen.

 6. It was against this background that the  judge  made  his  findings  of
    fact.  Two matters  in  particular  were  relevant.   First,  that  the
    Appellant had knowingly spent time illegally  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Second, there was the production of a document which was  known  to  be
    false.  The judge  concluded  that  the  Turkey  -  European  Community
    Association Agreement did not mean that  business  applicants  who  are
    Turkish nationals can disregard all the UK legislation, whether primary
    or secondary, passed since 1973 (see para 25).  The Appellant  did  not
    meet the criteria laid down by Appendix FM or paragraph 276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  His appeal was dismissed at all levels.

Grounds of Application

 7. The Grounds of Appeal raise a number of issues.  It is  said  that  the
    judge admitted evidence of submission of  alleged  fraudulent  document
    when the Respondent had failed to comply with  the  court's  directions
    regarding service of a bundle of documents on  the  Appellant  and  his
    legal representatives.  Second, the judge failed to have regard to  the
    fact that the Entry Clearance Officer was bound to refer to  provisions
    in HC 509 which were the 1973 Immigration Rules.  Third, the judge made
    material errors in  relation  to  dicta  in  the  recent  case  of  Kop
    (Dishonesty  Alleged  -  HC  510)  [2012]  UKUT  00264.   Fourth,   the
    standstill clause did not exactly mean what the judge stipulated.

 8. On 12th June 2014 permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis  that
    the judge had admitted the document verification report but it was  not
    clear whether the Appellant's representative had objected to  the  late
    service of the Respondent's documents.

 9. On 26th June 2014 a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that  it
    was difficult to see where there was a  procedural  unfairness  grounds
    error of law.  Also the judge did not err in  relation  to  the  Ankara
    Agreement.

10. At the hearing before me on 15th August 2014 Miss Chargar, appearing as
    Counsel on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that she had  taken  some
    time to discuss a preliminary issue with Mr Smart, who  appeared  as  a
    Senior Presenting Office on behalf of the Respondent.  This  issue  was
    the service of the Respondent's bundle, which  contained  the  document
    verification report and the allegation of false material.   Mr  Chargar
    submitted that the ECO's bundle was not sent to the Appellant.  It  was
    not sent to the Appellant's representatives either.  It was not sent to
    Mr E Umer, who was Counsel appearing at the hearing on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant.  It was not sent to his solicitor, SH and Co Solicitors.

11. For this reason, the Appellant's representatives were  unable  to  deal
    with the issues as effectively as they otherwise would have  done.   It
    was this that amounted to a procedural irregularity  and  a  procedural
    error of law.

12. The skeleton argument by Mr E Umer did make it clear that they were not
    in receipt of the Respondent's bundle.  Indeed,  even  at  the  hearing
    itself there was no Respondent's bundle available for  them.   If  this
    was right, then the only course of  action  was  to  have  this  matter
    remitted to a First-tier Tribunal Judge again so that there is equality
    of arms and any allegation against the Appellant can be properly  dealt
    with.

13. For his part, Mr Smart submitted that it was not  clear  that  Mr  Umer
    raised the question of non-service of the Respondent's bundle upon  the
    Appellant's representatives.  Whereas the application form  was  signed
    off by SH and Co Solicitors of Dudley Road in Birmingham, in Section 5,
    which contains the heading "representative details" (see page 7 of  the
    form), there was no entry made of either  Mr  Umer  or  of  SH  and  Co
    Solicitors.  Therefore, the Respondent would have been at loss to  know
    who to send the bundle to.  If the Appellant was the architect  of  his
    own misfortune, or if his legal  representatives  were  responsible  in
    this way, then there would not be a procedural error of law.

Error of Law

14. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    [2007]) such that I should set aside this decision.  I am so  satisfied
    for this reason.  I have taken the  opportunity  of  looking  at  Judge
    Camp's handwritten Record of Proceedings.  This contains an  entry,  "A
    has not received documents."  This is consistent with what Mr Umer, the
    representative on the day, stated in  his  skeleton  argument,  namely,
    they were not in receipt of the Respondent's bundle.

15. On the other hand, this Tribunal does have a bundle, and did  have  one
    at the time of the hearing.  The question arises as to why this  bundle
    was  not  served  by  the  Respondent  on   the   Appellant   and   his
    representatives.   I  am  far  from  satisfied  that  the   Appellant's
    representatives bear no blame for this.

16. At the  very  least,  the  Section  with  the  heading  "Representative
    Details" (see Section 5 at page 7 of the application form) should  have
    been filled by a solicitor's firm making  the  application.   Had  that
    Section been filled the bundle would doubtless have been  sent  by  the
    Respondent to SH and Co Solicitors.

17. Be that as it may, the net effect of this is that it is  the  Appellant
    who has found himself unable to deal with allegations of fraud, serious
    as they are, and given that this is the case, it must be right  to  set
    this matter aside, for it to be remitted back to a First-tier  Tribunal
    to be heard by a judge other than Judge Camp, so that the Appellant  is
    not deprived of the full  effects  of  a  proper  hearing  pursuant  to
    Practice Statement 7.2.  This I therefore now do.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the
    decision of the original judge.  I remit this matter back to the First-
    tier Tribunal to be heard by a judge other than Judge Camp.   I  should
    emphasise that the Appellant should not raise his  hopes  as  there  is
    much in the background to the case, not least the "legacy"  application
    made at a time when the Appellant appears not to have been in  the  UK,
    that militates against him.  This, however, must be a  matter  for  the
    judge at first instance when this matter is heard again de novo.

19. This appeal is allowed.

20. No anonymity order is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th September 2014

