
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03385/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 August 2015                    |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MOSCOW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     msh
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Lloyd, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Russia, born in 1959, and is  married  to
    the sponsor, a British citizen, born on 15 June 1939.  She  applied  to
    join the sponsor for settlement on 14 July 2013.  This application  was
    refused on 19 June 2013 and the refusal was maintained but modified  by
    the Entry Clearance Manager in a review dated 14 July 2014.

2.   The  appellant  appealed  and  her  appeal  came  before  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge on 4 November 2014.  The judge set out  the  grounds  of
    refusal in paragraph 4 of the decision.  It is fair to say that at that
    stage there were issues about the status of  the  relationship  between
    the appellant and the sponsor but these matters were  resolved  in  the
    parties' favour by the judge and an appeal has not been brought against
    those findings.  The point was taken by the respondent that the parties
    had got married after the date of decision.  It was submitted that they
    had not been in a relationship akin to marriage for two years prior  to
    the date of application.  However the principal point at issue  is  the
    financial requirements and it was submitted that  the  couple  did  not
    meet the relevant requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  although  a
    final decision had not been reached on this aspect pending  a  decision
    of the Court of Appeal.

3.   The background to the relationship  between  the  parties  is  somewhat
    complex. Both the appellant and the sponsor  had  previously  divorced.
    They became engaged in 2005 and married in 2007.  The appellant  has  a
    daughter, L, a British citizen, and she, the daughter, has a son, A.

4.   The parties met each other in 2005  and  married  in  Russia  in  2007.
    The appellant was granted an entry clearance as a spouse and arrived in
    the UK in 2007.  The relationship broke down and the  parties  divorced
    in 2009.  However they reconciled in 2010 and the judge  accepted  that
    the couple started living together again in October 2010.

5.   The  judge  heard  from  the  sponsor  at  the  hearing  who  was  then
    representing the appellant.  Among other things the sponsor said he had
    health problems and had to undergo a  surgical  operation  requiring  a
    responsible person who would look after him  for  24  hours  after  the
    operation.  The absence of the appellant and the lack of  psychological
    stability made his health worse.  He  had  had  a  long  work  history,
    taking over his father's business in 1965 and he had continued to  work
    for the business on a part-time basis.

6.   The judge found the sponsor to be a credible witness and was  satisfied
    that the parties had lived together as partners for two years prior  to
    the application.

7.   The judge then went on to consider the financial  requirements  finding
    that while the appellant and sponsor had sufficient  funds  they  could
    not satisfy the evidential requirements of the Rules.  The  judge  then
    went on to consider Article 8.  Having referred to Razgar  v  Secretary
    of State [2004] UKHL 27 and the  need  to  safeguard  and  promote  the
    welfare of children, the judge then directed himself  by  reference  to
    Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 and MM v Secretary of State [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    985.  The judge found that the Rules did not provide  a  complete  code
    and concluded his determination as follows:

         "54. I have to consider Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and
             Asylum Act 2002, as added by the Immigration Act 2014  Section
             19.  Section 117A requires that I  must,  in  considering  the
             public interest question, have regard  in  all  cases  to  the
             considerations listed in Section 117B.   The  public  interest
             question means 'the question of whether an interference with a
             person's right to respect  for  private  and  family  life  is
             justified under Article  8(2)'  [Section  117AS(2)  and  (3)].
             Section 117B(1)  states  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
             immigration controls is in the public interest.

         55.  Section 117B(2) states that it is the public interest  that  a
             person seeking to remain in the UK  should be  able  to  speak
             English. The appellant appears to have obtained  the  relevant
             English language certificates.

         56.  Section 117B(2) states that it is in the public interest,  and
             in particular in the interests of the  economic  wellbeing  of
             the UK, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the UK are
             financially independent.  I am satisfied (given my findings in
             relation to Appendix FM) that the appellant  and  the  sponsor
             are financially independent.

         57.  However, what I have to consider is not whether  it  would  be
             proportionate to expect the appellant to reapply.  I have  not
             found this is an easy question.  I find that the  relationship
             between the couple is a genuine one (although I can understand
             why the respondent did not - on the basis of  the  information
             before him - accept  that  it  was.  The  appellant  also  has
             another - good -reason, for wishing to enter  the  UK;  to  be
             with her (divorced) daughter L.  and  L.'s  son  A.  L.  is  a
             British citizen as is (I assume) A. I am required to take into
             the account not only the appellant's interests, but also those
             of the sponsor, L. and A.  I specifically  consider  A.  under
             Section 55.  I am satisfied  on the evidence,  that  both  the
             appellant and the sponsor (the one being his  grandmother  and
             the other his godfather) have had a much  closer  relationship
             with A. than many who have such relationships, if only because
             of the time they have spent with him.  The sponsor has medical
             conditions, and is waiting for a further operation. He is also
             over 70, although the appellant is 20 years younger. I  accept
             that Foreign Office advice is that British citizens should not
             visit North Caucasus where the appellant is at present living.
             Against  that,  of  course,  is  the  respondent's  legitimate
             interest in the maintenance of effective immigration  control,
             a matter re-emphasised in Section 117B of the 2002 Act. I take
             into account that the appellant tried unsuccessfully to remain
             in the UK outside the Rules, and was (eventually) issued  with
             removal direction. However, the evidence  of  the  sponsor  is
             that she left voluntarily.  This  is  marginally  against  the
             appellant, but not a matter (in the context of this appeal) of
             great significance.

         58.  Taking all  these  matters  into  account,  I  find  that  the
             respondent's decision is not proportionate.

         59.  For completeness' sake I consider this case on the alternative
             basis that my finding that the Rules do not provide a complete
             code is incorrect.  If that is so, I have to find  that  there
             are exceptional or compelling circumstances.  I have not found
             this an easy exercise.  I  repeat  my  findings  at  paragraph
             above.  The  exceptional  or  compelling  circumstances   are,
             cumulatively, that the respondent cannot (if only  because  of
             Foreign Office  advice)  live  with  the  appellant  in  North
             Caucasus; the appellant has two members of  her  family  (both
             British citizens) in the UK; the  sponsor  is  suffering  from
             medical conditions and he is waiting  for  another  operation.
             With considerable doubt,  I  find  that  these  circumstances,
             cumulatively, are exceptional and compelling."

8.   The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal under the Rules but  allowed
    the appeal on human rights grounds.

9.   Permission to appeal was sought.  It was argued that as  the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Rules an  Article  8  assessment
    should only be carried out when there were compelling circumstances not
    recognised by the Rules as made  clear  in  Gulshan.   Such  compelling
    circumstances had not been identified. The parties  could  either  live
    together in Russia or make  a  further  application  supported  by  the
    correct evidence.  It would not be unjustifiably harsh for them to live
    in Russia.  They could relocate if required.  Article 8 should  not  be
    used to circumvent the requirements of the Rules.  In relation  to  the
    appellant's child and grandchild, the appellant was currently  overseas
    and the refusal maintained the status quo. There was no reason why  the
    appellant could not make a fresh application  based  on  the  sponsor's
    income and the appellant had an alternative remedy.

10.  Miss Isherwood relied on the grounds of appeal  and  pointed  out  that
    the judge had misdirected himself in paragraph 9 in  referring  to  the
    appellant seeking leave to enter as the spouse of the sponsor.  She had
    not been married at that time - the marriage was post-decision.

11.  The couple had failed to meet the financial requirements  set  down  by
    the Rules and I was referred to paragraph 44 of SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 387 where the Court of Appeal had referred to the  need  to  assess
    the force of the public interest given expression in  the  Rules  which
    would be relevant to the balancing exercise under Article 8.

12.  Miss Isherwood pointed out that in paragraph 52  the  Court  of  Appeal
    had stated that the Rules regarding evidence about funds had  the  same
    general objective as the substantive Rules:

         "Namely to limit the risk that someone is admitted into the  United
         Kingdom and then becomes a burden  on  public  resources,  and  the
         Secretary of State has the same primary  function  in  relation  to
         them, to assess the risk and put in place measures which are judged
         suitable to contain it within acceptable  bounds.   Similar  weight
         should be given to her  assessment  of  what  the  public  interest
         requires in both contexts."

13.  Everyone should be treated  equally  and  fairly  in  relation  to  the
    evidential requirements - Miss Isherwood referred to paragraph 53 of SS
    (Congo).   She also relied on paragraph 57 and the  fact  that  it  was
    generally fair that an appellant should wait until  he  could   satisfy
    the requirements of the Rules and not attempt to jump the  queue.   The
    Court of Appeal had  also  made  it  clear  in  paragraph  39(iv)  that
    children were not a trump card.  She referred to  paragraph  40  of  SS
    (Congo) where the Court considered the wider margin of appreciation  in
    leave to enter (LTE) cases as opposed to leave to  remain  (LTR)  cases
    and the need to show compelling circumstances:

         "In the light of these authorities we consider that the state has a
         wider margin of appreciation in determining the  conditions  to  be
         satisfied before LTE is granted, by contrast with the  position  in
         relation to decisions  regarding  LTR  for  persons  with  a  (non-
         precarious) family life already established in the United  Kingdom.
         The Secretary of State has already, in effect,  made  some  use  of
         this wider margin of appreciation by excluding Section  EX.1  as  a
         basis for grant of LTE, although it is available  as  a  basis  for
         grant of LTR.  The LTE Rules therefore maintain, in general  terms,
         a reasonable relationship with the requirements of Article 8 in the
         ordinary run of cases.  However, it  remains  possible  to  imagine
         cases where the individual interests at stake are of a particularly
         pressing nature so that as good claim for LTE  can  be  established
         outside  the  Rules.   In  our  view,   the   appropriate   general
         formulation for this category is that such cases will  arise  where
         an applicant for LTE can show that compelling  circumstances  exist
         (which are not sufficiently recognised  under  the  new  Rules)  to
         require a grant of such leave."

14.  Miss Lloyd  relied  on  her  chronology  and  skeleton  argument.   She
    submitted  that  the  reference  to  spouse  at  paragraph  9  of   the
    determination was a mistake but no more.  The matter was  clarified  at
    paragraph 40 of the decision where the judge stated  he  was  satisfied
    that the parties were not married as at the date of decision.

15.  While there was no general obligation to facilitate the choice made  by
    a married couple as to where to reside, evidence had been introduced to
    show that advice from the Foreign Office was to the effect that British
    citizens should not visit North Caucasus where the  appellant  resided.
    As was said by the Court of Appeal at paragraph 26 of SS (Congo) it was
    clearly possible to imagine  that  there  might  be  some  cases  where
    notwithstanding that the requirements of the Rules were  not  met,  the
    circumstances of the individual case has such force  that  leave  would
    have to be granted outside the Rules.

16.  There would be a need to  show  compelling  circumstances,  Miss  Lloyd
    submitted.  Although the judge had reached his  decision  prior  to  SS
    (Congo)  he  had  directed  himself  correctly  in  finding  compelling
    circumstances and the respondent would need to show that those findings
    were perverse if they were to be overturned.  To  establish  perversity
    required surmounting a high threshold.

17.  The judge had found that the couple had the finances required  but  the
    appeal failed under the Rules for evidential reasons and could thus  be
    treated as a near-miss case and reference was made to paragraphs 54  to
    58 of SS (Congo).  This was not a case where the parties were expecting
    their position to improve and their  position  could  be  distinguished
    from what was said in paragraph 57 about jumping the queue.  This was a
    case in which the sponsor was over 70 and had health problems and might
    expect difficulties in  travelling.  The  judge  had  referred  to  the
    sponsor's operations at paragraphs 31  and  37  of  the  determination.
    The sponsor had a long work history in the United Kingdom and while the
    position of the appellant's daughter and grandson did not amount  to  a
    trump card, it was a factor to take into account under  Section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.   The  situation  in
    this case was different from many cases.  There would be difficulty for
    family life being enjoyed by the parties together with the  appellant's
    daughter and grandson and the evidence about  the  situation  in  North
    Caucasus added a further complicating factor.  The judge had also given
    weight to the public interest reflected in Section 117B as inserted  by
    the Immigration Act 2014.  There was no error in the determination  and
    the conclusions were not perverse.  Counsel also mentioned the case  of
    Chikwamba v Secretary of State [2008] UKHL 40.

18.  Miss Isherwood submitted that there was  nothing  different  about  the
    situation in this case and the appeal did not represent a near miss and
    the circumstances could be distinguished from  Chikwamba.   The  couple
    should wait until they could meet the  financial  requirements  of  the
    Rules.

19.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision if it was materially
    flawed in law.

20.  I also remind  myself  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  the
    benefit of hearing from the sponsor.   Miss  Isherwood  submitted  that
    there was nothing different about the circumstances in this  case  from
    any other case.  However I respectfully disagree.  The first  point  to
    note is that the parties were previously married.  Indeed the appellant
    was granted an entry clearance as  a  spouse  and  entered  the  United
    Kingdom  as  a  spouse.   The  parties  then  got  divorced  and   were
    subsequently reconciled and after the respondent's decision  remarried.
    The history is somewhat unusual. The judge found  the  relationship  as
    partners was genuine and did not materially err  in  referring  to  the
    marriage at an early stage of his determination - he  was  quite  clear
    about it being a post-decision matter, as he says in paragraph 40.

21.   The  judge  also  specifically  considered  the   interests   of   the
    appellant's grandson and found that both the appellant and the  sponsor
    have had a much closer relationship with the  grandson  than  many  who
    have had such relationships.  This was a relevant matter for the  judge
    to consider.  The judge also referred to the sponsor's age and  medical
    conditions and the need  for  a  further  operation.   It  was  not  an
    irrelevant consideration to take into  account  Foreign  Office  advice
    against travel to the North Caucasus.

22.  Miss Isherwood correctly refers to the need to take  into  account  the
    Secretary of State's position.  The judge did not have the  benefit  of
    SS (Congo) when he determined the matter but he does refer, as  I  have
    said earlier, to Gulshan and MM v Secretary of State.  He also sets out
    the amendments made by the 2014 Act and expressly reminds himself  that
    Section 117B(1) states that the maintenance  of  effective  immigration
    controls is in the public interest.

23.   In  paragraph  59  the  judge  finds  that  the  circumstances  viewed
    cumulatively were both exceptional and compelling.  There is  force  in
    the submission made on behalf of Miss Lloyd that  these  findings  were
    open to the judge and should only be disturbed if they  were  perverse.
    She rightly points out the high threshold - see, for example, R  (Iran)
    v Secretary of State  [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at paragraph 11 per Brooke  L
    J:

         "It may be helpful to comment quite briefly on three matters  first
         of all. It is well known that "perversity" represents a  very  high
         hurdle. In Miftari v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  481,  the  whole  court
         agreed that the word  meant  what  it  said:  it  was  a  demanding
         concept. The majority of the court (Keene and Maurice Kay LJJ) said
         that it embraced decisions that were irrational or unreasonable  in
         the Wednesbury sense (even if there  was  no  wilful  or  conscious
         departure from the rational), but it also  included  a  finding  of
         fact that was wholly unsupported by the evidence,  provided  always
         that this was a finding as to a material matter."

24.  It is clear that the judge found the matter not an easy one to  resolve
    as he says in both paragraphs  57  and  59  of  the  determination  but
    resolve it he did and he resolved it in favour of  the  appellant.   It
    may be that another judge would have come to a different conclusion  or
    supported the conclusion with different or other  reasons  but  he  was
    entitled to find as he did in a properly reasoned decision.

25.  When the determination is read as a whole it is clear  that  the  judge
    gave proper weight to the public interest.  The reference to a complete
    code in the determination needs to be read in the  light  of  the  fact
    that the judge did not have the benefit of paragraph 43 of  SS  (Congo)
    which reads as follows:

         "We should say something about the notion  of  a  'complete  code',
         which has been deployed in argument in some cases  (see,  e.g.,  MM
         (Lebanon) at paragraphs [131]-[132] in the judgment of the Court of
         Appeal). Tribunals and courts should not  attach  undue  weight  to
         this concept, which is capable of giving rise to confusion  if  not
         properly understood. In truth,  it  does  not  have  a  significant
         impact on the proper legal approach to be deployed in  any  of  the
         types of case to which we have referred."

26.  Happily this case the judge sensibly dealt with the matter both on  the
    basis that the Rules formed a complete code and on the basis that  they
    did not.  On the particular facts of this case as the judge found  them
    to be he did not err in law in concluding that cumulatively there  were
    exceptional and compelling circumstances and to  allow  the  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.

Decision

27.  The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed and the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge to allow the appeal under Article 8 stands.

28.  The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  (because  a
    minor child was involved) continues.

Fee Award

29.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make  a  fee  award.   I  do  not
    consider it appropriate to make a fee award.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Warr
27 August 2015

