
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03702/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Oral judgment given at hearing                |On 29 August 2014            |
|On 12 August 2014                             |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr Ahmadullah

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No Legal Representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in these  proceedings  is  the  entry  clearance  officer
    ("eco"), but I refer to the parties as they were before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He was born  on  1  January
    1985. He made an application for entry clearance  as  a  spouse.   That
    application was refused in a decision  dated  17  December  2012.   The
    application was made and refused with reference to paragraphs  281  and
    320 of the immigration rules, HC 395 (as amended).

 3. It is important to say at this stage that it was accepted on behalf  of
    the eco before me, that notwithstanding  what  is  in  the  grounds  of
    challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision, the  'new'  Article  8
    Rules do not and did not apply to this appeal.

 4. The refusal of the appellant's application for entry clearance raised a
    number of issues.  In support of  the  application  the  appellant  had
    provided a passport giving a particular name and a date of birth  of  1
    January 1985.  The name on the passport is the name in which his appeal
    was advanced.  However, records said to be available from  a  biometric
    finger scan show that on 5 January 2008, when he applied for indefinite
    leave to remain in the UK, he gave different personal details in  terms
    of his name as well as a different date of birth, that  date  of  birth
    being 1 January 1990.  Further records  appeared  to  show  that  on  7
    January 2008 when he came to the attention of  the  police  he  gave  a
    different name from the one in the passport and again a different  date
    of birth, that is a third date of birth.

 5. Various aliases are referred to in the notice of  decision.   The  visa
    application  form,  so  the  decision  says,  has  not   satisfactorily
    explained his change of identity on the visa application.  In the light
    of the multiple use of identities by the appellant,  the  eco  was  not
    satisfied  that  the  appellant  had  satisfactorily  established   his
    identity.  The application was therefore refused under paragraph 320(3)
    of the immigration rules.

 6. The decision also referred to paragraph 320(11).   That  related  to  a
    contention that the appellant had previously contrived in a significant
    way to frustrate the intentions  of  the  immigration  rules.   He  had
    stated that he came to the UK in 2005 and had been granted a  visa  but
    there was  no  trace  of  such  a  visa.   There  was  no  evidence  to
    substantiate that claim.

 7. The appellant came to the attention of the UK  immigration  authorities
    in January 2008, and although vaguely expressed within  the  notice  of
    decision, it states that he was "issued" a custodial sentence  at  that
    time, although what for is not stated.  He then  made  his  application
    for indefinite leave to remain and gave the identities to which I  have
    referred.  He left the UK in April 2008 having  been  detained  by  the
    immigration authorities.  It was those circumstances which led  to  the
    refusal under paragraph 320(11).

 8. A further ground for refusal was under  the  'substantive'  immigration
    rules in relation to spouses; that is paragraph 281(ii), which  relates
    to the English language requirement.

 9. First-tier Tribunal Judge C. M. Phillips heard the appeal  against  the
    refusal of entry clearance, on 26 March 2014.  She concluded  that  the
    appeal under the immigration rules should be dismissed but she  allowed
    the appeal on human rights grounds, with reference to Article 8 of  the
    ECHR.   She  heard  evidence  from  the  sponsor  and  from  two  other
    witnesses.

10. At [7] of the determination the judge said that it  was  accepted  that
    the appellant had used false names in the past and he does not have the
    required English language qualification.

11. At [11] she referred to the decision in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT  000702
    in terms of a previous appeal in relation to an application made by the
    appellant for entry clearance.  That appeal was  heard  by  Immigration
    Judge O'Connor, as he then was,  on  18  April  2011.   Judge  O'Connor
    dismissed the appeal, making a number of adverse  credibility  findings
    against the appellant and the sponsor.

12. The First-tier Judge  in  this  case,  Judge  Phillips,  made  findings
    starting at [27] of the determination.  She concluded  that  it  was  a
    matter in the appellant's favour that the sponsor attended the  hearing
    "thus demonstrating clearly her knowledge of the  application  and  her
    support for the application and for the appeal."  She stated  that  she
    found the sponsor and the witnesses to be credible.

13. At [28] she acknowledged that the  starting  point  in  her  assessment
    should  be  the  determination  of  Immigration  Judge   O'Connor,   in
    accordance with the decision in  Devaseelan.   She  referred  to  Judge
    O'Connor's  conclusion  that  the  sponsor's  relationship   with   the
    appellant was not genuine and that the appellant had not  fathered  her
    children.  That was also a refusal under paragraph 320(11).

14. However, Judge Phillips had before her DNA evidence that was not before
    Judge O'Connor.  She referred  to  that  evidence  at  [29],  it  being
    evidence that the judge concluded showed that  the  appellant  was  the
    father of the sponsor's children.  She  noted  that  it  postdated  the
    respondent's decision but found it admissible  because  it  related  to
    circumstances obtaining at the time of the decision.

15. At [30] Judge Phillips noted that no issue was  taken  in  the  refusal
    with the genuine and subsisting nature of the relationship or with  the
    paternity of the sponsor's children.   For  completeness  however,  she
    concluded that the DNA evidence established  the  relationship  between
    the appellant and the children, and that it  further  established  that
    the relationship between the appellant and the sponsor was genuine  and
    subsisting and that they  intended  to  live  together  permanently  as
    spouses.

16. Judge Phillips  acknowledged  at  [31]  that  the  appellant  had  used
    different identities although noted that there was a difference of view
    as to why he had used different identities.  Nevertheless at  [31]  she
    found that  the  sponsor  had  consistently  used  the  name  that  the
    appellant  used  on  his  passport  and   for   the   entry   clearance
    applications.  The judge considered the question  of  the  passport  at
    [32], and  the  extent  to  which  it  satisfactorily  established  the
    appellant's identity and nationality.

17. She went on to consider paragraphs 320(11), and 281  in  terms  of  the
    language requirement.  She  considered  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  and
    ultimately concluded, taking into account the  best  interests  of  the
    appellant's children, that the decision to refuse entry clearance would
    amount to a disproportionate "interference", as she described it,  with
    the appellant's Article 8 right to family life.

18. Now the grounds on behalf of the eco, at [1], assert that the judge was
    wrong to conclude that merely because the sponsor attended the hearing,
    that was a matter that the judge was entitled to take into  account  in
    assessing credibility.  However, it seems to me  that  that  contention
    does not adequately represent what the judge said in  this  respect  at
    [27].  The judge said that:

         "I find that it is in  the  appellant's  favour  that  the  sponsor
         attended the oral hearing thus demonstrating clearly her  knowledge
         of the application and her support for the application and for  the
         appeal.  I find the sponsor and the witnesses to be credible."

19. It was not the mere attendance of the sponsor that helped  to  persuade
    the judge of the sponsor's credibility.  It was  her  demonstration  of
    her knowledge of the application, her support for the application,  and
    in general terms the finding that the sponsor was credible.

20. It is said in ground 2 that the judge did not give adequate reasons for
    finding  that  the   appellant   had   established   his   nationality,
    particularly with reference to the passport.  At [32], on  that  issue,
    the judge said that she did not find that the respondent had set out in
    the refusal any basis for refusing to  accept  the  appellant's  Afghan
    passport as a document that satisfactorily established his identity and
    nationality.

21. It seems to me that what the judge was  referring  to  there  was  that
    there was no specific or direct challenge to the  passport  itself,  in
    its own terms, as opposed to in terms of the general  proposition  that
    it could not be relied on because  of  the  appellant's  use  of  false
    identities in the past. What is said in the determination at [32] is as
    follows:

         "I find that the respondent had not set  out  in  the  refusal  any
         basis for refusing to accept the appellant's Afghan passport  as  a
         document  that  satisfactorily   establishes   his   identity   and
         nationality. In the absence of any substantive  challenge  to  this
         document and in light of the other evidence I find  that  there  is
         sufficient evidence in the consistent evidence of the  sponsor  and
         witnesses and in the documentary evidence to justify a finding that
         the appellant  has  satisfactorily  established  his  identity  and
         nationality."

22. What the judge was saying there was that it was not just  the  passport
    that led her  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  has  established  his
    identity but the consistent evidence of the sponsor and  the  witnesses
    also led to that conclusion.  It is also right  to  say  that  the  DNA
    evidence  had  a  part  to  play  in  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's identity and nationality.

23. The grounds also attack the judge's conclusion in relation to paragraph
    322(11) of the immigration rules, and it is said that the judge  should
    not have concluded that the discretion under paragraph  320(11)  should
    have been exercised differently.  There is reference  to  the  evidence
    given on behalf of the appellant in terms  of  his  reasons  for  using
    deception, namely to protect his family from removal, a  decision  that
    was based on false premise in any event in terms of whether the  family
    would have been removed.

24. But it is important to see the judge's decision in context.  At [33] it
    was concluded that the discretion under paragraph 320(11)  should  have
    been exercised differently because the appellant's family life with the
    sponsor and his two young children in the United Kingdom had  not  been
    considered or taken into account by the respondent.

25. Although another judge may perhaps have come to a different view, Judge
    Phillips was entitled  to  conclude  that  it  was  credible  that  the
    appellant had not put forward a case to remain in the UK on  the  basis
    of family life in the UK in January 2008 because  he  feared  that  his
    family may be deported with him.  She then  concluded  that  it  was  a
    credible explanation for the use of different names and failure  to  be
    named on  the  birth  certificates,  an  omission  that  had  now  been
    corrected.

26. In the same paragraph it was stated as follows:

         "I find that when the family circumstances are taken  into  account
         along with the length of time since his deportation and the efforts
         made by this family to reunite that  the  refusal  under  paragraph
         320(11) is undermined."

    She then concluded that  the  discretion  should  have  been  exercised
    differently.

27. I am satisfied that those conclusions were conclusions that  were  open
    to the judge.  Paragraph 320(11) is a discretionary ground for  refusal
    and the judge was entitled in her assessment of the evidence to come to
    the view that the exercise  of  the  discretion  under  that  paragraph
    should have been made differently. In any event, she nevertheless found
    that the appellant was  not  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    immigration rules because of the language requirement.

28. It does not seem to me that the  issue  in  relation  to  the  language
    requirement in terms of the proportionality assessment  was  raised  in
    the  grounds  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  although  it  was  raised   in
    submissions by Mr Avery on behalf of the respondent.  It is in fact not
    correct to say that the judge did not give this  any  consideration  in
    the proportionality assessment.

29.  At  [40]  the  judge  stated  that  she  took  full  account  of   the
    circumstances weighing in favour of the refusal "including  the  weight
    to be attached to the English language requirements in the  Immigration
    Rules".

30. It is also important to note that she expressly took into  account  the
    appellant's "poor immigration history".  It is not the case  therefore,
    that in the proportionality assessment  the  judge  was  blind  to  the
    appellant's background  and  his  use  of  false  identities,  and  his
    consequent poor immigration history.  The contention therefore that the
    judge failed properly to  consider  factors  such  as  the  appellant's
    previous criminality and his use of multiple and false  identities,  is
    not a contention that is made out having regard to the passages of  the
    determination to which I have referred.  In any event, when one makes a
    global assessment of the determination it is apparent  that  the  judge
    had those matters well in mind  when  considering  the  proportionality
    assessment.

31. The further contention on behalf of the respondent is  that  there  was
    inadequate consideration given to the public  interest  in  immigration
    control.  As I  have  already  indicated  however,  at  [40]  there  is
    reference to the requirements of the immigration rules and the  English
    language requirement, as  well  as  the  appellant's  poor  immigration
    history.  That seems to me to demonstrate an awareness of the  need  to
    take into account the public interest in immigration control.

32. Furthermore, there is express reference to that public interest at [45]
    whereby the judge expressly stated that  she  took  into  account  "the
    legitimate interest of immigration control in the economic interests of
    the United Kingdom".  There is further  reference  to  the  appellant's
    poor immigration history.

33. One of the features of the  determination  which  is  apparent  is  the
    judge's  consideration  of  the  best  interests  of  the   appellant's
    children.  There are two children who were born on 23 February 2007 and
    28 September 2008.  They were therefore at  the  time  of  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal aged 7 and 5.  Their ages  in  fact  are
    only relevant with reference to the date of the decision by the eco  on
    17 December 2012. But in any case, they were two years, or a year and a
    half, younger at that time.

34. The judge referred to their best interests in the determination and she
    referred to evidence that satisfied her that the appellant  was  living
    as a family with his wife and elder child prior  to  his  removal.  She
    concluded that if the appellant had not  been  removed  he  would  have
    remained living with the sponsor and their children.

35. At [41] she accepted the evidence of contact between the appellant  and
    his children by phone, and accepted evidence  that  the  children  were
    coming to an age where the appellant's absence is causing distress.

36. In conclusion therefore, notwithstanding the submissions made on behalf
    of the  respondent  by  Mr  Avery,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  it  is
    established that there is any error of law on the part  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  The judge took into account the factors that needed  to
    be taken into account and did not leave out  of  account  factors  that
    needed to be taken into account.

37. There is no error of law in  the  proportionality  assessment  and  the
    decision to allow the appeal on human rights grounds with reference  to
    Article 8 of the ECHR therefore stands.





Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 27/08/14
