
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03920/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast Laganside                    |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 July 2013                                |On 15 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                              SEYNAB BARRE HAJI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-NAIROBI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms M. O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mr S. McTaggart, Counsel instructed by R P Crawford &
Co Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia,  now  living  in  Kenya.  Her
       application for entry clearance as the spouse  of  a  refugee  under
       paragraph 352A of HC 395 (as  amended)  was  refused  by  the  Entry
       Clearance Officer ("ECO") in a decision dated 24 January  2012.  Her
       appeal against that decision was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge S.G. Gillespie after a hearing on 7 November 2012.  Permission
       to appeal against his decision having been granted, the appeal  came
       before me.

    2. The ECO refused the application for the following main  reasons.  In
       support of the claim that the appellant married the sponsor in  1971
       she had produced a copy of a marriage certificate said to have  been
       issued in 1971. However, no original had been provided. She had  not
       provided witness statements or photographs of the wedding.  Although
       someone with the appellant's name was identified  in  the  sponsor's
       asylum interview shortly after his arrival in the  UK,  no  date  of
       birth  or  age  was  given  and  the  appellant  had  not   produced
       satisfactory evidence of her identity or that she is the person that
       the appellant named.  Her  physical  appearance  on  the  photograph
       attached to the visa application and on  the  biometrics  photograph
       appears to be of someone much younger than her  claimed  age  of  66
       years.

    3. Although she claimed to be in contact with the sponsor by  telephone
       and that he provides financial support, the money transfer  receipts
       show that they originated in London but the sponsor has  an  address
       in Belfast. The receipts are unsigned and there is no evidence  that
       she had ever received those funds.

    4. The First-tier judge made the following findings. He concluded  that
       the person appearing in the photographs was the same person  and  is
       the appellant. However, he found that  the  original  document  (the
       marriage certificate) was "patently" a document produced long  after
       1971. "[T]he font of the insertions, in what is a template document,
       is unlikely to date to 1971  and  does  indeed  suggest  a  document
       produced on a computer." He  did  not  accept  the  evidence  of  an
       expert, Dr  Anita  Adam,  that  the  document  has  a  genuine  age,
       concluding that "It has every appearance of having been  treated  to
       give it a time soiled effect." He also decided that although it  was
       "possible" that the appellant and the sponsor married in  1971,  the
       production of a document of very  dubious  authenticity,  albeit  to
       prove a genuine event, undermines  the  integrity  required  of  the
       appellant. She had not established on  a  balance  of  probabilities
       that she was married to the sponsor on the date claimed.

    5. At the hearing before me Ms O'Brien said that she could not seek  to
       defend the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, notwithstanding  the
       'rule 24' reply opposing the appeal.   She  suggested  that  on  his
       findings the judge could have gone on to allow the  appeal.  It  was
       accepted on behalf of the respondent that there was an error of  law
       in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as  set  out  in  the
       grounds, such that the decision should be set aside.

    6. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, in summary,  were  that
       the judge was not entitled to reject the evidence  of  the  marriage
       certificate on the basis of his observations as to  its  appearance,
       for example that it had been treated to  given  it  a  "time  soiled
       effect". It is also asserted that  the  judge  had  not  taken  into
       account evidence of continuing contact between the parties in  terms
       of the sending of money and the telephone contact. The  sponsor  had
       also given the appellant's details in his asylum claim and  that  he
       had attempted to get a visa to visit her in  Kenya,  but  could  not
       because of his health.

    7. Before me  Ms  O'Brien  suggested  that  there  were  some  positive
       findings made by the First-tier judge, and if one were to  take  out
       of account the marriage certificate, the evidence on  a  balance  of
       probabilities points to the appellant having met the requirements of
       the Rule that were in issue. Even  if  a  bogus  document  had  been
       produced, that did not mean that the marriage did not take place.

    8. In the circumstances, I announced that I was  satisfied  that  there
       was an error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  such
       that the decision is to be set aside. Ms O'Brien conceded  that  she
       had no submissions to make to contradict the  position  advanced  on
       behalf of the appellant to the effect  that  the  appeal  should  be
       allowed.

    9. In re-making the decision I decided to  allow  the  appeal.  In  the
       circumstances, my reasons can be  stated  briefly.  Judge  Gillespie
       found at [34]  that  the  person  in  all  the  photographs  is  the
       appellant. Those photographs included that on the  visa  application
       form. The expert report from Dr Adam  concluded  that  the  passport
       dated 1983 was genuine. It too bears the appellant's photograph.

   10. In the sponsor's screening interview that took place on 15 June 2011
       he gave the same name as that of the appellant  as  his  wife,  also
       stating when they married. Although the ECO stated in the notice  of
       decision that the appellant had not given the  appellant's  date  of
       birth in his asylum interview (that took place  on  24  June  2011),
       that is not correct. At question  18  (B5  of  the  bundle  as  then
       marked) a date of birth of 10 October 1945 is  given.  This  is  the
       same date of birth as that of the appellant.

   11. The appellant has produced money transfer  receipts.  Although  they
       emanate form a money transfer agency or  business  in  London,  they
       have on them an  address  in  Belfast,  said  to  be  the  sponsor's
       address. The money transfer receipts are pre and post decision  (and
       the  latter  can  be  taken  into  account  as   evidence   of   the
       circumstances obtaining at the date  of  decision).  There  are  two
       letters from the money transfer business, Dahabshill,  stating  that
       the sponsor (giving Belfast addresses for him) has been transferring
       money to a person with the appellant's name.

   12. Ms O'Brien conceded that even without the evidence of  the  marriage
       certificate there was sufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  the
       appellant meets the requirements of the Rules. She pointed out  that
       it has not been suggested on  behalf  of  the  respondent  that  the
       document is fraudulent.

   13. I am satisfied that the appellant has established on  a  balance  of
       probabilities that she is married to the sponsor and that they  were
       married in 1971 as claimed. There was  consistent  evidence  on  the
       matter between them, the sponsor named the appellant in  his  asylum
       interviews and gave her date of birth and the date of the  marriage.
       There is evidence that he has sent money to the appellant, with  his
       address on the money transfer  receipts.  So  far  as  the  marriage
       certificate is concerned, as I pointed out to the  parties,  on  the
       original produced to me, there was faintly written in type the  word
       "duplicated". This may explain any concerns that there may  be  over
       the age of the document. However, I do not consider that I  need  to
       make a  finding  on  that  issue,  or  indeed  in  relation  to  the
       reliability of that document, it having been conceded on  behalf  of
       the respondent that even without it the appellant has established on
       a balance of probabilities that she and the sponsor are married.

   14. I am satisfied therefore, both that the appellant  and  the  sponsor
       married in 1971 and that they intend to live permanently  with  each
       other as spouses. None of the other requirements of  the  Rules  are
       said to be in issue.

Decision

   15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       set aside and the appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.











Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 3/07/13
