
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA039442015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th June 2016                              |On 20th June 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                iman farousi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     THE Entry Clearance Officer - AMMAN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra of Counsel, instructed by Arkas Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of Judge Stott of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 2nd October 2015.

 2. The Appellant is  a  female  Syrian  national  who  applied  for  entry
    clearance as the spouse of a British citizen, Kifah Johnson to  whom  I
    shall refer as the Sponsor.

 3. The application was refused on  29th  January  2015.   In  summary  the
    Respondent gave three reasons for refusing the  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  Firstly it was not accepted  that  the  Appellant's
    relationship with the Sponsor was genuine or  subsisting,  nor  was  it
    accepted that they intended to live permanently together in the  United
    Kingdom.

 4. Secondly it was not  accepted  that  the  financial  requirements  were
    satisfied in that specified documents to prove the Sponsor's salary had
    not been submitted.

 5. Thirdly it was not accepted that the Appellant had  submitted  evidence
    to prove that she satisfied the English language  requirements  as  she
    has not produced evidence of passing an English language test at  level
    A1 of the CEFR with a provider approved by the Secretary of State.

 6. Finally the Respondent did not accept that  the  application  disclosed
    any exceptional circumstances which would justify a grant of  leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom outside  the  Immigration  Rules  pursuant  to
    Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention on Human Rights.

 7. The Appellant appealed pursuant  to  section  82  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act) and requested  that  her
    appeal be decided on the papers rather than at an oral hearing.

 8. The appeal was therefore decided on the papers as requested.   The  FTT
    found that the Appellant had submitted further documentation  with  her
    appeal, and was satisfied that evidence had  been  submitted  from  the
    Sponsor's employer to prove he satisfied the financial requirements.

 9. The FTT did not however accept that the Appellant had proved  that  she
    had a genuine and subsisting relationship with the  Sponsor.   The  FTT
    noted the absence of witness statements from  both  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor, and noted  that  although  numerous  screen  prints  had  been
    produced to prove communication, the majority were in  Arabic  "with  a
    handful containing English text.".  The FTT found  that  this  material
    was not dated and there was no translation of the documents in  Arabic.
    There was no indication of the parties having met since their marriage.

10. There was no satisfactory evidence to show that the Appellant had taken
    and passed an English language test at level A1 of the CEFR.

11. The FTT noted that the birth certificate of a child had been  produced,
    but the father's name on the birth certificate  was  not  that  of  the
    Sponsor.  The FTT did not find that it had been proved that family life
    existed between the Sponsor and Appellant, and therefore the appeal was
    dismissed pursuant to Article 8,  as  well  as  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

12. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    and permission to appeal was refused by Judge Shimmin.   The  Appellant
    had not had legal representation, but following refusal  of  permission
    to appeal, it appears that legal representatives were  instructed,  and
    further grounds seeking permission to appeal were settled by Counsel.

13. In summary it was  contended  that  the  FTT  had  erred  in  law  when
    considering whether there was a genuine and subsisting relationship, by
    failing to take into account the principles in Goudey Sudan [2012] UKUT
    00041 (IAC).  It was also contended that the Appellant and Sponsor have
    a child together, but the FTT had placed little or no  weight  on  this
    cogent evidence, because the father's name on the birth certificate was
    not that of the Sponsor.  It was contended that the FTT  had  erred  by
    not appreciating that the Sponsor had officially changed  his  name  by
    deed poll on 31st March 2015, which explained the different name on the
    birth certificate and therefore the birth certificate proved  that  the
    Sponsor is the father of the Appellant's child.  It was contended  that
    the deed poll had been sent to the Home Office.

14. In relation to the English language  requirement  the  Appellant  is  a
    Syrian national, resident in Syria, and there is currently no  approved
    English language test centre in Syria.  Therefore the  Appellant  could
    not satisfy the English language requirement  of  the  rules,  and  the
    Respondent should have considered exercising discretion,  and  the  FTT
    had erred by failing to consider whether  the  Respondent  should  have
    exercised discretion.

15. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam  in
    the following terms;

         "The judge determined the appeal on the papers, at the  request  of
         the Appellant.  There was no witness statement from  the  Appellant
         or the Sponsor and the judge was not  assisted  by  the  Appellant.
         However,  it  is  arguable  that  the  judge  did  not  take   into
         consideration the deed relating to the Sponsor  having  changed  in
         the context of paternity of the British citizen child."

16. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FTT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

Oral Submissions

17. Ms Malhotra submitted that the Sponsor had sent the change of name deed
    to the Tribunal, and the FTT had therefore erred by failing to consider
    this evidence, which explained  why  the  name  on  the  child's  birth
    certificate was not that of the Sponsor.

18. Ms Malhotra requested that the decision of the FTT be set aside for the
    reasons given in the  grounds  contained  within  the  application  for
    permission to appeal.

19. Mr Kandola submitted that the judge had not erred in finding  that  the
    burden of proof had not been discharged in relation to the issue  of  a
    genuine and subsisting marriage.  The FTT  could  not  give  weight  to
    untranslated  documents  which  the  Appellant  relied   on   to   show
    communication between her and the Sponsor.  It was  not  accepted  that
    the change of name deed had been submitted to the FTT.

20. Mr Kandola accepted that there may have been some force in  the  ground
    relating to the English language test if that had been the only  reason
    for refusal, but it was not, and therefore the FTT  decision  disclosed
    no material error of law.

21. By way of response  Ms  Malhotra  pointed  out  that  the  Sponsor  had
    provided a copy of his passport which contained stamps showing that  he
    had travelled back to Syria, and therefore this was evidence  that  the
    parties had met since their marriage.

22. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

23. I firstly consider the FTT finding that the burden  of  proof  had  not
    been  discharged  in  relation  to  the  existence  of  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship, and an intention to live permanently together.
     It is accepted that the FTT was  correct  to  note  that  neither  the
    Appellant nor the Sponsor had submitted witness  statements.   The  FTT
    also correctly noted that the copy screenshots which had been  produced
    to demonstrate communication, had not, in the vast majority  of  cases,
    been translated, and therefore could not be relied upon.

24. A birth certificate had been produced showing that the Appellant is the
    mother of a child.  The FTT correctly noted that this  certificate  did
    not show the Sponsor to be the father, and noted that the father had  a
    different name to the Sponsor.

25. The Appellant's case is that this was explained by the Sponsor changing
    his name by deed poll, and submitting that change of name deed  to  the
    FTT.  This appears to be why permission to appeal was granted.

26. My view is that if that change of name deed was before the FTT, then it
    was overlooked by the FTT, and this would amount to an error of law.

27. However I have very carefully perused all the documents in the Tribunal
    file.  There are now a very considerable number of documents, and it is
    clear that some of these documents have been submitted  after  the  FTT
    decision was promulgated.

28. I do not find that  the  change  of  name  deed  was  included  in  the
    documents submitted to the FTT.  I have located a bundle  of  documents
    that was submitted on behalf of the Appellant, which is not indexed  or
    paginated.  Documents in this bundle are in fact referred to in the FTT
    decision at paragraphs 8-11.  Those documents include a letter from the
    Sponsor's employer, documents submitted from the Rai  Language  Centre,
    the screen prints, the majority of which are in Arabic, and  a  divorce
    certificate.  The FTT makes no reference to  the  Sponsor's  change  of
    name deed, and having examined the bundle of documents I  am  satisfied
    that this change of name deed was not submitted.  It is clear that  the
    change of name deed has now been submitted, but I find  that  this  was
    submitted after the FTT decision was promulgated and sent out, and  was
    included in the documents submitted with the application for  leave  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

29. Therefore there was no  satisfactory  explanation  before  the  FTT  to
    confirm why the father's name on the child's birth certificate was  not
    that of the Sponsor.  I therefore conclude that the FTT  did  not  err,
    taking into account the evidence that was before it, in concluding that
    the Appellant had not proved that she  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with the Sponsor.

30. With reference to English language, the Grounds of Appeal submitted  to
    the FTT did not contend that there was  no  approved  English  language
    test centre in Syria.  Documents submitted by the  Appellant  were  not
    from an approved test provider, and in the absence of any  explanation,
    I conclude that the FTT did not err in law in dismissing the appeal  on
    this basis.

31. Because the FTT had found, in relation to the Immigration  Rules,  that
    there was no genuine and subsisting relationship, the FTT did  not  err
    when considering Article 8, in concluding  that  family  life  did  not
    exist.

32. The decision of the FTT therefore stands.  However, I note  that  there
    was a review of the initial decision by the Entry Clearance Manager but
    inexplicably this did not  take  place  until  23rd  December  2015,  a
    considerable period of time after the FTT decision had been promulgated
    and sent out.  The parties to this appeal were  advised  on  27th  July
    2015 that the appeal would be decided on the papers on  or  after  22nd
    September 2015, and the decision was promulgated on 2nd October 2015.

33. It is therefore not clear why the ECM reviewed the decision  so  longer
    after the FTT had promulgated its decision, but the point  is  that  in
    the review the ECM accepted that due to further evidence that had  been
    submitted, it was conceded that  there  is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship between the Appellant and Sponsor.  The review went on  to
    maintain refusal based upon the lack of a satisfactory English language
    test.

34. The position therefore appears to be that because the  ECM  review  was
    not before the FTT, the FTT decision must  stand  in  relation  to  the
    relationship as well as the English language test,  but  that  now  the
    Respondent accepts that all of  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules are satisfied with the exception of the  English  language  test.
    It would seem appropriate therefore for the Appellant to make  a  fresh
    application, to deal with the English language issue, and  if  such  an
    application is made, the Appellant and Sponsor  may  wish  to  consider
    having  legal  representation  to  assist  with  the  making  of   that
    application.  That however is obviously a matter for them.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FTT did  not  involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law such that the decision must be set aside.  I do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FTT.  There has been no  request  for
anonymity made to the Upper Tribunal and no anonymity order is made.





Signed                              Date 16th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 13th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
