


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03065/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision Promulgated                |
|On : 29 August 2017                    |31 August 2017                      |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                              hibo hassan dahir
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The sponsor, in person
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia whose date of birth is  recorded
      as 1 January 1948. She has been given permission to appeal against the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Oliver  dismissing  her  appeal
      against the respondent's decision to refuse her application for  entry
      clearance.

   2. The appellant applied for entry clearance to settle in the UK  as  the
      adult dependant relative of her son, Abokor  Bashe  Ahmed,  a  British
      citizen. It was stated in the appellant's  application  that  she  was
      living in Somalia with her husband until August 2014 when he travelled
      to Mogadishu and did not return. His whereabouts were unknown  and  he
      was presumed to have died. There was no-one in Somalia to  look  after
      the appellant, who suffered from old-age and ill-health, and  she  was
      currently living alone in Ethiopia without any close  family  members.
      Consequently, the sponsor wanted her to join him in the  UK  where  he
      would be able to care for her and support her.

   3. The  respondent  refused  the  application  on  5  January  2015.  The
      application  was  refused  under  the  suitability   and   eligibility
      provisions of  Appendix  FM  of  the  immigration  rules.  As  regards
      suitability,  it  was  refused  under  paragraph   EC-DR.1.1(c)   with
      reference to S-EC.1.6 of Appendix FM  and  paragraph  320(8A)  of  the
      immigration rules on the  basis  that  the  appellant  had  failed  to
      provide a TB certificate. As regards eligibility, the application  was
      refused under paragraph EC-DR.1.1(d) with reference to E-ECDR.2.4  and
      E-ECDR.2.5 on the basis that the respondent was not satisfied, on  the
      evidence produced  by  the  appellant,  that  she  required  long-term
      personal care to perform everyday tasks or  that  she  was  unable  to
      obtain the required level of care where she was currently living.  The
      respondent noted that a letter submitted by  the  appellant  from  the
      Ministry of Health in Somaliland, which stated that she suffered  from
      renal failure and back pain and that she  needed  treatment,  did  not
      indicate how long she had been suffering from those conditions or what
      effect they had on her daily life. The respondent also noted that  the
      appellant had stated in her application form that she had been  living
      in Ethiopia for the last week but considered it to be unclear how  she
      had been able to travel there  unassisted,  where  she  was  currently
      living and under which conditions. The respondent noted  further  that
      the sponsor was employed full-time and would therefore not be at  home
      to care for the appellant and, as such, it was unclear how  she  would
      receive daily care in the UK. There was, in addition, no evidence from
      a health authority or health professional regarding the level of  care
      she required or the costs involved. The respondent  was,  furthermore,
      not satisfied that  the  appellant  would  be  adequately  maintained,
      accommodated and cared for by the sponsor without recourse  to  public
      funds and therefore also refused the application  under  paragraph  E-
      ECDR.3.1.

   4. The appellant appealed against that decision, asserting in her grounds
      of appeal that she had submitted her original TB certificate with  her
      application and confirming that evidence of the sponsor's  ability  to
      accommodate and maintain her had been produced.


   5. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Oliver on 1 November
      2016. The sponsor, Mr Ahmed, gave evidence before the judge, providing
      details of the everyday tasks his mother was unable  to  perform.  The
      sponsor said that his mother required medical support and he  produced
      evidence of money remittances he had sent to her, but which  had  been
      misused by the providers. His mother had returned home from Ethiopia.


   6. Judge Oliver expressed sympathy for the sponsor but noted  that  there
      was a lack of evidence before him and, given the specific  requirement
      for evidence as set  out  at  Appendix  FM-SE  paragraphs  33  to  35,
      concluded that the appellant had failed to meet the  burden  of  proof
      under the immigration rules and had  failed  to  demonstrate  anything
      exceptional about her circumstances.

   7. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by  the  sponsor
      on behalf of the appellant, on the grounds that  he  had  evidence  to
      prove his mother's medical condition and that he had provided  her  TB
      certificate. Further evidence was subsequently produced under cover of
      a letter from Aden & Co Solicitors dated 14 June 2017.


   8. Permission was granted on 22  June  2017  on  the  basis  of  arguably
      inadequate reasoning by the judge.


   9. At the  hearing  the  sponsor,  Mr  Ahmed,  appeared  before  me.  The
      appellant was not legally represented due to lack of funds.  Mr  Singh
      relied on the Rule 24 response and asked me to find that the judge had
      properly dismissed the appeal. In response the sponsor explained  that
      he had been to Somaliland and had taken  his  mother  to  hospital  in
      Ethiopia in order  to  obtain  evidence  of  her  care  needs  and  to
      demonstrate that she could not find  medical  care  and  treatment  in
      Somaliland. He said that he had further documentary evidence and  that
      the judge would allow the appeal if he were to hear it again.  Further
      to my enquiry, Mr Ahmed confirmed that  his  trip  to  Somaliland  and
      Ethiopia had taken place after the hearing  before  Judge  Oliver  and
      that the further evidence had been obtained after the hearing and  had
      not been before the judge.


  10. As I explained to Mr  Ahmed,  the  relevant  question  before  me  was
      whether Judge Oliver had made errors of law in  his  decision  on  the
      basis of the evidence  that  was  before  him.  Evidence  subsequently
      produced could not give rise to an error of law in his decision-making
      but would instead best be employed to support a fresh entry  clearance
      application.


  11. Although the judge's reasoning at [7] was brief, there was little more
      to be said. The  appellant's  application  had  been  refused  by  the
      respondent on the basis of a lack of supporting evidence in regard  to
      her medical condition and her care needs  and,  as  the  judge  found,
      there was no such evidence before him. The judge properly  noted  that
      the immigration rules required  specified  evidence,  as  set  out  in
      Appendix  FM-SE  paragraphs  34  and  35,  to  demonstrate  that   the
      requirements of paragraphs E-ECDR.2.4 and 2.5 had been met,  and  such
      evidence had plainly not been produced.  As  such,  he  was  perfectly
      entitled, and indeed was required, to conclude that the appellant  had
      failed to show that she could meet the requirements of the immigration
      rules.  Given  the  respondent's  concerns  set  out  in  the  refusal
      decision, and the limited evidence  before  him,  the  judge  properly
      concluded that the  appellant  had  failed  to  show  any  exceptional
      circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside  the  rules.  Whilst
      the judge did not address the conflicting evidence as  to  whether  or
      not a TB certificate  had  been  produced  with  the  entry  clearance
      application, that is immaterial in light of the lack  of  evidence  in
      relation to the eligibility requirements of the rules.

  12. Accordingly the judge was fully entitled to dismiss the appeal on  the
      basis that he did and I find no errors  of  law  in  his  decision.  I
      uphold the decision.


DECISION

  13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.









Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  30 August
2017
