
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/03367/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 1 April and 10 September 2014              |On 11 September 2014         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON

                                   Between

                                AMINO NUR MAOW
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:           Mr A Devlin, Advocate, instructed by Mr Neil
Barnes, Solicitor

For the Respondent:          Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) The appellant identifies herself as a citizen of Somalia  with  the  date
   of birth of 1 January 1949.  In October 2012 she sought to enter  the  UK
   as the wife of Osman Mohamed Ahmed, who has been recognised as a  refugee
   in the UK.

2) The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application by  notice  dated  10
   December 2012.  The marriage was said to have  taken  place  in  1976  in
   Somalia, but there was no marriage  certificate,  witness  statements  or
   photographs to show pre-flight relationship.  The appellant claimed to be
   63 years old but  her  appearance  in  the  photograph  provided  on  her
   application form  and  in  the  photograph  taken  at  the  time  of  her
   application was that of someone considerably younger.  Although a  person
   of her name was specified as her sponsor's spouse when he was interviewed
   shortly after arrival in the UK, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not
   satisfied that the applicant was the same person.  There was no  evidence
   of contact since the sponsor left Somalia in 2008 and  no  evidence  that
   she was currently in Ethiopia with the applicant as claimed.   There  was
   no explanation of why the appellant remained in Ethiopia for at  least  6
   months rather than applying to join the sponsor.  There was  no  evidence
   of attempts by the sponsor to locate his spouse.

3) The appellant filed notice of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

4) In a review dated 13 May 2013 an Entry Clearance Manager found no  reason
   to reverse the decision.

5) First-tier Tribunal Judge Mozolowski dismissed the appellant's appeal  by
   determination promulgated on 18 November 2013.  The appellant's appeal to
   the Upper Tribunal against that determination firstly came  before  Judge
   Macleman on 1 April 2014.

6) Paragraph 24 of the determination expresses doubts  as  to  how  a  third
   party, a Mr Ibrahim, could have obtained the sponsor's  telephone  number
   and been unable to track him down as the husband of the sponsor, they not
   being known to each other. The grounds of appeal  criticise  this  aspect
   for failure to give the  sponsor  the  opportunity  to  respond,  and  as
   speculative and perverse.  Mr Devlin submitted that this was not an issue
   previously raised or which  ought  to  have  been  anticipated.   It  was
   identified in the course of submissions that relevant matters were raised
   in cross-examination, but the sponsor had not been able to  take  matters
   much further.  Any further information would have had  to  come  from  Mr
   Ibrahim, who had not been a witness. Mr Devlin's final point on this  was
   that the judge's findings  amounted  to  guesswork  rather  than  logical
   deduction.

7) Paragraph 25 of the determination is adverse  to  the  appellant  on  the
   basis of the sponsor's lack of effort or of credible explanation for  his
   failure to try to trace his wife through the Somali community or the  Red
   Cross.  Mr Devlin submitted that the fact  that  the  appellant  had  his
   refugee claim accepted by the respondent  should  have  been  given  some
   weight in his favour.  He accepted that the judge's point referring ahead
   to matters derived from cross-examination at paragraph 27 did  form  some
   rational basis for doubting the evidence.  Nevertheless, he said that the
   substance of paragraph 25, namely that  it  was  not  credible  that  the
   sponsor would not have done more to contact his wife, contained  no  good
   reason for rejecting his evidence.

8) The next criticism was that paragraph 26, which finds  the  timescale  of
   the appellant making an application to be incredible, makes no sense.  It
   contains no reason as to why the timing of  the  application  is  at  all
   adverse to the claim.

9) At paragraph 30 a  letter  showing  financial  transfers  by  sponsor  to
   appellant is found unreliable because supporting records and schedules of
   dates and amounts are not also produced.  Mr Devlin submitted that  there
   was no reason why the appellant should have been expected to provide  any
   more evidence on this point that she did, or why the  underlying  records
   of all transactions should have been produced.  Even if more was sensibly
   to be required, the appellant and sponsor should  have  been  given  that
   opportunity by the judge as a matter of procedural  fairness.   Paragraph
   30 contained no good reason why the letter from the financial agency  was
   not to be taken at face value.

10)  Finally,  Mr  Devlin  submitted  that  the  only   paragraph   of   the
   determination which contained any sensible reasoning  was  paragraph  27.
   He accepted that the judge was entitled to found upon repeated  hesitancy
   in answering a reasonable question, and upon a  discrepancy  between  the
   appellant and sponsor over the sponsor's whereabouts from 2008  to  2012.
   However, Mr Devlin argued that these points were far from  sufficient  in
   themselves to support the adverse conclusion, and these matters should be
   further analysed in reaching a new decision.

11) The submissions for  the  appellant  are  not  rehearsed  here  in  full
   detail, because Mrs O'Brien conceded that there was sufficient  substance
   in the  various  criticisms  to  render  the  determination  unsafe.   By
   agreement of parties, it was to be set aside.

12) The appellant had not sought to provide any further evidence.   However,
   parties were also agreed that in order to make full submissions upon  the
   appropriate fresh decision which should be made by the Upper Tribunal  it
   would be necessary to have a transcript of the cross-examination  of  the
   sponsor in the First-tier Tribunal.

13) Parties undertook to produce an agreed transcript of the examination  of
   the appellant between themselves.  In terms of a decision and  directions
   prepared by Judge Macleman, dated 7 April 2014, parties were to file that
   transcript with the Upper Tribunal no later than Tuesday 29 April 2014.

14) There was then some administrative confusion and delay on  the  part  of
   the Upper Tribunal.  On 14 August 2014,  notice  was  issued  of  further
   hearing on 10 September 2014.  The decision and directions were not  sent
   out until 8 September 2014.  However, both  parties  were  aware  at  the
   hearing on 1 April 2014 of what was expected.

15) The case thus came before Judges Macleman and  Dawson  on  10  September
   2014.

16) Parties did not seek further time to provide a  transcript,  and  agreed
   that the  decision  should  be  remade  on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
   available.  Mrs O'Brien accepted that the case turned on the identity  of
   the appellant and the person the appellant named as  his  wife  in  2008.
   She told us (rightly and fairly, in our view) that she was not relying on
   the point of the appellant's youthful appearance.

17) The copy photograph on file provided by the respondent (attached to  the
   copy of the application) does not significantly support  the  point  that
   the appellant could not be of the age claimed.  It is  far  from  obvious
   that it is of "someone considerably younger".

18) The sponsor's date of birth is  1  May  1945.   The  appellant  produces
   photographs of the appellant and sponsor together.  They do not  give  us
   the impression of two  persons  from  very  different  age  groups.   The
   information given by the sponsor in 2008 is consistent with that given by
   the appellant in 2012.

19) Apart from appearance, the other reasons  given  by  the  ECO  are  much
   weaker.   They  are  little  more  than  suspicion  based  upon  lack  of
   documentation, the extent of contact, and delay.  None of  those  aspects
   are particularly unusual or surprising in a case  like  this.   They  are
   responded to in the evidence  which  was  placed  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, which we have been given no reason to  doubt.   We  find  that,
   more likely than not, the appellant is the person the  sponsor  named  in
   20008.  The ECO's other reasons then fall away.

20) The determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside,  and  the
   following decision is substituted:  the appeal, as originally brought  to
   the First-tier Tribunal, is allowed.



                               [pic]
                                10 September 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
