
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/03541/2013
      OA/03542/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 10 February 2014                           |On 14 February 2014          |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
Between

                      Manmaya Gurung (first appellant)
                      Dinesh Gurung (SECOND APPELLANT)
                                                                  Appellants


                                     and



                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Saldanha, Solicitor, Howe & Co
For the Respondent:    Miss A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal with  permission  against  the  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright promulgated  on  14  October  2013  in
    which he dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decisions of  the
    respondent made on 6 December 2012 to refuse him entry clearance to the
    United Kingdom.

 2. The first appellant was born on 3 August 1966; the second appellant  on
    9 February 1990.  Both are citizens of Nepal.  The first  appellant  is
    married to Prembahadur Gurung ("the sponsor") who is a  former  Gurkha,
    discharged on 1  April  1995;  they  are  the  parents  of  the  second
    appellant.  On 27 September 2006 the  sponsor  was  issued  with  a  UK
    settlement visa which is still valid although he has  never  sought  to
    use it to come to the United Kingdom or to settle here.  On 6 September
    2012 the appellants applied for entry clearance.   Subsequent  to  that
    the sponsor took up a new three year contract with the  Gurkha  Reserve
    Unit based in  Brunei,  where  he  has  lived  since  2002;  the  first
    appellant had joined him there in 2008/2009. After being refused  entry
    clearance to settle here, the second  appellant  applied  for  and  was
    granted entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student.

 3. The respondent refused entry clearance to the first  appellant  on  the
    grounds that:-

      i) as the sponsor had been issued with a settlement visa  outside  the
         Immigration Rules, she could not meet the requirements of paragraph
         276R of the Immigration Rules;

     ii) he was not satisfied that the sponsor was present  and  settled  in
         the United Kingdom or intends to enter the United Kingdom  for  the
         purpose of settlement with her  and  thus  she  did  not  meet  the
         requirements of paragraph 276R(i);

    iii) that as the first appellant did not meet the criteria of  paragraph
         276R(i) he was not satisfied that discretion should be exercised in
         her favour under the discretionary  guidance  for  spouses  of  ex-
         Gurkhas; with regard to Article 8 of the Human  Rights  Convention,
         refusal of the application was justified and  proportionate  noting
         that refusal of the application would  not  interfere  with  family
         life.

 4. The respondent refused the application of the second appellant  on  the
    grounds that:

      i) As the second appellant's father was not present and settled in the
         United Kingdom or intends to enter the United Kingdom on  the  same
         occasion with him, refusal of the application was mandatory and  he
         failed to fulfil the requirements of the Immigration Rules;

     ii) The second appellant did not fall within the policy for  dependants
         over the age of 18 of Foreign and Commonwealth and other HM  Forces
         members,  it  not  being  clear  what  the  necessary   exceptional
         circumstances were;

    iii) The second appellant was over 18 and thus he was not satisfied that
         Article  8(1)  was  engaged  or  that,  even  were  that  so,   any
         interference  caused  by  the  refusal  of  entry   clearance   was
         proportionate.

 5. In the grounds of appeal it was conceded that the appellants could  not
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  but  it  was  submitted
    that the decisions were contrary to the  United  Kingdom's  obligations
    pursuant to Article 8; that this is an appeal in  which  the  terms  of
    the policy are clear and that there was a presumption in favour of  the
    appellant's being given entry clearance [27] and that there was nothing
    which on the facts of the case displaces such a presumption,  it  being
    further argued that no reasonable decision could refuse entry clearance
    whether by reference to existing policy or generally [28].

 6. When the matter came before Judge Wright, the grounds  of  appeal  were
    supplemented by a skeleton argument produced by Ms Lagunju who appeared
    for the appellants. The skeleton argument provides [2]:-

         "2.   However  as  the  sponsor  was  granted   leave   under   the
             'discretionary  arrangements  for  former  Gurkhas  discharged
             before 1 July 1997' (see page  46  authorities'  bundle)  (the
             sponsor was discharged in 1995 please  see  sponsor's  witness
             statement paragraph  2  respondent's  bundle),  the  appellant
             should have been granted leave in line with  her  husband  the
             sponsor.  (See page 46 authorities'  bundle  in  line  with  R
             (Limbu) v SSHD [2008] pages 54 to 82 authorities' bundle)".

 7. I note in passing that it was also said in the skeleton  argument  that
    the sponsor made clear his intention to come to the United  Kingdom  as
    soon as the appellants are granted leave.

 8. In his determination the judge found that:-

      i) the second appellant could not succeed under  the  relevant  policy
         [34];

     ii) the first appellant's position fell  to  be  considered  under  the
         relevant policy [36];

    iii) no satisfactory explanation had been offered as to why the  sponsor
         has not activated his visa since its issue in 2006 and it  was  not
         credible that he would not  have  used  his  visa  had  he  had  an
         intention to do so; and,  his  signing  an  additional  three  year
         contract working in Brunei casts even further doubt on his  claimed
         intention to stay in the United Kingdom [39];

     iv) there was no family life in the UK between the first appellant  and
         the sponsor and the second appellant [40]; and, even were that  so,
         the refusal of entry clearance did not amount to interference [41];

      v) there was nothing to justify a  conclusion  that  the  respondent's
         decision under the policy was not in accordance with the law [44];

     vi) even were he wrong with regard  to  interference,  the  refusal  of
         entry clearance in respect of either  appellant  was  proportionate
         [42], and even were there family life between the second  appellant
         and his parents, given that he and his parents had lived apart  for
         several years, that Article 8 was not engaged [54].

 9. The appellants sought permission to appeal on the  grounds  that  Judge
    Wright had erred:

      i) in failing to recognise  or  remedy  the  respondent's  failure  to
         correctly apply the policy and grant the first appellant's leave in
         line with the sponsor [3] and the suggestion that  the  policy  did
         not apply because the sponsor had not activated was incorrect [5];

     ii) in restricting his findings on Article 8 as to whether family  life
         exists in the United Kingdom, an incorrect basis on which to assess
         family life [7];

    iii) in failing to give proper reasons for finding that the  refusal  of
         entry clearance would be proportionate;

     iv) in failing to give adequate consideration to the second appellant's
         case is  simply  repeated  verbatim  at  paragraphs  39  to  40  at
         paragraph 52 erring again in finding that the second appellant  had
         not shown family life with the sponsor in the United Kingdom  which
         is not the correct legal test; and

      v) in applying the wrong test when considering Article 8  family  life
         when  noting  [54]  that  financial  dependency  is  not  emotional
         dependency or by failing to follow the decision  of  the  Court  of
         Appeal in Ghising.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge R A Cox granted permission to  appeal  on
    19 December 2013 stating that it was arguable that the judge  erred  in
    the ways contended.

11. Mr Saldanha accepted that the grounds were not drafted by him and  that
    he would be speaking solely to ground 1.  Whilst he accepted  that  the
    use of the word "normally" was not an indication that the policy  could
    never not be followed,  he  submitted  that  the  issue  had  not  been
    properly considered by the judge.

12. Mr Saldanha accepted that he was in some  difficulty  with  respect  to
    Article 8 given the jurisdictional issues arising from  the  fact  that
    the sponsor was not present in the United Kingdom at any relevant time.
     He accepted also that the judge  had  made  a  finding  of  fact  with
    regards to the sponsor's intentions.

13. Miss Holmes has submitted that the judge had reached a conclusion  open
    to him with respect to whether the decisions were  in  accordance  with
    the law or not, given the findings regarding the sponsor's  intentions.



14. I turn first to the situation of the  first  appellant.   The  relevant
    policy - "Discretionary  Arrangements  for  Former  Gurkhas  Discharged
    Before 1 July 1997" - appears in the respondent's bundle pages 46 to 47
    to which I was helpfully directed by Mr Saldanha The  relevant  section
    provides:-

         "Discretion will normally be exercised and  settlement  granted  in
         line with the main applicant for spouses, civil partners, unmarried
         and same sex partners and dependent children under the age of 18."

15. This is not a situation in which the Entry Clearance Officer failed  to
    have regard to a relevant policy; it is a  case  where  the  respondent
    considered the policy and considered that it did not apply to the first
    appellant.  Further, as this was not an exercise of  discretion  within
    the Immigration Rules, it was not open to the judge to  substitute  his
    own decision of it, his role was to decide solely whether this decision
    was "in accordance with the law".

16. It was not properly put to Judge Wright in the skeleton argument or the
    grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  respondent's
    decision was not one open to  him  having  had  regard  to  public  law
    principles, that is  a  decision  which  was  irrational,  perverse  or
    "Wednesbury" unreasonable; that argument is only now put  substantively
    by Mr Saldanha.

17. Whilst it is averred in the grounds of appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    that the respondent took into account an  irrelevant  consideration  in
    the exercise of discretion, and whilst it is arguable  that  that  does
    (just) form a consideration outlined  by  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    skeleton argument produced by Miss Lagungu, it was not  argued  in  any
    detail before the judge.

18. It is not an error of law for a judge  not  to  take  into  account  or
    follow a submission which is not made to him.  If, as is now contended,
    the respondent's decision was wrong on  public  law  principles  as  Mr
    Saldanha submits, then that should have been put to the judge in  those
    terms.  Further, as Mr Saldanha conceded, the judge made a  finding  of
    fact that it was not the sponsor's intention  to  come  to  the  United
    Kingdom which was one open to him.  That was a conclusion also  reached
    by the respondent and was, as I explain below, relevant to the exercise
    of discretion under the policy.

19. The purpose of the policy in question is clear; it  was  to  facilitate
    the grants of entry clearance to Gurkhas discharged before 1 July  1997
    and  their  families.   The  policy  states  that  discretion  will  be
    exercised and settlement "granted in line" as the main applicant.

20. In this case there is a significant  gap  in  time  between  the  first
    occasion on which the  sponsor  obtained  a  grant  of  leave  and  the
    application by the appellants. It is accepted that he has never used it
    to settle in the United Kingdom,  It  cannot  realistically  be  argued
    that the respondent was not entitled to conclude that the  sponsor  did
    not intend to become settled here  or that it was perverse, irrational,
    or otherwise unlawful on public law principles  to  conclude  therefore
    that the  policy  did  not  apply  to  the  particular  facts  of  this
    application.

21. Accordingly, I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  not  err  when  he
    concluded that the respondent's decision was  in  accordance  with  the
    law, a conclusion with which he gave adequate reasons at paragraphs  44
    of his determination, nor is it properly arguable that  he  could  have
    come to any other conclusion. I am satisfied also that the finding that
    the second appellant did not fall within the terms of  the  policy  was
    also open to the judge.

22. Turning to Article 8, I note that at  the  relevant  date  neither  the
    appellants nor the sponsor were present in the United Kingdom.  Indeed,
    the sponsor has never been settled here.  This is a  significant  issue
    given that the scope of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  is
    essentially territorial and it is only exceptionally that rights can be
    asserted outside the jurisdiction or territory of the member state.  As
    was  stated  in  Sun  Myung  Moon  (Human  rights,   entry   clearance,
    proportionality) USA [2005] UKIAT 00112 at [68]:

         "The essence of family life, which makes it possible that the  ECHR
         extends  to  some  non-nationals   outside   of   the   territorial
         jurisdiction who seek respect for their family  life  with  someone
         settled here, is the need  for  physical  proximity  between  those
         persons.  This would cover the normal relationships between husband
         and wife, parent and child and closely  allied  relationships.   We
         did not conclude that Article 8 in this extended form  covered  all
         aspects of personal and private  life,  or  necessarily  all  those
         relationships which could come within the  notion  of  family  life
         within the Convention.  It covers the basic  components  of  family
         life, personal relationships which require  physical  proximity  in
         order for them to be enjoyed in any real sense.  We emphasise  that
         in this extended  form,  we  were  examining  the  issue  from  the
         standpoint of the non-national out of country, rather than from the
         standpoint of the family member settled here.  Our comments do  not
         bear upon the position of the latter were they to assert rights  as
         in Abdulaziz."

23. Whilst the issue of the extra-territoriality of the European Convention
    has been considered more recently in Al-Skeini [2006] UKHL  26  and  by
    the Court of Appeal in R v Naik [2011] EWCA Civ 1546, I do not consider
    this alters the position that the Human Rights Convention is simply not
    engaged when what is asserted is a family life which exists outwith the
    United Kingdom and none of those between whom  it  exists  are  present
    here.

24. Further, even were it  established  that  jurisdiction  exists,  as  Mr
    Saldanha accepted, (and he did not speak to the grounds  beyond  ground
    1), the grounds of appeal do not challenge the judge's finding that  on
    the facts of this case there was no  interference  with  the  right  to
    respect for family life given that all the parties were at the relevant
    time outside the United Kingdom and there was nothing to stop them from
    living together in Nepal or Brunei. That was  a  finding  open  to  the
    judge and for which he gave adequate reasons. On  that  basis,  it  was
    open to him to conclude that the appellants' case that refusal of entry
    clearance was contrary to their rights pursuant to  article  8  of  the
    Human Rights Convention fell to be dismissed.

25. For these reasons, the decision of the judge did not involve the making
    of an error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the decision and
    I uphold it.

Signed                                  Date:  13 February 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

