

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber          Appeal Number:  OA/03238/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated:              |
|On 25 October 2013                          |On 28th October 2013      |
|                                            |                          |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                             Subghatullah Ahmadi
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer

                                                           Respondent

                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr A Fouladvand, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Allen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Details of appellant and basis of claim

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson on 12 September 2013 in respect of
      the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre dismissing the
      appeal for entry clearance as a spouse on 12 July 2013.
   2.       The appellant is an Afghan national born on 1 January  1990.  He
      was removed from the UK on 13 July 2011 but prior to that married  the
      sponsor,  Faria  Nasiri  (a  British  citizen  who  came   here   from
      Afghanistan in 2004), on 23 April 2011. He made his application  as  a
      spouse on 11 October 2012; the reason for the delay is unclear but the
      effect was to bring him within the new rules which came into force  on
      9 July 2012. Although he maintained he had not been known by any other
      identity, fingerprint checks revealed that he  had  used  three  other
      identities in addition to that now provided and two different dates of
      birth in his attempts to enter. Details are set out in the  notice  of
      refusal dated 12 December 2012.

   3.       The ECO considered that he had failed to disclose facts material
      to his application and that he had contrived in a significant  way  to
      frustrate the intentions of the rules. Additionally,  the  maintenance
      requirements of the rules were not met. The  application  was  refused
      under paragraph 320(11), paragraph EC-P.1.1 (c) and (d), E-ECP 3.1 and
      S-EC.2.2 (b) of Appendix FM. The  sponsor  visited  the  appellant  in
      Afghanistan between 22 September 2011 and 18 October 2011  and  on  15
      June 2012 gave birth to a son.

Appeal hearing

   4.       At the hearing before me  on  25  October  2013,  Mr  Fouladvand
      summarised his lengthy grounds into two concise criticisms; first, the
      judge had failed to consider the discretionary  element  in  paragraph
      320(11) and, second, that this meant that her assessment of Article  8
      was flawed because she relied on the 320(11) finding when  undertaking
      the balancing exercise.

   5.       Having considered the evidence,  the  grounds,  the  submissions
      made by the parties and the determination, I conclude that  the  judge
      did not make any errors of law and that the grounds seek to promote  a
      very weak case.

   6.       Although Part II of the permission application purports  to  set
      out "grounds" and numbers the first one: "Irrationality", there is  no
      ground two so I can only presume  all  the  following  paragraphs  are
      designed to establish the alleged irrationality. The grounds  warn  of
      the high threshold to be reached before a finding on deception can  be
      made. I would  likewise  say  that  to  succeed  in  an  irrationality
      challenge requires the crossing of a very  high  threshold.  That  has
      certainly not been done in this case.

   7.       It was argued by Mr Fouladvand that the judge failed to consider
      the determination of the  Upper  Tribunal  in  PS  (paragraph  320(11)
      discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC).  This  case  was
      not placed before the judge nor was it relied upon in submissions.  Mr
      Fouladvand submitted  that  nevertheless  the  judge  was  obliged  to
      consider the law, however he fails to explain the significance of this
      decision to the appellant's case. In the case of PS, paragraph 320(11)
      was used to refuse his  application  solely  because  he  had  entered
      illegally and sought unsuccessfully to remain indefinitely. There  had
      been no finding on whether there were  any  aggravating  circumstances
      such as whether he had absconded or used false identities  and  indeed
      he had left the UK voluntarily rather than being subject  to  removal.
      Not surprisingly the Tribunal warned of the importance  of  a  careful
      consideration of aggravating circumstances. That is all  that  can  be
      gleaned from PS.   Failing  to  refer  to  it  where  there  has  been
      consideration of such factors, does not amount to an error of law.

   8.       The judge sets out paragraph 320 (11)  at  paragraph  7  of  her
      determination and notes it involves discretion. Additionally, prior to
      that, at paragraph 3, she refers to  the  appellant's  complaint  that
      discretion should have been exercised differently.  Paragraph  320(11)
      suggests various examples of what "aggravating behaviour" could  mean,
      in addition to either overstaying, breaching  a  condition  of  leave,
      being an illegal entrant or using deception. These factors are said to
      be absconding, not meeting temporary admission/reporting  restrictions
      or bail conditions, using an assumed identity or multiple  identities,
      switching nationality, making frivolous applications or not  complying
      with the re-documentation process.

   9.       It is not disputed that the appellant was an illegal entrant  or
      that he used multiple identities and different dates of birth in order
      to try and cross into the UK from France. The evidence shows  that  in
      February 2009 he absconded and stopped reporting and that  an  attempt
      to remove him in non 2009 failed because he was "disruptive".  He  was
      later detained after his asylum appeal was dismissed as a  fabrication
      and had to be removed from this  country.  At  paragraphs  30-31,  the
      judge noted that the appellant had used multiple  identities  and  had
      absconded. At paragraph 38 she found he  had  remained  without  leave
      after his appeal was dismissed. The first two factors alone are to  be
      found from the list of "aggravating factors", let alone the additional
      factors of being disruptive and frustrating  removal  and  of  putting
      forward a bogus asylum claim, remaining without leave after  a  failed
      asylum  appeal  and  having  to  be  removed.  He  also  lied  to  the
      immigration service about when he left  Afghanistan  as  the  evidence
      shows at the time he  claimed  to  be  in  Afghanistan,  he  had  been
      fingerprinted in France.  Given the judge's clear findings of fact, it
      is difficult to see how the outcome would have been any different even
      if  she  had  looked  at  paragraph  320(11)  in  further  detail   as
      specifically referred to  discretion,  as  Mr  Fouladvand  would  have
      liked.

  10.       The appellant clearly knew that he  had  used  false  identities
      when attempting to enter the UK, as the judge found. He did not  refer
      to these other identities on his visa application form. The  case  for
      deception has been proved. Even if this was not specifically  referred
      to in these terms by the judge, the outcome would have been  the  same
      if she had, given the findings she made.  I do  not  therefore  accept
      that the judge erred in her  assessment  of  Article  8.  This  is  an
      appellant with an appalling immigration history  and  no  stranger  to
      deception.

  11.       The other complaints in  the  grounds  regarding  the  balancing
      exercise take matters no further. Contrary  to  what  is  argued,  the
      judge did look at the  best  interests  of  the  child  as  a  primary
      consideration, found the baby was very young, had never met his father
      and that his best interests were to remain with  his  mother.  As  for
      where that might be, that was a matter for the sponsor  and  appellant
      to decide. This is not a case where the  sponsor  has  been  born  and
      brought up in Britain. She  has  spent  more  years  of  her  life  in
      Afghanistan than in the UK and the  judge  found  that  her  formative
      years had been spent there. She returned there before her marriage  to
      the appellant "for a holiday" and  she  encountered  no  problems  and
      could "go anywhere"(according to the  appellant's  evidence  in  Judge
      Greasley's determination). Her ties cannot be completely broken as she
      travelled to  attend  her  brother's  wedding.  Her  marriage  to  the
      appellant took place only a few months prior to his detention  and  so
      the duration of family life was found to  be  limited.  There  was  no
      evidence as to the "grievous impact" of the separation on the  sponsor
      and her child, as is maintained in  the  grounds.  The  judge  herself
      commented on the limited evidence and cannot be faulted for failing to
      find that lives would be "destroyed" as the grounds argue.

  12.       Criticism is also made of the judge's comment that the appellant
      had not provided  a  witness  statement.  It  is  argued  that  he  is
      "stranded" in a village and therefore unable to  provide  any  witness
      statement. Plainly that is not the case.     He was able to provide  a
      sample for DNA testing as recently  as  May  2013  when  he  gave  his
      address as Kabul and that is where he was living in October 2012  when
      he made his visa application. His  wife  visited  him  last  year  and
      claims to be in touch with him over the telephone on  a  daily  basis.
      His solicitors have plainly taken instructions from him  as  indicated
      from their letter of 10 July 2013. Quite  how  it  is  claimed  he  is
      "stranded" in the middle of nowhere, when the evidence indicates  that
      he is in Kabul, is unclear.

  13.       The judge properly considered the evidence and took all relevant
      factors into account. Her findings and conclusions are sustainable.

  14.       It is accepted that the appellant does  not  qualify  to  remain
      within the immigration rules as the maintenance requirements cannot be
      met.

  15.       An anonymity order has not been sought and therefore one has not
      been made.



Decision

  16.       The First-tier Tribunal did not make any errors of law  and  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal on immigration and  Article  8  grounds
      stands.


      Signed:



      Dr R Keki?
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal

      25 October 2013
