

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03956/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5th June 2014                              |On 9th June 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               SAMINA PERVAIS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Wells, counsel, instructed by M & K solicitors,


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. The appellant (hereafter the ECO) appeals a decision of the First-tier
      Tribunal which allowed an appeal  by  the  respondent  (hereafter  the
      claimant) against a decision of an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  the
      grounds that the claimant met  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
      Rules for entry clearance as  the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
      settled in the UK. The application had been  refused  on  the  grounds
      that she did not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  in
      force at the  date  of  the  decision  namely,  that  the  College  of
      Excellence  who  provided  the  English  Language  certificate   (Test
      certificate 1) were not on the approved list of providers.  There  was
      no allegation that the claimant did not meet the other requirements of
      the Rules.

        Background


   2. The claimant had originally  submitted  Test  Certificate  1  with  an
      earlier application for entry clearance, which had been  refused,  and
      her appeal dismissed for reasons other than the  English  Certificate.
      In the instant appeal the claimant asserted  that  she  had  not  been
      aware that Test Certificate 1 was not  recognised  and  that  she  was
      unaware that the College had been removed from the  list  of  approved
      providers.

   3. Test Certificate 1 is dated 28th April 2011 and has endorsed  upon  it
      "Approved by the UK Border Agency". The grounds of appeal to the First-
      tier  Tribunal  (18th  January  2013)  state  that  the  claimant   is
      undertaking a further language test with an approved provider and  the
      certificate would be provided in due  course.  A  TOEIC/ETS  listening
      skills certificate from an approved provider was then submitted  dated
      1st December 2013, valid until  1st  December  2015.  The  Certificate
      shows listening skills score at 95 out of 495.  A  TOEIC/ETS  speaking
      skill certificate dated 1st December 2013  valid  until  1st  November
      2015 was produced showing a score of 60 out of 200.

   4. The First-tier Tribunal judge  found  that  the  latter  certificates,
      although  submitted  after  the  date  of   decision   satisfied   the
      requirements of the Immigration Rules and that the submission that  it
      post dated the date of decision and was therefore not  admissible  was
      not effective: the certificates confirmed her language ability  as  at
      the date of decision and were thus admissible.

   5. Permission to appeal was granted on the grounds that it  was  arguable
      that the judge had materially misdirected himself in finding that  the
      subsequent submission of the certificate was relevant  to  proficiency
      because the relevant requirement under the  Immigration  Rules  is  to
      submit a valid certificate. The grounds seeking permission  to  appeal
      also state that the date of the certificate filed  subsequent  to  the
      decision had not been referred to; the date was relevant  because  the
      new  test  was  not  available  at  the  relevant  date  which  was  a
      requirement under the Rules.

        Discussion

   6. The claimant had submitted her application for entry clearance on 25th
      June 2012. The application was refused on 13th  December  2012.  There
      were significant amendments to the Immigration Rules to take effect on
      9th July 2012 save for transitional provisions. In so far as  relevant
      to this appeal the Rules applicable at the date of decision are:

                  A277 from 9 July  2012  Appendix  FM  will  apply  to  all
                  applications to which Part 8 of these rules applied on  or
                  before 8 July 2012 except where the provisions of  Part  8
                  are preserved  and  continue  to  apply,  as  set  out  in
                  paragraph A280.
                  ....
                  A280 The following provisions  of  Part  8  apply  in  the
                  manner and circumstances specified:
                  a) ....
                  b) ....
                  c) The following provisions of Part 8 continue to apply to
                     applications made on or after 9 July 2012, and are  not
                     subject to any additional  requirement  listed  in  (b)
                     above;
                       i) By persons who have made an application before  9
                          July 2012 under Part 8 which was not  decided  as
                          at 9 July 2012; and
                      ii) ....


                     281-289


                  .....


                  281. The requirements to be met by a person seeking  leave
               to enter the United Kingdom with a view to settlement as  the
               spouse or civil partner of a person present  and  settled  in
               the United Kingdom or who  is  on  the  same  occasion  being
               admitted for settlement are that:
               (i) ....
               (ii) the applicant provides an original English language test
               certificate  in  speaking  and  listening  from  an   English
               language test provider approved by the Secretary of State for
               these purposes, which clearly show the applicant's  name  and
               the qualification obtained (which must meet or  exceed  level
               A1 of the Common European Framework of Reference) unless:
               ....

   7. The Immigration Directorate Instruction (IDI) as at 8th July 2012  and
      thus the instructions relevant to this application state  (Chapter  8,
      Annex A3, paragraph 2.5)
             How to treat applicants who already have a certificate
             If an applicant supplies a certificate from  a  test  provider
             who has ceased  to  be  an  approved  UK  Border  Agency  test
             provider we will not accept that certificate as they  are  not
             currently on the approved list of test providers for partners.
             Once the new requirement is in place if there are any  changes
             to the list of test providers for partners  then  transitional
             arrangements will be  put  in  place  advising  how  to  treat
             certificates from providers who are no longer on the  list  of
             approved providers.


   8. The IDI as at the date of decision is the same as regards the  English
      language qualification as set out above. It does not appear  that  any
      "transitional arrangements" were introduced at the date of  the  rules
      changes in so far as the language qualification is concerned. The  IDI
      as from April 2013 is as above save  that  it  states  in  the  second
      paragraph


                  "If there are any changes to the list  of  test  providers
                  then  transitional  arrangements  will  be  put  in  place
                  advising on how to treat certificates from  providers  who
                  are no longer on the list of approved providers"


   9. So far  as  I  am  aware  there  are  no  transitional  provisions  or
      arrangements in place and the actual Rule has not been amended.


  10. The College of Excellence was not, at the date  of  decision,  on  the
      list of approved providers. Mr Wells submitted firstly that the  judge
      had  correctly  accepted  the  Certificate  and  secondly   that   the
      subsequent certificates were correctly admitted as verification of her
      language abilities. He submitted that there was a basic fairness point
      in refusing to admit a certificate because a College had ceased, since
      the exam was taken, to be on the list of providers where there was  no
      indication that the reason for ceasing to be on the list  was  because
      of some fraudulent or similar behaviour by the college  that  affected
      the actual testing of language; that she  had  acquired  the  required
      language level and  this  was  confirmed  by  the  submission  of  the
      subsequent  certificates;  that  if  the  first  certificate  was  not
      accepted the claimant should have been given an opportunity to  submit
      a current certificate prior to a decision to refuse being made  -  see
      Thakur [2011] UKUT 00151 (IAC) and Patel [2011] UKUT 00211 (IAC).

  11. Mr Avery submitted that it was inconceivable that the Rules as drafted
      could be read to enable a certificate obtained  at  some  unidentified
      time in the past from an organisation that was  at  one  time  on  the
      approved list, as complying with the requirements  of  the  Rules.  He
      submitted that the Rules clearly required submission of a  certificate
      from an approved provider at the time of the decision.  In so  far  as
      the certificates subsequently filed were concerned he  submitted  that
      these were irrelevant because of the failure to meet  the  Rules;  the
      subsequent submission of a certificate, which  was  from  an  approved
      provider, did not render valid  a  previous  invalid  certificate.  He
      further submitted that even if Mr Wells were correct and the  claimant
      should have been given more time to submit a  further  certificate  (a
      proposition he did not accept) in this case the new certificates  were
      not obtained until some 10 months after the appeal was lodged  in  any
      event and therefore she would not have been able to  comply  with  any
      short period of time given.

  12. I provided Mr Wells and Mr Avery with copy extracts  from  the  Common
      European Framework of Reference for Languages to enable an  assessment
      of the later certificates against the required Level  A1  because  the
      certificates did not state what level  had  been  acquired.  Mr  Wells
      submitted that the later certificates showed  that  the  claimant  had
      retained her level of language ability as tested  by  the  College  of
      Excellence whereas Mr Avery submitted she had not.

  13. The Common European Framework of  Reference  for  Languages  describes
      Level A1 in the following terms:

             Can understand and use everyday familiar everyday  expressions
             and very basic phrases aimed at the satisfaction of needs of a
             concrete type. Can introduce him/herself and  others  and  can
             ask and answer questions about personal details such as  where
             he/she lives, people he/she knows and things he/she  has.  Can
             interact in a simple  way  provided  the  other  person  talks
             slowly and clearly and is prepared to help. (Page 24)

  14. According to UKVI, for a TOEIC/ETS certificate to qualify as level  A1
      the minimum grade required is listening - 60 and speaking 50.


  15. Thakur was an in country variation appeal where it  was  held  that  a
      decision by the Secretary of State to refuse further leave  to  remain
      as a Tier 4 (General) student migrant was not in accordance  with  the
      common law duty to act fairly in the decision making process  when  an
      applicant had not had an opportunity of enrolling at  another  college
      following the withdrawal of the sponsor's license. At the time of that
      appeal there was policy guidance, which, in  general  terms,  required
      the Secretary of State to grant periods of 60  days  where  a  sponsor
      college  licence  was  revoked,  thus  enabling   students   to   find
      alternative colleges within which to complete their studies. I was not
      directed to any similar policy guidance in the scenario the subject of
      this appeal; in fact what guidance does exist states  that  where  the
      provider ceases to be an approved provider, the certificate is not  to
      be accepted. Whatever transitional provisions were  envisaged  do  not
      appear to have been introduced.

  16. Patel, also a Tier 4 student case, considered in  rather  more  detail
      the issue of the duty of fairness in that class  of  case.  The  panel
      stated that the requirements of  fairness  always  depended  upon  the
      context and the specific facts of  the  case  [13]  and  accepted  the
      proposition  that  wherever  a  public  function  is  required  to  be
      performed there is an inference that the function is  required  to  be
      performed fairly, in the absence  of  an  express  indication  to  the
      contrary [14]. In [24] the panel states


                  It is obviously unfair  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to
                  revoke the college's status after the application has been
                  made when it was not an approved sponsor and not to inform
                  the applicant of such revocation and  not  afford  him  an
                  opportunity to vary the application.


        It goes on to say


                  33 We were informed that  UKBA  is  concerned  as  to  the
                  potential costs of imposing a duty of having to inform the
                  applicant that the college was no longer sponsored. We are
                  unpersuaded that this diminishes the duty to act fairly or
                  the way in which the duty is  discharged  in  the  present
                  case. ....
                  34  We are equally unpersuaded that merely putting a  list
                  of unapproved sponsors on the  website  will  serve  as  a
                  substitute for notification of a change  of  circumstances
                  since the application has been  made.  Of  course  such  a
                  course may increase transparency and fairness  in  respect
                  of applicants who can learn the status  of  their  college
                  before they apply and may therefore be a useful move.  But
                  it is unrealistic to expect an applicant who  has  applied
                  to monitor the Home Office website every day just in  case
                  there has been a change in the sponsorship status  of  the
                  college and relying on the college to notify those to whom
                  it has issued sponsorship letters of a  change  of  status
                  may be equally ineffective.

  17.  The  first  question  to  be  asked  is  whether  the  original  test
      certificate ie the one issued by the College of  Excellence  satisfied
      the requirements of the Rules. It is plain that as at the date it  was
      issued it was issued by an approved provider. However at the  date  of
      decision the provider was no longer approved. There is  no  allegation
      by the ECO that at the date  of  submission  of  the  application  the
      provider was no longer approved, although I  do  not  see,  given  the
      wording of the Rule, that that would make any difference in any event.
      The Rules do not state that the certificate must  have  been  obtained
      within a certain number of months of submission  of  the  application.
      However, the IDI states that if the certificate  produced  is  from  a
      provider who is no longer approved then it is not acceptable.


  18.  Alvi [2012] UKSC 33 sets out the obligation of the Secretary of State
      under s3(2) Immigration Act 1971 to lay statements of the Rules before
      Parliament. At [63]
                  Various expressions have been used to  identify  the  test
                  which should be used to determine whether or not  material
                  in the extraneous document is a rule which requires to  be
                  laid before Parliament. It is not easy to find a  word  or
                  phrase which can be used to achieve the  right  result  in
                  each case. I agree with Lord Dyson (see  para  88,  below)
                  that it is not helpful to say that there is a spectrum.  A
                  more precise expression is needed. The word  "substantive"
                  was identified by Foskett J in English UK and by  Singh  J
                  in Ahmed. But even this word  needs  some  explanation.  I
                  would prefer to concentrate  on  the  word  "rule"  which,
                  after all, is the word that section 3(2) uses to  identify
                  the Secretary of  State's  duty  and  to  apply  the  test
                  described in para 57, above.  The  Act  itself  recognises
                  that instructions to immigration officers are  not  to  be
                  treated as rules, and what is simply guidance to  sponsors
                  and applicants can be treated in the same way. It ought to
                  be  possible  to  identify  from  an  examination  of  the
                  material in question, taken in its whole context,  whether
                  or not it is of  the  character  of  a  rule  or  is  just
                  information, advice or guidance as to how the requirements
                  of a rule may be met in particular cases.


  19. In Ferrer [2012] UKUT 00304 (IAC)  and  Philipson  [2012]  UKUT  00039
      (IAC) the IAC held that where the provisions are ambiguous or  obscure
      it is unlikely that Parliament would have sanctioned rules  which  (a)
      treat a limited class of persons unfairly and (b) disclose  no  policy
      reason for that unfairness; italic point 5 of Ferrer asks the question
      "does  it  [the  particular  provision]  amount  to  a  condition   of
      succeeding under those rules?" it goes on to say there  may  still  be
      difficulties "in determining whether a particular requirement  amounts
      to such a condition or is merely a "procedural" requirement".

  20. Clearly on a plain reading of the Rule, there is  no  requirement  for
      the provider to be approved at any time other than at the date of  the
      obtaining of the certificate.  The  qualification  in  the  IDI  falls
      fairly and squarely as  a  requirement  to  be  complied  with  by  an
      applicant and would require numerous checks to  be  undertaken  by  an
      applicant right up until the time that the decision  is  taken  (which
      would be on a date unknown to  the  applicant)  if  s/he  were  to  be
      certain to comply with it. Furthermore there does not appear  to  have
      been any provision made  for  applicants  in  this  situation  despite
      reference to such in the  IDI.  This  is  not  a  scenario  where  the
      decision process breaches the common law duty of fairness  in  failing
      to provide a remedy which was referred to in Guidance; rather it is  a
      simple failure on the part of the ECO to comply with the Rules.

        Conclusion


  21. Although the First-tier Tribunal  judge  allowed  the  appeal  on  the
      grounds   that   the   certificates   submitted   subsequently    were
      confirmatory, such an approach was neither  correct  nor  necessary  -
      although in passing I would say that according to the scores  obtained
      by the claimant she does meet the basic level A1.

  22. It cannot be said that the decision of the ECO  was  "unfair"  in  the
      sense of Thakur and Patel: this is not  a  scenario  where  there  was
      guidance as to how  a  Rule  should  be  implemented  but  a  specific
      requirement in the IDI as to the  implementation  of  the  Rule  in  a
      specific situation.

  23. There is no suggestion from the ECO or Mr Avery that  the  College  of
      Excellence was involved in  the  production  of  false  or  misleading
      English qualifications or that this claimant obtained her  certificate
      through some sort of underhand means. Again, in passing,  the  current
      certificates produced show that she has reached the required level A1.
      Had the College of Excellence been producing  certificates  that  were
      not reliable, it was open to the  Secretary  of  State/ECO  to  assert
      this.

  24. Therefore although the judge erred in rejecting the  Test  Certificate
      1, the outcome of this appeal was correct, namely  the  clamant  meets
      the requirements of the Immigration Rules.


          Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set aside the decision.

     The ECO appeal  is  dismissed;  the  determination  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal to stand.


                                    Date 9th June 2014
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Coker
