
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03055/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 July 2017                           |On 27 July 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     qs
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms P Heidar, Solicitor, AA Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.   On  17  May  2017  I  set
    aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands for  error  of
    law. I concluded that Judge Rowlands had  not  properly  addressed  the
    appellant's family circumstances.  I directed that the case  be  listed
    for a further hearing in the Upper Tribunal and  that  the  appellant's
    brother and sister-in-law be  both  afforded  an  opportunity  to  give
    evidence that is tested in cross-examination.

2.   At the further  hearing  the  appellant's  representative,  Ms  Heidar,
    called the appellant's brother, Mr F Rahman.  He confirmed the truth of
    his witness  statement  and  in  reply  to  cross-examination  from  Mr
    Wilding, he said that the appellant's parents died when she  was  young
    and she had been looked after by her sister (his wife) until 2004, when
    the latter went to the UK as his wife.  Between 2004 and 2014 (when she
    applied for entry clearance) her aunt was looking after  her,  but  was
    finding it  increasingly  difficult  because  of  her  age  and  health
    problems.  The aunt had heart problems and was paralysed  in  her  legs
    and had a wheelchair.  His aunt had various medicines for  her  medical
    problems, but they had not made her better and he  believed  she  would
    die soon.  His understanding was that the aunt could not look after the
    appellant and he and his wife were particularly concerned that the aunt
    could not protect her against harms  such  as  rapes,  kidnappings  and
    forced marriage as her aunt's household had no male protector.  Because
    she was old, neighbours and distant relatives in her  village  provided
    some help to her.

3.   The witness said he sent money every month to the  appellant,  although
    at the date of decision he was still sending it to the aunt.

4.   Mr Wilding asked whether there had  been  any  direct  threats  to  the
    appellant at the date of decision.  Mr Rahman said there had not  been,
    but he was constantly worried harm could come to her as in  Afghanistan
    women are subjugated.  Mr Rahman said that at the date  of  application
    the appellant was still at school; since then he  had  arranged  for  a
    private tutor to come to her house.

5.   Mr Rahman said the appellant  loved  to  go  out  but  because  of  the
    security problems she could not go.

6.   In submissions Mr Wilding said that there were only really  two  issues
    outstanding.  One was whether the  appellant's  parents  were  in  fact
    dead; the other was whether  the  appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297(1)(f) of the Immigration Rules.  Mr Wilding said that  in
    relation to the expert report from Dr Giustozzi, there was the need for
    a degree of caution.  Most of its analysis focussed on the situation in
    Kabul whereas the appellant's home area was in Jalalabad.   As  regards
    the documentary evidence relating to the poor health of the  aunt,  the
    letter from the Ministry of Public Health gave no specific  information
    about the treatment the aunt required for her paralysed hands and legs.
    The statement that she needed "enduring rest"  was  unhelpfully  vague.
    The  appellant  had  not  established  that  her   circumstances   were
    compelling.  At the date of decision she was living with her  aunt  and
    was in education, but notwithstanding  the  understandable  worries  Mr
    Rahman and his wife had about her situation, she had not been subjected
    to harm and the evidence did not establish that she would be.
7.   Mr Wilding said that he concurred  with  the  submission  made  at  the
    previous hearing by Mr Kotas, that if the appellant failed to meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 297, she would not be able to show that there
    were compelling circumstances outside the Rules warranting a  grant  of
    entry clearance.

8.   Ms Heidar submitted  that  as  regards  the  appellant's  parents,  the
    appellant had submitted credible documentary evidence to show they were
    deceased.  The witness, Mr Rahman, had given  credible  evidence.   The
    focus of Dr Giustozzi's report on the  likely  problems  the  appellant
    faced was not confined to Kabul and there was a reference to Jalalabad.
     It was clear that after the appellant's sister  left  for  the  UK  in
    2004, the appellant's aunt had been able to  look  after  her  with  no
    apparent problems for some years but by the  date  of  application  she
    could no longer do so.  The fact that she was  in  a  wheelchair  spoke
    volumes about her inability to care  for  and  protect  the  appellant.
    There had been  specific  proposals  made  by  people  in  the  village
    regarding the appellant and marriage against her will.   Compared  with
    Kabul, which at the date of decision was relatively safe, Jalalabad was
    insecure.  The aunt could not control the  appellant's  activities  nor
    movements and in this way the appellant's welfare  and  best  interests
    were not being catered for.

9.   As regards Article 8, Ms Heidar said that its  requirements  could  not
    be equated with paragraph 297(i)(f).  When assessing Article 8  it  was
    necessary to have regards to family and  private  life  considerations,
    whereas that was not so under  paragraph  297(i)(f).   Given  that  the
    appellant's parents were deceased and the  appellant's  aunt  could  no
    longer look after her, it would not be in the public interest  to  deny
    the appellant entry clearance.

10.  Ms Heidar said that the judge  had  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
    shown there would be adequate maintenance and accommodation.

My Assessment

11.  The ECO did not accept that  the  appellant  met  the  maintenance  and
    accommodation requirements of the Rules, but there  is  no  longer  any
    dispute  regarding  this  matter.   The  FtT  judge  found  that  these
    requirements were met and the respondent did not  submit  any  response
    disputing that finding.  It was a finding that took account of  further
    evidence provided by the sponsor and his wife  as  to  their  financial
    circumstances and their accommodation situation.

12.  The ECO did not accept  that  the  appellant  had  produced  sufficient
    evidence  to  establish  that  her  parents  were  deceased.   Although
    appearing to accept that her parents were dead the FtT  judge  made  no
    clear findings on  this  matter.   However,  the  evidence  before  him
    included  death  certificates,  a  letter  from   the   Public   Health
    Directorate confirming  their  death  and  an  expert  report  from  Dr
    Giustozzi which explained that he had forwarded the death  certificates
    to one of his researchers based in Kabul who contacted a doctor at  the
    hospital where the deaths were recorded who confirmed the  certificates
    were  genuine.   The  respondent  has  not  adduced  any  evidence   to
    contradict this body of evidence.  I am satisfied  that  the  appellant
    has shown her parents are deceased.

13.  As a result of the appeal proceedings  thus  far,  Mr  Wilding  accepts
    that the appellant lives with her aunt in Jalalabad and that  the  only
    remaining issue  concerns  whether  or  not  the  appellant  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph  297(i)(f)  on  the  basis  that  she  has  a
    relative (her sister and brother-in-law) present and settled in the  UK
    "and there are serious and compelling family  or  other  considerations
    which make exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable arrangements
    have been made for the child's care".  It is not in  dispute  that  the
    appellant's sister and brother-in-law are present and settled in the UK
    and that at the date of application the appellant was a child.

14.  On the basis of the documentary evidence and the further oral  evidence
    I heard from the appellant's brother-in-law I am satisfied  that  after
    her parents died the appellant was looked after  by  her  sister  until
    2004 when the latter left for the UK.  I am further satisfied that from
    2004 until the date of application the sister and brother-in-law in the
    UK have continued to provide for her financially and also to  take  the
    important decisions about her  upbringing.   I  do  not  understand  Mr
    Wilding to dispute that this is the case and it has been the consistent
    evidence of the appellant, her aunt, her sister and  brother-in-law  in
    their witness statements.  In her written statement the aunt states  at
    paragraph 3 that:

     "Her sister in the UK sends her money which enables  me  to  buy  food,
         clothes and all other associated costs.  I have to ask her sister's
         permission for any decisions in her life."

15.  Mr Wilding asked a number of  questions  of  Mr  Rahman  regarding  the
    financial aspects of his and his wife's support of the appellant and in
    my judgement Mr Rahman's answers were satisfactory.

16.  Mr Wilding also asked a number of questions  to  Mr  Rahman  about  the
    health and physical capacity of the appellant's aunt; his replies  were
    to the effect she was wheelchair-bound and in declining health with not
    long to live.  Whilst  I  am  prepared  to  accept  that  the  aunt  is
    paralysed in one of her hands and legs and may be  wheelchair-bound,  I
    am not persuaded that her medical condition  is  extremely  serious  or
    that, in Mr Rahman's words, she is likely to die soon.  In  any  event,
    whatever might be the situation in 2017 I have to decide what the facts
    were at the date of decision in January 2015.  The evidence produced by
    the appellant establishes that the aunt is elderly and that one of  her
    hands and legs are  paralysed.   I  am  also  prepared  to  accept  the
    description in the letter from the Public Health Directorate  that  she
    needs constant treatment and is unable to look after herself.

17.  At the same time, it is clear to me from the  witness  statements  that
    through one means or another the aunt gets help with her own  care  and
    that hers is a functioning  household.   It  is  also  clear  that  the
    appellant plays a part in the daily life of the  household,  performing
    chores, but that these did not prevent her from going  to  school  (she
    was  still  attending  school  at  the  date  of  the  application  and
    decision).

18.  The only two aspects of the evidence that are  not  sufficiently  clear
    concern: the extent to which  the  appellant  was  receiving  care  and
    supervision at the date of decision; and the extent to  which  she  was
    receiving adequate protection against a range of harms,  in  particular
    the threat of forced marriage.

19.  In  relation  to  the  extent  of  the  care  and  supervision  of  the
    appellant, my starting point is that because she was still a  minor  at
    the date of decision her welfare and best interests must be treated  as
    a primary consideration, notwithstanding that she is applying to  enter
    the UK: see Mundeba (s. 55 and para 297(I)(f)) [2013] UKUT 0088 (IAC).

20.  Whilst the witness statements strongly reflect the subjective  view  of
    the appellant, her aunt and sister and brother-in-law, their terms  are
    somewhat vague and elusive  when  it  comes  to  piecing  together  the
    precise nature of her social and economic environment.   It  does  seem
    clear to me, however, that as a result of the close involvement of  her
    sister and brother-in-law in ensuring the appellant is  properly  cared
    for, that her aunt's household is economically secure and  through  one
    means or another it is a stable household.  There  is  also  help  from
    fellow-villagers who include distant relatives.   Further,  whilst  the
    aunt herself increasingly feels she cannot supervise the appellant,  at
    the date of decision the appellant was being sent to school  and  there
    has been no mention of the appellant  being  neglected  or  mistreated.
    Even though the aunt physically handicapped and  burdened  by  her  own
    medical  problems,  the  appellant's  sister  and  brother-in-law   are
    involved in all the important decisions in the appellant's  life.   The
    sister and brother-in-law (Mr  Rahman)  were  (and  are)  clearly  (and
    understandably) worried that the  appellant's  situation  would  (will)
    change for the worse, as a result of the aunt's age  and  poor  health,
    but the evidence falls short  of  establishing  that  at  the  date  of
    decision there were no longer stable arrangements for the child's care.
      The  appellant  herself  clearly  feels  that  her  own   views   are
    increasingly divergent from those of her  aunt  (the  former  believing
    that women and girls should be able to  live  full  lives;  the  latter
    holding conservative views), but it is  very  clear  from  Mr  Rahman's
    evidence that he and  his  wife  are  sympathetic  to  the  appellant's
    viewpoint and are in a position to act to assist the appellant (as they
    have done, post-decision by getting her a  home  tutor  to  ensure  her
    education continues after she finished school).

21.  That leaves the issue of sufficient protection of  the  appellant.   Mr
    Rahman's oral evidence highlighted his worries that  the  appellant  at
    the date of decision when she was a young woman would be vulnerable  to
    acts such as rape, abduction and forced marriage.   The  expert  report
    from Dr Giustozzi, albeit largely  focused  on  Kabul,  identified  the
    vulnerable position of women  and  young  girls  in  Afghanistan.   The
    evidence of Dr Giustozzi also highlighted that Jalalabad is an area  of
    the country where, in early 2015, there  was  a  significant  level  of
    insecurity due to armed conflict.  At the same time,  the  evidence  of
    both on this matter was generalised.  Given that Mr Rahman and his wife
    are accepted as the two persons who take all the important decisions in
    the appellant's life, it is  a  reasonable  inference  that  they  were
    satisfied the appellant could be safely maintained and accommodated  in
    her aunt's house, albeit with help from neighbours and extended family.
     There is no suggestion that  they  took  any  steps  to  relocate  the
    appellant to somewhere safer within the area  or  to  another  area  of
    Afghanistan.

22.  The only specific evidence of  possible  harms  concerns  proposals  of
    marriage which would amount to forced marriage.  The  evidence  of  the
    aunt at paragraph 5 of her witness statement was that:

     "Elderly men in our village have also asked for her  hand  in  marriage
         and I always make some excuse up.  I will not be able to stop their
         advances and I'm afraid she will be forced into marriage.  They can
         see I'm old and frail and will take advantage."

23.  I regret that I do not consider this squares with the objective  facts.
     As already noted, it was also the aunt's evidence that "I have to  ask
    her sister's permission for any decisions in her  life"  and  that  the
    sister and Mr Rahman were closely involved in  ensuring  adequate  care
    and control of the appellant.  It is  inconceivable  on  that  evidence
    that any decisions about the appellant's marital status could  be  made
    without consultation with them and it is unrealistic to  consider  that
    they would not be in a  position  to  rebuff  any  unwanted  offers  of
    marriage.

24.  I have read the undated witness  statement  for  the  appellant  which,
    because it refers to having the help of a home tutor,  must  have  been
    written post-decision.  It is difficult not to feel sympathy  with  the
    appellant's  situation,  as  in  the  statement   she   clearly   feels
    "suffocated" by having to live with her aunt and that "I hate my life".
     It is clear that one of the driving considerations in the  appellant's
    view of her life is that her sister, when she left for the UK in  2004,
    "promised she would take me with her".  Yet for one reason  or  another
    no application was made until the appellant was approaching  adulthood.
    If the appellant  had  been  several  years  younger  at  the  date  of
    application, it would have been necessary  to  consider  that  she  was
    going  to  face  increasing  problems  in  receiving  proper  care  and
    supervision in her aunt's household, but at the date of decision, as  I
    have already found, I do not consider  that  her  social  and  economic
    environment had deteriorated to the extent that there existed  "serious
    and compelling family or other considerations" which made her exclusion
    from the UK undesirable.  Whilst  the  post-decision  evidence  can  be
    considered as to what light it sheds on her circumstances at  the  date
    of decision, what it shows is that even though the appellant  has  been
    feeling increasingly frustrated with her present circumstances, she has
    been able to continue her education and she has shown herself to be  an
    intelligent young woman of strong views about the  position  of  women.
    The post-decision evidence sheds light back on  the  situation  at  the
    date of decision in  demonstrating that because of  her  education  and
    views she was a person likely to  reach  adulthood  (as  she  now  has)
    without  experiencing  a  deterioration  in  her  social  and  economic
    environment sufficient to engage paragraph 291(i)(f).   For  the  above
    reasons I do not consider that she has shown she meets the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.

25.   Whilst  in  the  abstract  it  is  quite  possible  for  an  appellant
    unsuccessful under the  Immigration  Rules  to  succeed  on  Article  8
    grounds on the basis of compelling circumstances outside the Rules, the
    factual matrix in this appeal is not such that the appellant  can  show
    such compelling circumstances.  They  are  circumstances  that  deserve
    sympathy but not ones that bring  the  appellant  within  any  relevant
    legal framework.

Notice of Decision

26.  For the above reasons:

     The FtT judge has already been found to  have  erred  in  law  and  his
    decision has been set aside.

     The decision I re-make is to dismiss the appellant's appeal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.







Signed                                  Date:27 July 2017
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

