
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/03496/2014
                                                               OA/03497/2014
                                                               OA/03500/2014
                                                               OA/03504/2014
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th March 2015                            |On 24th March 2015            |
|Prepared on 17th March 2015                   |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                    Mrs Halimo Ali Omar (first appellant)
               Mr Mohammed Ali Yusef Ahmed (second appellant)
               Mr Abdikarim Ali Yusef Ahmed (third appellant)
               Mr Abdimajid Ali Yusef Ahmed (fourth appellant)
                         (NO ANONYMITY ORDERS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A. Chelliah, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Ms E. Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

1.   The Appellants are all citizens of Somalia.  The first Appellant,  born
    on 30th January 1974, is the mother of the  second,  third  and  fourth
    Appellants and I shall refer  to  her  as  the  Appellant.   The  three
    children were born on 20th July 1997, 18th March  1999  and  4th  March
    2001 respectively.  They all appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Lawrence  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  3rd
    November 2014 in which he dismissed their appeals against decisions  of
    the Respondent to refuse to issue the Appellants  with  family  permits
    under  Regulation  12  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the 2006 Regulations").  The  Appellants  wished  to
    join Mr Ali Yusef Ahmed, a citizen of Norway  of  Somali  origin  ("the
    Sponsor"), who is said to be married to the Appellant and  said  to  be
    the father of the three children.

2.   Regulation 12 provides that an Entry Clearance Officer  must  issue  an
    EEA family permit to a person who is a family member of an EEA national
    (who is residing in the United Kingdom  in  accordance  with  the  2006
    Regulations) where (inter alia) the applicant will be joining  the  EEA
    national in the UK. The burden of proof of establishing that  rests  on
    the applicant and the standard of proof is the usual civil standard  of
    balance of probabilities.

3.   The Respondent was not satisfied  that  the  relationship  between  the
    Sponsor and the  Appellants  was  as  claimed.   In  support  of  their
    applications the Appellants had submitted photocopied documents to  the
    Respondent, namely the marriage certificate of the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor and birth certificates for the three children.  The  Respondent
    did not  attach  any  weight  to  those  documents  because  they  were
    photocopies and therefore could not be authenticated.

The Proceedings at First Instance

4.   At the hearing the Sponsor produced what was said to be  the  originals
    of the  marriage  certificate  and  the  birth  certificates  and  also
    produced DNA test results which purported  to  show  that  he  was  the
    father of the three  children.  The  Judge  was  concerned  about  this
    documentation and at paragraphs 6 to 11 of his determination set out in
    some detail his concerns about them.   Specifically  he  was  concerned
    that if indeed the certificates had been issued several years ago  they
    would not still be in the apparently pristine condition that they  were
    now.  He was also concerned as to certain discrepancies  in  them,  for
    example the Appellant's date of birth  was  recorded  on  the  marriage
    certificate as 1st January 1974 whereas when she put her date of  birth
    in her application form to the Respondent she stated 30th January 1974.
     Although the documents were said to have  been  authenticated  by  the
    Somali government the authentication was not dated.

5.   For these reasons the Judge  placed  no  weight  on  the  documents  as
    showing that the parties were related as claimed.  He then went  on  to
    deal with the DNA tests and dealt with the DNA evidence at paragraph 12
    of his determination where he said:

         "12. The Sponsor has submitted DNA  test  results.   These  purport
             that the  Sponsor  is  the  biological  father  of  the  minor
             Appellants.  [The Presenting Officer] asked the  Sponsor  what
             identity documents [had been shown] to the test  centre.   The
             Sponsor told me that they submitted their birth  certificates.
             I note that on the front of the documents, which is in Somali,
             only the mother's name is recorded.  The Sponsor's  name  does
             not appear.   However,  on  the  reverse  side,  which  is  in
             English,  the  Sponsor's  name  is  recorded.   There  is   no
             explanation as why on the Somali side, the Sponsor's name does
             not appear but does appear on the English side.

         13.  The documents do not encourage me to attach any weight to  any
             of them.  I do not find that the document which purports to be
             a marriage certificate is genuine and that it demonstrates the
             first Appellant is married to the Sponsor.  I remind myself it
             records a different date of birth for the first Appellant than
             in  the  application  form.   I  do  not  accept   the   birth
             certificates are genuine.  I do not accept they  are  reliable
             to be used for identity.  Consequently, I am unable to  attach
             any weight to the DNA test results."

    He found that the Appellants were not related to the Sponsor as claimed
    and dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

6.   The Appellants appealed against that decision  taking  issue  with  the
    Judge's findings on the alleged pristine condition of the  certificates
    and submitted that in any  event  the  DNA  results  should  have  been
    considered separately. The application for permission to appeal came on
    the papers before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Osborne  on  28th  January
    2015.  In granting permission to appeal she wrote that  the  Judge  had
    made his findings:

         "without the benefit of any expert evidence  on  the  condition  or
         contents of the certificates and further placed no reliance on  the
         DNA results which were provided showing that the  Sponsor  was  the
         father of the  children  in  question  due  to  perceived  lack  of
         information on the accompanying paperwork.

         The Judge made no findings about other matters  raised  within  the
         notice of refusal such as the absence of  evidence  of  intervening
         devotion."

7.   The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter  dated  6th
    February 2015 stating that the Judge had given detailed reasons why  he
    rejected the evidence submitted starting with the  sustainable  finding
    that the Sponsor had not submitted the original documents to the ECO as
    he now presented them to the court.  The ECO had expertise and was  not
    to entertain photocopied documents for obvious reasons.

The Hearing Before Me

8.   At the outset it was submitted on behalf  of  the  Appellant  that  the
    issue in the case was whether the Appellant was the wife of the Sponsor
    (who was present in court) and  whether  the  dependent  children  were
    their family members.  The reason why the marriage certificate  was  in
    as good a condition as it was, having been created on the  day  of  the
    marriage on 1st January 1996,  was  because  it  had  been  kept  in  a
    briefcase all this time.  There should be a presumption  in  favour  of
    the validity of the documents.  The Judge had not recorded the evidence
    given about the DNA test results correctly.  The Sponsor had said  that
    the Somali community identity  documents  had  been  submitted  to  the
    tester when the Appellants gave their DNA samples.

9.   For the Respondent it was acknowledged that the only issue in the  case
    was whether the parties were related as claimed.  The Cellmark evidence
    had been before the First-tier Tribunal and had been taken into account
    by the Judge as had the other documents.

10.  At this point I indicated  that  I  had  on  the  file  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's manuscript note of the evidence and  submissions  made
    to him at the hearing.  In relation to the DNA evidence the  Judge  had
    recorded the evidence of the Sponsor in cross-examination as follows:

         "I have provided DNA  evidence.   My  wife  and  children  provided
         Somali documents as identity for the DNA.  They  have  to  register
         with the Somali community; once  registered  the  Somali  community
         provides an ID card.  I was  not  there  when  the  ID  cards  were
         issued."

    Then in re-examination the Sponsor said that "my wife and children have
    no passports.  They only have identity cards as refugees".

Findings

11.  At the end of the hearing I indicated  that  I  had  found  a  material
    error of law such that the decision at first instance fell  to  be  set
    aside and that I would remake the appeal by allowing it.  I now give my
    reasons for those findings.

12.  The main issue in the case was whether  the  parties  were  related  as
    claimed.  The Judge found that they were not.  Had the case  turned  on
    an assessment of the credibility of the documents put in support of the
    claimed relationship I would not have found an error of law.  The Judge
    gave cogent reasons why he could place no weight on either the marriage
    certificate or the birth certificates.  Copies only  were  produced  to
    the Entry Clearance Officer  and  quite  rightly  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer could not assess copy documents.  The Judge's finding that  the
    documents were in pristine condition was one which was open to  him  as
    it was to a certain extent a matter of simple observation.   The  Judge
    was entitled to disbelieve the Sponsor's evidence that the certificates
    had been kept safely in a briefcase since 1996.

13.  The difficulty was that there was a  second  quite  discrete  piece  of
    evidence, namely the DNA test results.  Whether the Sponsor or  another
    person had decided to "improve" the  evidence  by  producing  documents
    after the fact might not have a bearing on whether the DNA evidence was
    acceptable.  The Judge placed no weight on the DNA evidence because  he
    was  not  satisfied  that  proper  identification  documents  had  been
    produced to the sample taker such that he could not be sure  whose  DNA
    had in fact been tested.

14.  Had the only documentation being  submitted  to  the  tester  been  the
    marriage/birth  certificates  that  finding   too   would   have   been
    unimpeachable and clearly open to  the  Judge  on  the  evidence.   The
    problem was that that was not in fact the evidence which  was  received
    by the Judge as can be seen from the handwritten note  that  the  Judge
    took at the hearing (see paragraph 10 above).  It was  clear  that  the
    Appellants had submitted their Somali community identity  documents  to
    the sample taker at the  time  they  provided  the  samples.   That  is
    recorded on the Cellmark declaration form where both the nature of  the
    document, that it was a Somali community ID, and  the  document  number
    was recorded.  There is also a photocopy of the document itself in  the
    Appellants' bundle.

15.  The Judge was wrong in law to reject the DNA evidence  on  the  grounds
    that there was a lack of documentation to prove the identity  of  those
    giving the samples. His decision falls to be set aside and the decision
    on the appeal remade. I am satisfied that the  Appellants  were  indeed
    the ones who were tested and that the test results show that  they  are
    related to the Sponsor as claimed.  He is the  father  of  the  second,
    third and fourth Appellants.  As that was the principle  issue  in  the
    case and as I find as a fact that the Appellants are able to  show  the
    relationship their appeals must succeed. I find they are entitled to be
    issued with family permits under Regulation 12. As I have  allowed  the
    appeals under the 2006 Regulations no issue as to Article 8 arises.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.  I have remade the  decision  by  allowing  the
Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decision  to  refuse  to  issue
family permits.

Appeals allowed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 23rd day of March 2015

.......................................................

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft







TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have considered making a fee award as I have allowed the appeals.  I  find
that the DNA evidence was  conclusive  but  it  was  not  submitted  to  the
Respondent at the date of decision.  What was submitted  to  the  Respondent
was clearly insufficient for the reasons which  I  have  given.   I  do  not
consider therefore that the Respondent's decision is such as  to  attract  a
fee award notwithstanding that I have allowed the  Appellants'  appeals.   I
therefore make no fee award in this case.

Signed this 23rd day of March   2015

.......................................................

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft
