
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/03638/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 22 May 2014                             |On 2nd June 2014           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between

                              SALLAYMED KAIKAI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE )
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr R Parkin of David Wyld & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr G Jack Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not deem it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Grimes after a paper appeal decided on 17  February  2014,
   which dismissed the Appellant's appeal on all grounds .

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 23 July 1995 and is a citizen of Sierra Leone.
4. On 5 September 2012 when the Appellant was 17 years old she  applied  for
   entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the child of  Kadiatu  Kargbo  a
   British Citizen.
5. On 5 April  2013  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  Accra  refused  the
   Appellant's application on the basis that the Appellant did not meet  the
   requirements of paragraph 297(i) (e) of the Rules on the basis  that  she
   had not established that the sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  for  her
   upbringing.
The Judge's Decision
6. The Appellant appealed  asserting  that  her  mother  had  supported  her
   significantly throughout her life and therefore had  sole  responsibility
   but also stated that her  father  had  died  during  the  rebel  war  and
   therefore her case should  also  have  been  considered  under  paragraph
   297(i)(d) of the Rules which is the requirement whereby the applicant  is
   seeking ILR as the child of a parent settled in the  United  Kingdom  and
   the other parent is dead .
7.  The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Grimes (hereinafter called  "the  Judge")  determined  the
   case on the basis of the papers. He  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
   Respondent's decision. The Judge found that the Appellant  did  not  meet
   the evidential burden of establishing that her father was  dead  and  did
   not accept that the sponsor had sole responsibility for her.
8. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 10 March 2014 Upper  tribunal  Judge
   Martin gave permission to appeal stating that it was 'arguable...that the
   Judge erred in  failing  to  give  any  consideration  to  the  Sponsor's
   statement concerning the death of the  Appellant's  father  when  finding
   that he is not dead.'

9. At the hearing I heard submissions from  Mr  Parkin   on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that in essence:

   a) In paragraph 10 the Judge referred to the affidavit of  the  Affidavit
      and the witness statement of  the  sponsor  who  both  said  that  the
      Appellant's father was dead. What else could they have produced?

   b) While dismissing the Appellant's evidence because she was a  child  he
      failed to have regard to the fact that the sponsor was an adult at the
      time of her husband's death.

   c) The Judge failed to explain why he was giving the statement no weight.

   d) The absence of a death certificate was not a complete hurdle.

10. On behalf of the Respondent  Mr Jack submitted that in essence:

   a) The Judge made reference to both the affidavit of  the  Appellant  and
      the witness statement of the  sponsor  and  he  did  not  accept  this
      established that the Appellant's father was dead.

   b) The burden of proof is on the Appellant to establish that  her  father
      was dead.

   c) The evidence before the Judge was extremely limited thus there was  no
      evidence for example of what happened to his business,  evidence  from
      other family friends, whether any court order was made.

   d) It is easy to say that someone has died but the tribunal must exercise
      great care when moving children cross borders to establish  the  facts
      underpinning that movement.

The Law

11.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law.
Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

14. The Appellant made an application for  entry  clearance  to  the  United
   Kingdom as the child of a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  United
   Kingdom  namely  the  sponsor  Kadiatu  Kargbo.  The  grounds  of  appeal
   challenge  the  decision  only  in  relation  to  paragraph  297(d)   and
   permission was given on that sole ground.

15. The Appellant through her mother the sponsor  chose  to  have  the  case
   determined on the basis of the papers and that was a matter of choice for
   them: they could have elected to have an  oral  hearing  which  may  have
   given them the sponsor the opportunity  to  explain  their  circumstances
   more fully and have her account tested. They did not choose  this  option
   and I am satisfied that the Judge cannot be criticised for  not  deciding
   this case on a basis that was never argued before him.

16. The Judge set out a fair summary of the Appellant's case at paragraph  4
   of the determination including the fact that the Appellant's father 'went
   missing during the rebel invasion of Freetown on 6 January  1999  and  is
   presumed dead.' The only evidence placed before the  Judge  to  meet  the
   evidential burden of establishing that the Appellant's  father  was  dead
   was set out in the Judge's findings at paragraph 10 of the determination.
   There was an affidavit dated 7 January 2013 from the Appellant confirming
   that her father died in 1999. The Appellant was of course 3 years old  at
   that time and  the  Judge  confirms  that  fact.  The  Judge  also  makes
   reference  to  the  skeleton  argument  which  'submits  that  background
   evidence is consistent with this account.' The  Judge  also  makes  clear
   that he took into account the witness statement of the sponsor  who  also
   confirmed that the Appellant's father went missing and that  as  'nothing
   was  functioning  in  Sierra  Leone  at  that  time  there  is  no  death
   certificate available.'

17. The Judge therefore had before him what  were  in  effect  self  serving
   statements confirming that  the  Appellant's  father  was  dead:  neither
   author was witness to the father's death and the Appellant was a child of
   3 at the time. There was no other documentary evidence either from  other
   family  members  or  any  government  department  which   confirmed   the
   assertions made in the affidavit and witness statements. I  am  satisfied
   therefore, given that  the  Appellant  bears  the  burden  of  proof  for
   establishing this fact, that the Judge was entitled to give very  limited
   weight to such evidence as he stated:

   "Although I appreciate  that  a  death  certificate  may  not  have  been
   available I do not accept that  further  evidence  could  not  have  been
   obtained to establish that the appellant's father is dead."

18. I am therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read  as  a
   whole set out findings that were sustainable  and  sufficiently  detailed
   and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

19. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

20. The appeal is dismissed.
Signed                                                              Date 2
June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell





