
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/03075/2014
     OA/03077/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 March 2016                            |On 13 April 2016                 |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                             josephine NABAkooza
                              jonathan kakooza
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                         AN ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms J Heybrook of Counsel instructed by Kothala &
Co (Harrow Road)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

Details of Appellants

 1. The appellants  in  this  case  are  citizens  of  Uganda.   The  first
    appellant was born on 4 January 1996 and the second  appellant  is  her
    brother born on 23 April 1998.  The appellants sought  entry  clearance
    as the dependent children of their mother, Rebecca Odoki, the  sponsor,
    a British citizen.  Those applications were refused by  the  respondent
    under paragraph 297 and paragraph 320(7A)  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The  respondent  also  concluded  that  there   were   no   exceptional
    circumstances that would justify granting leave outside Article 8.

 2. The appellants appealed the refusals  and  their  appeals  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mr J S Hamilton.  In  a  Decision  and
    Reasons promulgated on  20  July  2015  Judge  Hamilton  dismissed  the
    appellants' appeals under the Immigration Rules and  under  Article  8.
    However, the judge found that the respondent had not demonstrated  that
    the appellants had "deliberately and dishonestly relied upon  a  forged
    death certificate in support of their applications".

 3. The appellants appealed and permission was granted on the basis that it
    was arguable that in assessing Article 8 Judge Hamilton had  failed  to
    consider the impact on the second appellant of being separated  from  a
    sole surviving parent  and  that  it  was  unclear  whether  the  judge
    accepted that the father was dead.  If that in fact was  accepted  this
    may have impacted on the assessment in relation to paragraph 297 of the
    Immigration Rules as indeed paragraph 297(i)(d) may be relevant.

 4. Ms Fijiwala conceded before me that paragraph 297(i)(d) was material to
    the outcome of this appeal and that no finding had  been  made  by  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal as to whether or not  the  appellants'
    father was dead or alive.

 5. The respondent had submitted a Rule 24(3)(e) response.  The  respondent
    had sought to rely on the judge's asserted failure to provide  adequate
    reasons for not concluding that the death  certificate  was  a  forgery
    given the document verification report.  Ms Fijiwala  conceded  however
    that the case of EG & NG (Upper Tribunal: Rule 17: withdrawal: Rule 24:
    scope) Ethiopia [2013] UKUT 00143 was relevant authority.  At paragraph
    46 and in the head note of that case the Upper Tribunal  confirms  that
    Rule 24 does not create a freestanding right of appeal and Ms  Heybrook
    correctly  confirmed  that  the  respondent  had   not   submitted   an
    application for permission to cross-appeal.

 6. I am satisfied that the judge failed to  provide  adequate  reasons  or
    indeed any findings in relation to  the  appellants'  father  which  is
    material to the case.  The judge had found at [39] and  following  that
    the sponsor's evidence was evasive and not candid.  I accept that  this
    appears to relate to the  appellants'  circumstances  in  Uganda.   The
    judge found that the sponsor sought  to  embellish  and  exaggerate  in
    order to assist the appellants' case.  Significantly the judge found at
    [41] that the judge did not have a clear  picture  of  the  appellants'
    true circumstances in Uganda and therefore found that it had  not  been
    shown that the sponsor had sole responsibility for the appellants.

 7. It was Ms Heybrook's contention however the judge found  at  [43]  that
    'it did not necessarily follow'  that  the  judge  had  to  reject  the
    sponsor's  evidence  about  the  death  certificate   and   the   judge
    specifically found that in contrast to her other evidence the  evidence
    she gave on this issue was "detailed, clear and seemed plausible".  The
    judge went on to consider this issue at [43], [44], [45] and [46].

 8. At [46] the judge stated that, "looking at the sponsor's evidence as  a
    whole there is cause to be very suspicious about the reliability of her
    account".  However the judge concluded that suspicion is not enough and
    when proving dishonesty the burden of proof lies on the respondent  and
    therefore the judge reached  the  conclusion,  noted  above,  that  the
    appellants had not "relied upon a deliberately forged death certificate
    when making their application".

 9. However, I do not accept Ms Heybrook's submission that given all of the
    judge's findings and given that the respondent  had  also  verified  as
    genuine the appellants' birth certificates (which specifically referred
    to their father as dead), it must follow that their father was deceased
    and therefore the appeals fell to be allowed under paragraph 297(i)(d).

10. The judge materially erred in failing to make a finding either  way  as
    to whether or not the appellants' father is  deceased  or  not.   Given
    that the judge made both positive and negative findings in relation  to
    the sponsor's credibility it is not possible to extrapolate  a  finding
    either way as to whether the judge found the appellants' father  to  be
    deceased or not.  As indicated above this is clearly material including
    as it potentially changes the entire nature of the appellants' case.  I
    am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set
    aside.

11. In relation to the remaking of the decision under  section  12(2)(b)(i)
    of the 2007 Act and Practice Statement 7.2 (b), the nature  and  extent
    of judicial fact finding necessary for the decision  to  be  remade  is
    such that it is  appropriate  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, given in particular the failure to make findings in  relation
    to whether or not the appellant's father is dead.

12. I heard submissions as to whether any findings of  fact  should  stand.
    Ms Fijiwala was of the view that the findings in relation to  paragraph
    297(i)(e) in relation to sole responsibility  should  be  preserved  as
    they may be relevant if the judge of the First-tier Tribunal found that
    the appellant's father is in fact not deceased.  It was  Ms  Heybrook's
    submission  that  the  appeal  should  be  heard  de  novo.    In   the
    alternative, if I was not minded  to  remit  the  appeal  for  a  fresh
    hearing it was her submission that equally if the findings in  relation
    to 297(i)(e) were to be  preserved  equally  the  findings  had  to  be
    preserved in relation to the respondent not discharging the  burden  in
    relation to the death certificate being a forgery.

13. I am of the view that the judge's failure to make adequate findings  in
    relation to whether or not it was accepted that the appellant's  father
    is deceased has muddied the waters.  It is not clear that if the  judge
    had accepted that the appellants' father was deceased, that  the  judge
    would have also gone on  to  make  the  negative  findings  he  did  in
    relation to paragraph 297(i)(e).  However, given the ambiguous findings
    in relation to the death certificate I am equally  not  satisfied  that
    the findings in relation to the document verification report can stand.



Notice of Decision

14. The appeal is allowed.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set
    aside in its  entirety.   No  findings  shall  stand.   The  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (any London hearing centre) to  any
    judge other than Judge C J Hamilton.


No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


