
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03734/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke on Trent                         |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13 October 2014                              |On 21 October 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
                                   Between

                                 Asim Atarid
                        [No anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    The Entry Clearance Officer Islamabad

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr D Akhtar, instructed by Burton & Burton
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Asim Atarid, date of  birth  1.2.85,  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.

 2. This is his appeal against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gurung-Thapa,  promulgated  on  14.3.14,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent, dated 15.12.12, to  refuse  his
    application made on 6.7.12 for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as
    the spouse of Alia Javed, pursuant to paragraph 281 of the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Judge heard the appeal on 18.2.14.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bennett  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    22.5.14. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Allen granted permission  to  appeal  on
    6.8.14.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 13.10.14 as an appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the determination of Judge Gurung-Thapa should be set aside.

 6. The relevant background can be summarised as follows.  The  appellant's
    application was made prior to the change in the Rules coming into force
    on 9.7.12. Following Edgehill  and  the  transitional  provisions,  the
    application thus falls to be considered  under  paragraph  281  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 7. The application was refused because of failure to submit an  acceptable
    English language test certificate  from  a  provider  approved  by  the
    Secretary of State showing that the appellant met or  exceeded  the  A1
    level of the CEFR.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was not satisfied that the job offer  for
    the appellant was genuine, but was satisfied that the appellant and the
    sponsor would be able to maintain and accommodate themselves within the
    Immigration Rules. However,  the  judge  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    produced evidence met the English language requirements.  That  is  the
    only issue in this appeal.

 9.  The  application  was  also  refused   under   the   maintenance   and
    accommodation requirements of paragraph 281.

10. In granting permission to appeal, considered simply  that  the  grounds
    identified an arguable challenge to the judge's findings in respect  of
    the appellant's English language qualification.

11. The Rule 24 response seems to address only the maintenance requirements
    and criticises the First-tier Tribunal findings, but there is no  cross
    appeal by the Secretary of State. In relation to the  English  language
    requirement, the response states only that the  judge  made  clear  and
    reasoned findings as to the validity of the qualification.

12. I bear in mind that as this is an out of country  appeal,  I  can  only
    consider evidence pertaining to the  circumstances  prevailing  at  the
    date of decision, namely 15.12.12.

13. The document produced by  the  appellant  with  the  application  is  a
    Pearson  PTE  Score  Report,  dated  10.7.12,  a  few  days  after  the
    application but before the date of decision. It shows an overall  score
    of 17. However, Mr Akhtar's submission was that the result demonstrated
    that the appellant met the listening and speaking requirements, 15  and
    16 respectively. He  relied  on  the  reverse  of  the  document  which
    suggests that a PTE Academic Score in the range 10-29 met the  CEFR  A1
    level. He also pointed me to Appendix O which also  suggests  that  the
    Pearson test is accepted for A1, even though it is designed to test  at
    level B1. The difficulty in the argument  is  whether  the  scores  are
    acceptable and mean what Mr Akhtar claims. The words, "A1 or below"gave
    me cause for  concern,  especially  when  read  with  the  accompanying
    explanation that when using PTE Academic for a spouse/partner  visa  it
    states that, "spouse visa applicants require  a  minimum  PTE  Academic
    score of 24 in listening and Speaking only." Mr Akhtar  suggested  that
    this meant a total of 24 when  taken  together.  However,  the  overall
    score was only 17, even when taking the other components into  account.
    Mr Akhtar also suggested that as the Pearson PTE was  at  B1  level  it
    must necessarily include the lower A1.

14. I adjourned briefly to allow Mr Harrison to  take  instructions  as  to
    whether the Pearson B1 level test is acceptable  for  A1  requirements.
    He produced to me the case of Akhtar (CEFR; UKBA  Gudiance  and  IELTS)
    [2013] UKUT 00306 (IAC), which held that reliance must be placed on the
    UKBA Guidance, because the Rules did not state an  equivalence  between
    the IELTS results and the CEFR levels. It also  states  that  at  least
    each of the individual modules in speaking and listening must have been
    assessed at the level required.

15. The Guidance document relied on was  published  on  25.1.13,  which  Mr
    Akhtar points out  was  after  the  refusal  decision.  However,  after
    checking it, I am satisfied that the Guidance applicable at the date of
    the decision was to the same effect. The Guidance states at SET  17.4.2
    that the TOEFL test is not designed to test below B1 and thus there  is
    no way to establish what score is required to meet A1. I  do  not  find
    the Guidance helpful in this case, as  the  test  was  not  TOEFL,  but
    Pearson PTE Academic, which clearly states on the explanation page that
    it can be used.

16. Having considered both the Guidance the case of Akhtar, I am  satisfied
    that potentially, the Pearson test can cover the A1 level for a  spouse
    application. However, I am not satisfied that the  appellant's  results
    met the A1 level. The overall score of 17 was very poor. I am satisfied
    that the necessary pass of A1 is a score of 24  in  each  of  both  the
    speaking and listening tests. The  appellant  scored  well  below  that
    level. I reject Mr Atkhar's submission that the scores have to be added
    together, as that is not stated on the Pearson guidance and makes sense
    of the statement that 10-29 overall score is A1 or below. Clearly,  the
    appellant needed to pass each of speaking and listening at 24.

17. In  the  circumstances,  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  failed  to
    demonstrate that he meets the A1 CEFR level required to meet the Rules.
    In the circumstances his application must fail  under  the  Immigration
    Rules as failing to meet the English language requirement of  paragraph
    281.

18. The grounds of appeal both to the First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper
    Tribunal rely on article 8 ECHR, however, Mr Akhtar did not address  me
    on family life at all. Even if family life is to be relied  on,  it  is
    clear that Appendix FM and paragraph 276ADE do not apply to an  out  of
    country application.

19. Even had the First-tier Tribunal proceeded to consider article  8  ECHR
    under  the  Razgar  five   step   process,   conducting   the   careful
    proportionality  balancing  exercise  between  on  the  one  hand   the
    legitimate and necessary aim of the state to protect the economic well-
    being of the UK through immigration control and on the other the rights
    of the appellant and the sponsor to respect for their  family  life,  I
    find that the First-tier Tribunal  would  have  undoubtedly  found  the
    decision entirely proportionate.  The  appellant  is  not  entitled  to
    settle in the UK simply because that is their choice. I would  have  to
    take into account that there is a route for entry for  persons  in  his
    circumstances, but he has failed  to  demonstrate  that  he  meets  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules. Article 8 is not a short circuit
    to compliance with the Rules. The appellant  and  the  sponsor  entered
    into their relationship in the full knowledge that they would  only  be
    able to settle in the UK if they met the Rules for doing so. There  was
    no evidence before the Tribunal that the  parties  could  not  continue
    family life in Pakistan. It is also the case that if the appellant  and
    the sponsor can demonstrate that they  meet  the  requirements  of  the
    Rules they can make a  new  application  with  an  appropriate  English
    language test certificate. In the circumstances, it is difficult to see
    how the decision could ever be found to be disproportionate.

20. I also bear in mind that if the decision had to be set aside  and  made
    again, I would have to take account in the public  interest  assessment
    of section 117B(2) of the 2002 Act: "It is in the public interest,  and
    in particular in the interests of the economic well-being of the United
    Kingdom, that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
    are able to speak English, because persons who can speak  English-  (a)
    are less of a burden on taxpayers, and (b) are better able to integrate
    into society."

21. In all the circumstances,  although  article  8  family  life  was  not
    considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, the appellant  has  failed
    to demonstrate that it would  or  could  have  produced  any  different
    outcome to the appeal than a dismissal. In the circumstances, I find no
    material error of law in the decision.

Conclusion & Decision:

22. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed.
Signed: [pic]     Date: 16 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed.

Signed: [pic]     Date: 16 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


