
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03520/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2015                              |On 22 May 2015                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                              Sharifa Aden Amin
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Yeo, instructed by Wilson Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Sharifa Aden Amin,  claims  to  have  been  born  on  25
    December 1995 and is a citizen of Somalia.  She seeks  entry  clearance
    to the United Kingdom for settlement with her father (Aden Amin Subow -
    hereafter referred to as the sponsor).  Her application was refused  by
    the ECO, at Nairobi, by a decision dated 7 January 2014.  She  appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Horvath) which,  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 3 December 2014, dismissed the  appeal.   The  appellant
    now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The ECO refused the application on a  number  of  grounds.   The  judge
    found in favour of the appellant in respect  of  maintenance  [22]  and
    accommodation [19].  Those findings have not  been  challenged  by  the
    ECO.  The judge was not satisfied,  however,  that  the  appellant  was
    under the age of 18 years at the date she made  her  application  under
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

 3. In a detailed and thorough  determination,  the  judge  considered  the
    evidence which had been provided regarding the  appellant's  age.   She
    appears to have placed considerable weight on a birth certificate which
    had been produced by the appellant.  However, it  is  clear  that  both
    parties  accepted  that  the  birth  certificate  alone  would  not  be
    sufficient or reliable evidence of the appellant's proper date of birth
    given that there was no central government in  Somalia  from  1991  and
    during 1995, the year in which the appellant claimed she was born.  The
    judge recorded [14] that the Somali Embassy had issued a certificate on
    the basis of what the sponsor had told them as regards the  appellant's
    date of birth.  At [16], the judge concluded that she  was  "unable  to
    accept the birth certificate in  form  and  content  because  it  lacks
    reliability and provenance in Tanveer Ahmed terms."  Mr  Yeo,  for  the
    appellant, submitted that the judge  had  unbalanced  her  analysis  by
    dealing at such length with a document which  neither  party  suggested
    could be determinative of the appellant's age.  I find  that  there  is
    some merit in that submission.  The birth certificate is  not  a  false
    document in the sense either that it is a forgery or that  the  sponsor
    has submitted it knowing that its contents are untrue.  I  accept  that
    the decision of the judge gives the  impression  that  the  appellant's
    credibility generally had been placed in doubt by the fact that she had
    produced the certificate.  If the judge did take that  view,  I  accept
    that she may be entitled to do so provided she had properly weighed all
    the evidence regarding the appellant's date of birth. However, she  did
    not do so and there is the danger that she may have  ignored  or  given
    insufficient attention to evidence when she was already persuaded  that
    the appellant and sponsor were lying.

 4. I accept Mr Yeo's submissions that there  were  items  of  evidence  to
    which the judge has not paid proper  attention.   First,  there  is  an
    email from the Entry Clearance  Officer  to  UKBA  International  Group
    (Beronica Karanja) which is dated 6 February 2014.  This  records  that
    there was no "full copy of the screening interview notes"  (see  below)
    relating to the sponsor for his claim for asylum but does  recall  that
    there was a letter on the files of the respondent  dated  25  May  2007
    from Wilson & Co Solicitors in which reference is made to  the  present
    appellant having been "born c 1995."  The judge refers  to  this  email
    (indeed, she quotes at length from it at [15]).  She does not, however,
    engage with the statement in the letter (from which the  email  quotes)
    that the appellant was born "c 1995".  Rather, she concentrates on  the
    (missing) screening interview of 1 October 2007 of the  sponsor's  wife
    who had claimed that the present appellant was "15 years  old  at  that
    point".  She then goes on to reject the  sponsor's  wife's  explanation
    regarding that interview and her assertion that  she  would  "not  have
    just guessed [the appellant's] age"  because  she  had  never  met  the
    appellant and "did not know much about her."  The judge does  not  deal
    with the fact that the transcript of the interview itself  is  missing;
    she has reached her findings about the interview solely on the basis of
    what the email says about it.  I consider that the judge should, at the
    very least, have dealt with  the  fact  that  the  transcript  for  the
    interview is not available and how that fact might have figured in  her
    analysis.

 5. There are additional problems concerning the judge's analysis of  other
    items of evidence.  As the grounds record (ground 3), there are medical
    letters which support the appellant's claimed date of  birth  but  with
    which the judge failed to deal at all.  Likewise, the Somali  Community
    ID card (which was issued eighteen months before  the  application  for
    entry clearance) also contained details of the date of  birth  but  was
    rejected by the judge simply because the details had been provided  "on
    the say-so of the appellant."  The judge fails to assess  the  evidence
    on the basis that the appellant and sponsor have, over  a  period  time
    and prior to the making of the present application for entry clearance,
    stated that the appellant's date of birth was 1995.  Instead, the judge
    suggests that this evidence is simply self-serving, an  arguably  harsh
    judgment given the fact that accurate documentary evidence of dates  of
    birth are simply not available from Somalia from the 1990s.

 6. The judge was aware that a previous Immigration  Judge  (Judge  Molloy)
    had found the sponsor and his wife credible.   However,  Judge  Horvath
    noted that she had not seen "the papers  submitted  at  that  time  and
    therefore I am in no position to  comment  upon  his  findings  in  his
    determination."  I am not persuaded that  those  comments  represent  a
    sufficient engagement with the previous determination which, under  the
    principles of Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT  00702  (Starred)  should  have
    formed the starting point for the judge's own analysis.

 7. Mr Yeo also submitted that the judge's conclusion (in effect, that  the
    appellant and sponsor had  deliberately  told  untruths  regarding  the
    appellant's date of birth) were never put to the  witnesses  in  cross-
    examination.  I am not persuaded that that submission  taken  alone  is
    capable of undermining the judge's decision but,  taken  together  with
    the other observations which I have made above, leads  me  to  conclude
    that the judge's analysis is flawed by legal error.

 8. I have decided to set aside the judge's decision.  In a  case  such  as
    this, I consider that an appellant is entitled to a  thorough  analysis
    of all the evidence for and against her claimed  date  of  birth.   She
    comes from a  country  where  it  is  impossible  to  obtain  objective
    documentary records which might support her claimed  age  and,  if  the
    analysis of the evidence of her date of birth  is  not  scrupulous  and
    thorough, she may suffer a significant injustice  which  she  would  be
    entirely incapable of remedying.  That is not to say, of course, that a
    Tribunal should necessarily accept that she was born in 1995.  It  will
    be necessary for the next Tribunal to consider all  the  evidence  very
    carefully and to weigh it accordingly.  That is  a  task  which  it  is
    appropriate for the First-tier Tribunal to undertake  and  I  therefore
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The  only  issue  in  the
    appeal which remains outstanding is that of  the  appellant's  date  of
    birth; the findings of  Judge  Horvath  as  regards  accommodation  and
    maintenance shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 3 December  2014
is set aside. The appeal will be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not
Judge Horvath) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 15 May 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane





