
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03251/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 September 2017                 |On 9 October 2017                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            mrs Faiza Jewar Kemal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Singh, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The hearing of this case was fixed following a decision by me dated  19
    May 2017 setting aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Frankish for
    material error of law.  I stated that it would be necessary  for  there
    to be a further hearing in order for the decision to be re-made in  the
    Upper Tribunal so that the appellant  (hereafter  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer or ECO) through  the  HOPO  had  an  opportunity  to  test  the
    evidence of the  sponsor  and  receive  further  submissions  from  the
    parties in the light of that examination.

2.   In a fax sent to the Tribunal on 22 September 2017 by the  respondent's
    (hereafter the claimant's) nominated representatives  stated  that  the
    sponsor would not be attending the hearing "and the above  appeal  will
    not be pursued any further".  They also stated that they were no longer
    acting for the claimant.  In a  faxed  reply  sent  the  same  day  the
    Tribunal pointed out to the claimant that since  the  appeal  had  been
    brought by the ECO against the  FtT  decision,  it  was  "not  for  the
    ............ or her sponsor to withdraw"  and  that  the  appeal  "will
    proceed to a hearing".

3.   Having considered the above development I decided to proceed  with  the
    hearing in the absence of one of the parties and I heard  very  briefly
    from Mr Singh.

4.   I have decided to re-make the decision  by  dismissing  the  claimant's
    appeal.

5.   First of all, although the claimant and her representatives  failed  to
    understand that at this stage of the proceedings it  was  not  open  to
    them to withdraw the ECO's appeal, it is clear that they wished not  to
    pursue these proceedings any further.

6.   Second, for the reasons made clear by me in my decision  setting  aside
    the FtT decision, two  things  are  indubitable.   First  of  all,  the
    claimant could not succeed under  paragraph  352A  of  the  Immigration
    Rules because the  claimant's  marriage  did  not  meet  the  lex  loci
    celebrationis requirement because of  her status as a minor at the time
    the marriage was said  to  have  been  contracted  and  the  subsequent
    absence of any application for dispensation  from  the  requirement  of
    Article 7 of the Revised Family Code of Ethiopia.  Second, the claimant
    has failed to substantiate her sponsor's claim that the parties are  in
    a subsisting relationship and intend to live together  permanently  one
    with  the  other.   Despite  my  making  very  clear  several  concerns
    regarding the nature of  the  couple's  relationship  and  convening  a
    further hearing specifically so the sponsor could give evidence  to  be
    tested by the HOPO,  the  claimant  has  written  to  say  through  her
    representative that she does not pursue the appeal.  Having  regard  to
    all the evidence before me, I find that the claimant has not discharged
    the onus of proof on her to establish that she meets  the  requirements
    of paragraph 352AA or that there  is  a  sufficient  factual  basis  to
    engage Article 8 of the ECHR.

7.   For the above reasons:

    I have already set aside the decision of the  FtT  Judge  for  material
    error of law.

    The decision I re-make is to dismiss the claimant's appeal against  the
    ECO decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 6 October 2017

         [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
