

                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal number:
OA/03879/2014

                                          OA/03884/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |      Determination         |
|                                     |Promulgated                 |
|On March 6, 2015                     |      On March 9, 2015      |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MISS RUPA THAPA
                            MASTER RANABIR THAPA
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                 Respondents
Representation:
Appellant   Ms Everett (Home Office Presenting Officer)
Respondent  Ms Jafa, Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.


 2. The appellants are citizens of Nepal and applied for settlement as  the
    dependant  daughter  and  grandchild  of  the  sponsor,  an  ex-Ghurkha
    soldier. The main appellant was thirty-five years of age at the date of
    application and her son was almost six years  of  age.  The  respondent
    considered their applications but refused their applications on January
    24,  2014  because  the  first-named  appellant  did   not   meet   the
    requirements of Section E-ECP of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules
    and the second appellant was refused under paragraphs 276X and  297  HC
    395.  The  respondent  further   refused   their   claims   under   the
    discretionary policy as there were no exceptional circumstances.

 3. The appellants appealed on March 17, 2014, under section 82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 4.  The  matter  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Khan
    (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on November 5, 2014  and  in  a
    decision promulgated on November 21, 2014 he  found  the  discretionary
    policy was not exercised properly in the appellants' favour and allowed
    the appeal on article 8 human rights grounds

 5. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on December 2, 2014 submitting:



     a. The FtTJ erred by failing to remit the decision back to  the  Entry
        Clearance Officer as the Tribunal did not have the power  to  allow
        an appeal when the power was discretionary.


     b. The FtTJ erred by dealing with the article 8 claim in light of  the
        fact the substantive decision was found to be unlawful.

     c. The FtTJ wrongly found there was family life and ultimately wrongly
        allowed the appeal under article 8 ECHR.

 6. On January 14, 2015 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Osborne  gave
    permission to appeal finding there were arguable grounds that the  FtTJ
    had erred on all grounds.

 7. The matter came before me on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set  out  above.  The  sponsor  and  his  wife  were  in
    attendance.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 8. Both representatives agreed that when the FtTJ found the respondent had
    been in error in not exercising the discretionary policy in respect  of
    adult dependants he should have remitted the matter back to her  as  it
    was not in accordance with the law. The FtTJ's decision was unclear and
    for the sake of clarity I confirm that the decision is remitted back to
    the respondent as not being in accordance with the law to enable her to
    consider the matter afresh in light of the findings made by the FtTJ at
    paragraphs [17] to [20] of the determination.
 9. Ms Everett considered the decision of Pun & Ors [2011] UKUT  00377  and
    in particular paragraph [29] (Article 8 section). The Tribunal found-


         "It may be that in a particular case the proper course is  for  the
         decision under article 8 to await a decision under the  policy  but
         that depends upon the  facts  of  each  individual  case  including
         whether there are sufficiently clear findings of fact  on  which  a
         decision under article 8 can properly be made. It is a  matter  for
         the discretion for the Tribunal whether to deal separately with  an
         article 8 appeal before the decision is made under  the  policy  or
         whether the proper course is for both matters to be  considered  by
         the respondent and any delay which  has  already  taken  place  and
         which may well take place pending a further decision  can  properly
         be taken into  account.  However,  as  a  matter  of  principle  an
         appellant is entitled to  a  decision  on  any  appeal  before  the
         Tribunal and an appeal should not be adjourned or the decision sent
         back to be re-made by the respondent where this course is  resisted
         by the appellant unless there is a compelling reason for doing  so.
         In this context we note that in UR article 8 was not dealt with  as
         a full case had not been  put  together  on  that  ground  and  the
         appellant was  content,  probably  wisely,  for  article  8  to  be
         considered afresh by the respondent when reconsidering the decision
         under the policy. The position is  similar  in  the  second  appeal
         before us."

10. In light of this Ms Everett conceded the Tribunal did  have  discretion
    as to whether to consider article 8 in circumstances where the decision
    under the policy was being  remitted  back  to  the  respondent  for  a
    decision. The Tribunal could make a decision on article 8 and the  FtTJ
    did not err by considering the article 8 claims.

11. Ms Everett accepted that the remaining issue centred around whether the
    FtTJ had erred in finding there was family life.

12. I invited submissions on this issue.

    ERROR OF LAW SUBMISSIONS

13. Ms Everett submitted the FtTJ had erred in  finding  there  was  family
    life. The main appellant left home  in  2008  and  married  Rajiv.  She
    believed her family would not accept the marriage, as it had  not  been
    arranged, but after three months living  apart  from  her  parents  she
    contacted them. In time  the  main  appellant's  parents  accepted  her
    marriage but within 12 months of marriage her husband left and went  to
    live and work in India but neither the appellant nor  his  father  have
    ever heard from him. Her father-in-law  provided  support  because  she
    felt unable to tell her mother. Four  months  after  he  left  her  she
    discovered she  was  pregnant.  Ms  Everett  submitted  that  the  main
    appellant had left  the  family  home  and  was  living  her  own  life
    independently of her family. Although financial support was provided Ms
    Everett submitted that the FtTJ erred because he did not  consider  the
    fact she left home, married and intended to  live  her  own  life.  She
    argued that unless there was family  life  the  appellants  failed  the
    first question set out by Lord Bingham in Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027.


14. Ms Jafa submitted the FtTJ's decision  was  not  perverse  and  he  was
    entitled to find there was family life. There was clear dependence:

     a. Regular telephone contact.
     b. The sponsor had supported the main appellant since  her  father-in-
        law died in 2010.
     c. The sponsor had transferred his Ghurkha  pension  in  2010  to  his
        daughter to enable her to survive and also sent  other  monies,  if
        needed.
     d. Regular trips by the sponsor to Nepal to ensure  his  daughter  and
        grandson were all right.


    Ms Jafa placed reliance on the comments of Lady Arden and Lord  Justice
    Sedley as set out in Ghising (family life-adults-Ghurkha policy) [2012]
    UKUT 001560 and in particular paragraphs [54] and  [55].  Lord  Justice
    Sedley made clear that dependency should be read as real  or  committed
    support in the personal sense and Ms Jafa submitted  this  was  exactly
    what the sponsor was offering.  Lady  Arden  stated  that  family  life
    between adult dependants could exist  as  long  as  it  was  more  than
    emotional ties and such a circumstance could include a situation  where
    an appellant was dependent on a family.  Ms  Jafa  submitted  this  was
    clearly the case.


    She submitted the FtTJ's finding there was family life was not perverse
    and there was no error in law.


15. Ms Everett in response accepted the test set out  in  Kugathas  v  SSHD
    [2003] EWCA Civ 31 was too restrictive. She concluded  her  submissions
    that if the FtTJ had stated what Ms Jafa had argued  then  there  would
    not have been an error.

16. I reserved my decision after hearing these submissions.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

17. As a result of what was discussed at the outset of this case I am  left
    with one issue to be decided namely did the FtTJ err when finding there
    was family life. Ms Everett concedes that if the FtTJ did  not  err  in
    this assessment then there would be no error in law.


18. It is clear the FtTJ was helped greatly by a large bundle of  case  law
    and well-prepared subjective bundle.

19. From paragraph [25]  of  his  determination  the  FtTJ  considered  the
    appellants' article 8 claims. It is agreed that if the  main  appellant
    succeeds under article 8 then her son must also succeed.

20. The FtTJ had regard to what is referred to as the historic injustice in
    Ghurkha cases and in paragraph [25] the FtTJ found  the  appellant  was
    dependent on the sponsor and that she had a strong claim under  article
    8 ECHR. The FtTJ considered the original case of Ghising and Ghising  &
    others (Ghurkhas/BOCs: Historic Wrong; Weight) [2013] UKUT  567  (IAC).
    He also had regard  to  R  (Gurung)  v  SSHD  [2013]  1  WLR  2546.  He
    considered the  background  in  paragraph  [26]  and  made  credibility
    findings on the evidence in  that  paragraph  as  well.  The  FtTJ  had
    already dealt with the level of support offered and  had  recorded  the
    oral evidence of the sponsor and his wife.

21. Ms Everett invited me to find the FtTJ had wrongly found there  was  no
    family life but to do so I would have to find the FtTJ's  decision  was
    perverse. Ms Jafa reminded me what the courts  had  said  about  family
    life and dependency especially in Ghurkha cases and I am satisfied  the
    finding on family life was open to him.

22. There is no error in law on this issue and I uphold the FtTJ's decision
    on article 8 in respect of both appellants.


    DECISION


23. There was no material error. I uphold the  original  decision  save  as
    clarified above in paragraph [8].


24. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction pursuant to
    Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and I see
    no reason to alter that order.

Signed:                                 Dated:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no amendment to the order made in the First-tier.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

