
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03702/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower,          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|Birmingham                           |                                     |
|On 7th October 2015                  |On 4th November 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                    mr Erick Junior Tinotendashe Nyabanga
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      Entry Clearance Officer, pretoria
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills (HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ghaffar, promulgated on 10th November 2014, following  a  hearing
    at Birmingham Sheldon Court on 6th October 2014.  In the determination,
    the judge allowed  the  appeal  of  Master  Erick  Junior  Tinotendashe
    Nyabanga.  The Respondent, subsequently applied for, and  was  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, a male, who  was  born  on  9th
    September 1998.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Entry Clearance Officer, made on 13th February 2014, to refuse to grant
    him entry clearance as the child of Ms Precious Gwese, a person present
    and settled in the United Kingdom.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that, there was a time  when  his  mother,  Ms
    Precious Gwese, did not have custody of him.  He  had  lived  with  his
    mother's parents until about 2007 and then he did not  come  home  from
    school one day.  That was the last time that  he  had  lived  with  her
    parents.  He was taken to South Africa and the mother, Precious  Gwese,
    was not allowed to contact him.  She was separated from her husband  in
    1999, and this was only a year after they had  married.   Between  1999
    and 2007, it was the sponsoring mother, Precious Gwese,  who  had  sole
    responsibility for the Appellant.

 4. The Appellant was then taken to South Africa, depriving the  mother  of
    her parental right to have access  to  a  child.   The  Appellant  then
    returned back to Zimbabwe and it is then that  Precious  Gwese  applied
    for his entry to the UK on the basis that she had  sole  responsibility
    for him since then.  The Appellant had not been living  then  in  South
    Africa.  The sponsoring mother had herself  been  to  South  Africa  on
    three occasions to see the Appellant himself.

The Judge's Findings

 5. The judge's  findings  were  based  upon  the  evidence  given  by  the
    sponsoring mother who had said that she had entered the UK in 2001 as a
    visitor and had the intention  of  returning  back  to  Zimbabwe.   Her
    parents were alive at the time and she  had  left  the  Appellant  with
    them.  She then completed her studies in 2004 and stayed on in  the  UK
    thereafter.  Her daughter was already living here.   Her  children  are
    from different fathers.  The police did not keep records and there  was
    no investigation.  There had then been the  removal  of  the  Appellant
    from his grandparents on the mother's side and this was reported to the
    police at the  time.   The  sponsoring  mother  was  fearful  that  the
    Appellant's father had been involved in this  and  would  use  violence
    given that there was a history of violence in the family.

 6. The judge considered at length the refusal  letter  (see  paragraph  3,
    which maintained that the sponsoring mother in the UK had not exercised
    sole responsibility and had not  made  decisions  with  regard  to  the
    Appellant's educational health, especially given that the Appellant had
    been residing in South Africa with his father from 2011 to 2014.

 7. However, the judge then heard  the  evidence  and  concluded  that  the
    Appellant's case was that it was after 2014 that  he  had  returned  to
    Zimbabwe and his mother had since been exercising  sole  responsibility
    for him, having previously made three visits to South Africa to see the
    Appellant, before he was allowed to come back to Zimbabwe.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge  erred  in  failing  to
    give adequate reasons for  his  findings.   The  judge  had  found  (at
    paragraph 21) that the Appellant's father had abdicated  responsibility
    for him and that the Appellant's  cousin  was  a  person  who  was  now
    exercising day-to-day care over him in Zimbabwe.  He had found that the
    Sponsor had  been  sending  money  for  the  Appellant  and  that  "the
    decisions about the  Appellant's  upbringing  are  discussed  with  and
    monitored by the Sponsor".  However, the judge had failed  to  consider
    the test of "sole responsibility" in the context of  the  authoritative
    determination in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e) "sole  responsibility")  Yemen
    [2006] UKAIT 00049, which had stated (at paragraph 19) that, "the  test
    is whether the parent has  continuing  control  and  direction  of  the
    child's upbringing including making all the important decisions in  the
    child's life".

 9. On 16th December 2014, permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

Hearing

10. At the hearing  before  me,  on  7th  October  2015,  Mr  David  Mills,
    appearing on behalf of the Respondent  Secretary  of  State,  submitted
    that the case of TD (Yemen) had not been applied, even though the judge
    had summed up the principle and facts of this  case  at  paragraph  20,
    before proceeding at paragraph 21 to hold that the day-to-day care  was
    undertaken by the Appellant's cousin.  The judge had concluded that the
    father had abdicated responsibility.  He had held that the Sponsor  had
    been sending money for the Appellant.  He had gone on to say  that,  "I
    find that this demonstrates a close interest in and affection  for  the
    child.  I find that the decisions by  the  Appellant's  upbringing  are
    discussed with and monitored  by  the  Sponsor".   This,  submitted  Mr
    Mills,  was  not  enough.   It  showed  that   there   was   a   shared
    responsibility with the cousin.

11. In her submissions, Ms Gwese, submitted that one had  to  look  at  her
    affidavit, because this explained the extent of her  care  and  control
    over her son, the Appellant.  She said that she had  asked  someone  to
    look after her son when he had returned to Zimbabwe, and this  was  the
    cousin.  She said she herself could not  do  day-to-day  care  for  him
    because she was living in this country.  It was physically  impossible.
    She was, however, paying for his food, his education,  and  his  health
    needs.  She was not physically there  and  could  not  physically  look
    after him in person there.  She turned emotional  and  broke  down  and
    submitted that she made all the decisions  in  relation  to  her  child
    because she was the mother.

12. There was no reply by Mr Mills.





No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.

14. First, the challenge in the grounds of application is on the basis that
    the authoritative determination in TD (Yemen) has not been applied.  It
    plainly has been.  The judge not only refers to it but  actually  cites
    its relevant parts at paragraph 19.  The judge then  explains  what  is
    meant by "sole responsibility".

15. Second, the challenge is on the basis that adequate reasoning  has  not
    been given.  It plainly has been.  The judge  gives  his  reasoning  at
    paragraph 18 and at paragraph 21.  It is entirely clear.  It  is  well-
    established that following R (Iran) [2005] it is necessary for there to
    be "perversity" in a decision under challenge and that this "represents
    a very high hurdle" (paragraph 11).  Lord Justice Brooke made it  clear
    in  that  case  that,  "far  too  often  practitioners  use  the   word
    'irrational'  or  'perverse'  when  these   epithets   are   completely
    inappropriate" (see paragraph 12).  This is the case here as well.

16. This can be demonstrated as follows.   First,  the  judge  finds  that,
    "having perused  the  documents  before  me  and  considered  the  oral
    evidence of the Sponsor, I find that she is a  credible  witness".   He
    finds  that  initially  the  Appellant  was  being  cared  for  by  his
    grandparents from 1999 to 2007, "with the decisions  and  direction  of
    the Sponsor".  This finding was open to the judge.  It shows that  even
    from the time in 1999 onwards, the decision making  and  direction  was
    given by the Sponsor.  There is no challenge to this finding and it  is
    difficult to see why  the  judge  is  not  entitled  to  come  to  this
    conclusion.

17. Second, the judge finds that the Sponsor remained  with  the  Appellant
    "until 2001 when she came to the UK leaving him  in  the  care  of  his
    parents but maintained parental responsibility for  him".   This  again
    shows that the decision and direction is entirely at the behest of  the
    sponsoring mother.

18. Third, the Appellant's father thereafter took the  Appellant  from  his
    grandparents' care "without warning and the Sponsor and her family were
    unable to stop this".  At this time  the  Appellant's  father  had  the
    Appellant in South Africa "and  prevented  contact  with  his  mother".
    However, soon after that, "there  came  a  time  when  the  Appellant's
    father was not coping financially and sent him back to Zimbabwe to  his
    mother's care".  It is at this stage that  the  fourth  reason  becomes
    relevant.  This is that the judge found that "since the  Appellant  has
    returned to Zimbabwe, the Sponsor has had care  and  control  over  the
    child" (see paragraph 18).

19. Second, the judge considers TD (Yemen) and observes that  the  test  is
    "whether the parent has continuing control and direction of the child's
    upbringing, including making all the important decisions in the child's
    life" (paragraph 19).  The meaning of this, as the judge summarises is,
    to cover a situation "where the primary parental responsibility for the
    child's upbringing rests to all intents and purposes with  one  parent"
    (paragraph 20).  The judge then makes findings that  the  Sponsor  does
    have sole responsibility for the Appellant  and  that  the  father  has
    abdicated responsibility, and that  although  the  day-to-day  care  is
    provided by the Appellant's cousin, "the Appellant's cousin is not in a
    position to take on the responsibility of the Appellant as her  husband
    has a serious illness and she has children of her own to care for".

20. There is no challenge to this finding in the grounds of application and
    none by Mr Mills today.  This finding was plainly open to the judge.

21. The judge then concludes that the Sponsor has  in  these  circumstances
    "also been sending money for him" so that the net result is  that  "the
    Appellant's upbringing are discussed with and monitored by the Sponsor"
    but the decisions are those of the sponsoring  parent  in  the  UK,  as
    would practically be the case in  any  situation  where  the  child  is
    living away in another country and direction and control are  exercised
    from the UK.

22. In short, the decision is unimpeachable.  The  judge  was  entitled  to
    find, on a balance of probabilities, that the requirements of the Rules
    have been made and that the  sponsoring  parent  in  the  UK,  Precious
    Gwese, had sole responsibility for the child.  He was correct to  allow
    the appeal on this basis.

Decision

23. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

24. No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Dated

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    2nd November 2015

