
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/03356/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 8 April 2014                               |On 11th April 2014           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, PAKISTAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 FOZIA SAEED
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:      Ms S Khalid, of Ethnic Minorities Law Centre,
Glasgow

No anonymity order requested or made


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This determination refers to parties  as  they  were  in  the  First-tier
   Tribunal.

2) The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on  6  February  1976.   The
   sponsor, her husband, is a UK citizen.  He has three  children  from  his
   first marriage.  Following the death of his first wife,  he  married  the
   sponsor.  They also  have  three  children.   All  six  children  are  UK
   citizens and now live with the sponsor in Glasgow.

3) By notice dated 6 December 2012 the Entry Clearance Officer  refused  the
   appellant's application for entry  clearance  because  the  documentation
   provided did not support the  sponsor's  claimed  earnings,  in  the  way
   required by the Rules.

4) The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal,  specifying  grounds
   under the Rules and under Article 8 of ECHR.  Judge McGrade  allowed  the
   appeal  by  determination  promulgated  on  7  January  2014,  saying  at
   paragraph 14:

    ... the appellant has a genuine and  subsisting  parental  relationship
    with Areeha Saeed, a child who is under the  age  of  18  years,  is  a
    British citizen and is in the UK.  Areeha Saeed [one of the children of
    the sponsor's first marriage] lived  with  the  appellant  in  Pakistan
    between October 2002  and  September  2011  ...  it  would  be  not  be
    reasonable to expect the child to leave the  UK  as  she  was  awaiting
    cardiac surgery, which was likely to be performed in the  near  future,
    and was in the event performed in April 2013.  In those  circumstances,
    I am satisfied that the  exception  [paragraph  EX.1  of  Appendix  FM]
    applies.


5) The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal on the grounds that the judge erred by granting the  application
   on the basis of the pending cardiac surgery, when that had taken place in
   April 2013, before the hearing date of 19 December 2013.

6) First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro granted permission on  27  January  2014,
   observing that the judge appeared to have misdirected himself by applying
   paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM to an entry clearance case.

7) In her very useful and fair submissions,  Ms  Khalid  conceded  that  the
   judge erred in thinking that paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM could apply to
   an  entry  clearance  case,  because  it  is  restricted  to   in-country
   applications; that there was a lack of logic in allowing  the  appeal  on
   the basis of a child awaiting  surgery,  when  that  had  been  performed
   months before the hearing; and that a fresh decision was  required.   She
   relied on the circumstances relevant to Article 8, which had been  argued
   on a wide basis in the FtT.  There is no doubt that there are genuine and
   subsisting relationships among the appellant, the  sponsor,  their  three
   children and the appellant's three step-children.  The sponsor works full
   time as a taxi driver.  Ms Khalid argued that the family  life  interests
   and in particular the best interests of all six  children  (two  of  whom
   have ongoing medical conditions)  amounted  to  a  strong  case  for  the
   appellant being permitted entry to the  UK,  notwithstanding  failure  to
   show compliance with the  Rules  in  the  application  leading  to  these
   proceedings.

8) Those were well made points, but the difficulty is this.   The  shortfall
   in the documentation  regarding  the  sponsor's  income  arose  for  very
   specific reasons.  Income had to be averaged over two tax years (not  two
   accounting periods), and post-decision income could not be  relied  upon.
   In a fresh application, it appears likely (while no future application is
   a foregone conclusion) that the financial requirements can be  satisfied,
   and that there are no other reasons for which the application might  fail
   under the Rules.  There is in general no right to insist on entering  the
   UK without applying under the Rules, when it  appears  that  a  route  is
   available within the Rules.

9) It is perhaps unfortunate that the entry of the appellant to the  UK  may
   have been delayed through these proceedings, but the remedy is and was in
   her own hands.

10) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal errs in  law,  and  is  set
   aside.  The appellant's appeal, as originally brought to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, is dismissed.





                               [pic]
                                10 April 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
