
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/03328/2014
     OA/03330/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th April 2015                            |On 30th April 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                     MRS Meiqing WANG (FIRST APPELLANT)
                       mr jian chen (SECOND APPELLANT)
                          (ANONYMITY NOT RETAINED)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss Farrell
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellants born on 22nd November 1972 and 30th May  1996  are  both
    citizens of China the Second Appellant  being  the  son  of  the  First
    Appellant.  The Appellants were represented by  Miss  Farrell  and  the
    Respondent was represented by Mr Harrison, a Presenting Officer.



Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellants had made application for settlement  as  a  partner  and
    child of the Sponsor under Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.   The
    Respondent had refused the Appellant's  application  on  11th  February
    2014.  The Appellants had appealed that decision  and  the  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Williams sitting  at  Manchester  on
    2nd October 2014.  He  had  dismissed  their  appeals  under  both  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights  grounds.   Application  for
    permission to appeal was made and was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Shimmin on 24th November 2014.  It was said that the  Grounds  of
    Appeal that related  to  the  judge's  treatment  of  English  language
    requirements and financial requirements gave rise to an arguable  error
    of law.  Directions were issued to the Upper Tribunal to firstly decide
    whether an error of law had been  made  or  not.   The  Respondent  had
    opposed the application by a letter  dated  10th  December  2014.   The
    matter came before me in accordance with the directions.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 3. It was submitted that in respect of the English  language  requirements
    the application had been made on 3rd December  2013  and  the  decision
    made on 11th February 2014 that inadvertently the law used by the judge
    and indeed by the Appellants' representative reflected the Rules as  at
    1st August 2014.  It was further submitted that  the  letter  from  the
    accountant was sufficient as being evidence from the employer.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 4. Mr Harrison said that the judge had dealt with language matters in  the
    appropriate way and that the requirement of a letter from  the  company
    must come from an officer of that company and not the accountant.

 5. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider the documents  and
    submissions made.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. Appendix O to the Immigration Rules which relates to  English  language
    requirements was inserted from 20th July 2012 by CM8423.  In respect of
    the ISESOL relating to the spouse/partner it lists one of the following
    document combinations required.  Appendix  O  firstly  deals  with  the
    international speaking and listening diploma  which  appears  to  be  a
    reference to the combined diploma and notes  that  for  proof  of  that
    combined diploma either an international speaking and listening  ISESOL
    diploma certificate is required or an ISESOL certificate plus an ISESOL
    listening certificate.  That requirement would  seem  to  flow  from  a
    situation where a candidate had had the two separate components  namely
    speaking and listening examined and awarded together.  If as the  judge
    noted was the case before him that those two  separate  components  had
    been examined separately then Appendix O suggests three alternatives in
    terms of  document  combinations  required.   Whichever  of  the  three
    alternatives is looked at each requires a certificate together  with  a
    notification of candidate results.  That would  seem  to  follow  as  a
    matter of common sense if exams are taken on a separate occasion.   The
    fact the Appellant had not provided her ISESOL certificate  in  respect
    of listening suggests therefore as the judge identified  at  paragraphs
    15 to 18 she had not complied with those  strict  requirements  of  the
    Rules in respect of the provision of proof in relation to the listening
    requirement of Appendix O.

 7. In terms of the financial requirement the  judge  had  noted  that  the
    Appellant had not provided evidence as required in Appendix FM-SE(2)(b)
    i.e. a letter from his employer confirming various  matters.   Although
    in this case the Appellant was essentially his own employer he had  set
    up a limited company for whom he was employed and  drew  a  salary  and
    therefore fell within the requirements of Appendix  FM-SE(2)  requiring
    him in respect of that salaried  employment  to  provide  a  number  of
    documents in support  of  his  claimed  income.   Appendix  FM-SE(2)(b)
    specifically requires  a  letter  from  the  employer  who  issued  the
    payslips confirming  those  matters  outlined  in  (i)  to  (iv).   The
    requirement in the Rules appears clear and does not on the face  of  it
    allow that letter to emanate from  any  other  source  other  than  the
    employer.  Accordingly a letter from an accountant for  those  purposes
    does not emanate from the employer and does not  therefore  fulfil  the
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE(2)(b).

 8. In summary therefore the judge did not make an error of law in refusing
    the Appellant's application on those two specific failings to meet  the
    strict evidential requirements of Appendix FM-SE and Appendix O of  the
    Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

I find no error of law was made by the judge in this  case  and  uphold  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity not retained.

Signed   Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
