
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03982/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 July 2016                               |On 28 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [S S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow
For the Respondent:    Mr C Jacobs of Counsel instructed by Bushra Ali
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer but I will  refer  to
    the original appellant, a citizen of Tanzania, born on [ ] 2001, as the
    appellant herein.  The  appellant  appeals  the  refusal  of  an  entry
    clearance on 31 January 2014.  The Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision
    was summarised by the First-tier Judge in paragraph 11 of the  decision
    as follows:

         "In the Notice of Decision the  Respondent  explained  the  reasons
         behind the decision saying that  the  Appellant  has  not  provided
         independent evidence that he lived with his  grandparents,  leading
         to doubts as to whether he indeed had no contact with his father as
         claimed.  Whilst it was stated that his mother sent him  money  for
         his upkeep, no evidence had been provided  of  this  or  of  visits
         since she left in 2005.  He had  not  provided  evidence  that  his
         mother was responsible for the important decisions with  regard  to
         his upbringing.  The Respondent was not satisfied that  his  mother
         had  sole  responsibility  for  him  or  that  there  were  serious
         compelling circumstances that made his exclusion undesirable."

2.   Issue  was  also  taken  on  maintenance  but  the  judge  recorded  in
    paragraph 14 of the decision that the issue of maintenance was conceded
    by the time of the hearing.

3.   The First-tier Judge heard evidence from  the  appellant's  mother  and
    her husband.  She also had the benefit of a skeleton argument  and  the
    lengthy bundle provided by the appellant's representatives.

4.   The judge records the appellant's  mother's  evidence  that  after  her
    parents' separation she resided with her father and his  new  wife  and
    their children.  She became pregnant in 2000 with the  appellant.   She
    received no support from the appellant's father  during  the  pregnancy
    and they never lived together.  After the appellant's birth her  father
    took responsibility for them both and the appellant's father  was  less
    and less involved and cut off all contact when the  appellant  met  her
    present husband.  The determination continues:

         "6.  This new relationship had the approval of her family.  Her new
             husband knew all about the Appellant.  In 2005 she applied for
             and obtained a visa to join her husband in the UK.  She didn't
             want to leave the Appellant behind but  they  were  not  in  a
             position to sponsor him then.  She says in her statement  that
             she asked her father to look after the Appellant for one year.
              It was only going to be a temporary separation.   Her  father
             agreed to bring  the  Appellant  up  in  accordance  with  her
             wishes.


         7.   The Sponsor says that since then she talks to her son  on  the
             telephone at least twice a week.  She has  produced  telephone
             records.  She talks about his schooling.  She made the  choice
             of school and sends money out to cover school  fees.   At  the
             hearing she gave evidence that most of  her  interaction  with
             the teachers is through her father but on  one  occasion  when
             the Appellant failed his  maths  she  contacted  the  teachers
             direct.  She also talks to him about whether he has eaten  and
             what he has  had  to  eat.   There  is  friction  between  the
             Appellant and his stepfamily and this makes  the  relationship
             difficult.  In fact since the decision  the Appellant has gone
             to live with his grandmother.


         8.   Within the Appellant's bundle of documents at pages 153 to 161
             are various receipts for foreign currency and letters from the
             grandfather and a cousin confirming  receipt  of  funds.   The
             Sponsor has made visits to Tanzania in 2006,  2008,  2009  and
             2011 as can be seen by the stamps in her passport.   She  says
             that when she goes there she takes money with her.   She  also
             sends money via friends visiting  the  country.   Her  husband
             confirmed this account.  Further visits have been  made  since
             the decision.  Photographs have been produced of the  Sponsor,
             her husband and their children with the Appellant.


         9.   The Sponsor and her husband have three  children  in  the  UK.
             They are keen for the Appellant to join them.  The Sponsor has
             now trained as a nurse and works at a hospital in Northampton.
              She says that her parents are elderly and cannot continue  to
             look after her son.  He is keen to join his family in the UK."

5.    The  judge  heard  submissions  from  Counsel  then  representing  the
    appellant (not Mr  Jacobs)  and  Ms  Ashraf  for  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.

6.   The judge's conclusions were as follows:

         "16. The Appellant wishes to join his mother in the UK.   Following
             the concession on behalf of the Respondent the issue before me
             is whether the Sponsor has sole responsibility for  her  son's
             upbringing (paragraph 297(i)(e)) or whether there are  serious
             and compelling family or other considerations which  make  his
             exclusion undesirable (paragraph 297(i)(f)).  It has not  been
             argued that suitable arrangements have not been made  for  his
             care and, for the avoidance of doubt, I am satisfied that  the
             Appellant no longer has any contact with his natural father.


         17.  In TD Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049  the  Tribunal  accepted  that
             "sole responsibility" is a factual matter to be decided on all
             the evidence.  Where one parent is not involved in the child's
             upbringing because he (or  she)  had  abandoned  or  abdicated
             responsibility, the issue  may  arise  between  the  remaining
             parent and others  who  have  day-to-day  care  of  the  child
             abroad.  The test is whether the parent has continuing control
             and direction over the child's  upbringing,  including  making
             all the important decisions in the child's life.


         18.  Contrary to Ms Ashraf's assertion, I do not read the Sponsor's
             statements as saying that her father agreed to take over  full
             responsibility for the  Appellant.   When  he  was  born,  the
             Sponsor was unmarried and at that stage her father  agreed  to
             look after them both.  I  am  satisfied  having  had  regarded
             [sic] the evidence as a whole, including  the  Sponsor's  oral
             testimony, that the arrangement made in 2005 was only intended
             to be temporary.  It has taken some time for the  Sponsor  and
             her husband to be in a position to  support  the  application.
             Although the present application is the first  one,  I  accept
             that they took advice previously.   No  application  was  made
             because that advice was that it would be unsuccessful.


         19.  It is inevitable that day-to-day arrangements will be  handled
             by the adult in the country  in  question.   The  question  is
             whether he also makes the important decisions.  There is not a
             continuing line of documentary evidence  showing  money  being
             sent but in addition to the documents that have been produced,
             I have the testimony of the Sponsor and her husband,  evidence
             of regular telephone calls and  evidence  of  regular  visits.
             The photographs show a genuine bond between  the  Sponsor  and
             her son.  I found the Sponsor's evidence to be clear, open and
             credible.  The occasional small detail added credence  to  the
             testimony as a whole, such as that  concerning  the  Appellant
             failing his maths and the  Sponsor's  action  on  hearing  the
             news.  I am satisfied that it is more likely than not that she
             chose the Appellant's school and pays for it.  I am  satisfied
             that she does whatever she can do to remain in touch with  her
             son's life and exercise parental  control  over  it.   On  the
             totality of the evidence I am  satisfied  that  she  has  sole
             responsibility for his upbringing."

7.   The judge accordingly allowed the appeal.  The Entry Clearance  Officer
    applied for permission to appeal and permission was granted on  8  June
    2016 by the First-tier Tribunal.  It was found to be arguable that  the
    judge had failed to  make  a  finding  on  the  issue  of  serious  and
    compelling family circumstances and had given  inadequate  reasons  for
    findings.

8.   Counsel lodged a skeleton argument for the  hearing  before  me  and  I
    gave Mr Tarlow time to read it.

9.   Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds and  submitted  there  was  a  lack  of
    documentary evidence to support the decision that  there  were  serious
    and compelling reasons for the child to get an entry clearance.   There
    was no evidence of contact with the child's school.  There were already
    safe and suitable arrangements for the appellant's care.  There was  no
    credible evidence of financial remittals.  The sponsor  could  maintain
    contact  with  the  child  by  modern  methods  of  communication.  The
    conclusions on the sole responsibility  issue  were  unsustainable  and
    inadequately  reasoned.   The  determination  was  a  short   one   and
    materially flawed in law.

10.  Mr Jacobs relied on his skeleton argument where he had made  the  point
    that the grounds proceeded on a misunderstanding of the construction of
    paragraph 297 of the Rules which he helpfully set out.   It  was  clear
    that 297(e) - which dealt with sole responsibility - was separated from
    297(f) by the word "or" and not "and".

11.  The ground claiming that the  judge  had  failed  to  give  reasons  or
    adequate reasons  for  findings  on  material  matters  was  simply  an
    expression of disagreement with her findings of fact.   The  judge  had
    had before her a very detailed statement from the sponsor.   There  had
    also been a statement from her husband, the stepfather  and  also  from
    the grandfather in  Tanzania.   There  was  substantial  and  extensive
    evidence and there was no requirement for corroboration in  this  case.
    Clear findings on sole responsibility having  been  made,  it  was  not
    necessary  to  deal  with  the  issue   of   serious   and   compelling
    circumstances.

12.  It was submitted by the Entry Clearance  Officer  that  there  were  no
    letters from the sponsor to the school but  the  First-tier  Judge  had
    considered the evidence of the sponsor and the other evidence and found
    that she was fully involved.

13.  It was further submitted that no credible evidence  had  been  produced
    to demonstrate that the sponsor financially remitted funds for the  use
    of the appellant.  The First-tier  Judge  had  accepted  the  sponsor's
    account as credible.  There had been evidence in the bundle before  the
    First-tier Judge and the sponsor had referred in paragraph  75  of  her
    witness statement to sending money regularly.

14.  With reference to reliance on modern means of communication, this  went
    to Article 8 and not the sole responsibility  issues.   The  judge  had
    directed herself by reference to TD (Yemen) and her approach  had  been
    entirely correct.  There had been no material error of law.

15.  Mr Tarlow in reply submitted that the statements made by the  witnesses
    before the First-tier Tribunal were from the sponsor and members of the
    family and were obviously self-serving.

16.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with  the  decision  if  there  was  a
    material error of law in it.

17.   It  is  plain  that  the  grounds  were   based   on   a   fundamental
    misunderstanding of the Rule.  As the judge herself says  in  paragraph
    16 of the decision

         "The issue before me is whether the Sponsor has sole responsibility
         for her son's upbringing (paragraph 297(i)(e)) or whether there are
         serious and compelling family or other  considerations  which  make
         his  exclusion  undesirable  (paragraph   297(i)(f))."    [emphasis
         added].


    The First-tier Judge did not misdirect  herself  in  any  way  on  this
    issue.  In relation to her approach she was guided by what is  said  in
    TD (Yemen).  I am not satisfied that she misdirected  herself  on  what
    she had to do under  the  Rules  and  find  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's grounds in respect of the construction of paragraph  297  are
    without merit.

18.  In relation to the reasons challenge the determination is, it is  true,
    not a long one, but on the other hand it is none the  worse  for  that.
    The judge summarised the evidence that she heard in paragraph 7 to 9 of
    the determination.  She refers to the  sponsor's  involvement  and  the
    money remitted for the appellant's schooling.  She refers to particular
    pages in the bundle before her.  I should mention that the  bundle  was
    very thoroughly prepared and a further  bundle  was  prepared  for  the
    proceedings  before  the  Upper  Tribunal.   Skeleton  arguments   were
    provided for both proceedings and I am  grateful  to  Counsel  for  his
    assistance.

19.  It is plain that the judge took into account the  submissions  made  on
    behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer - see, for example, paragraph  18
    of the decision which I have set out above - and  gave  proper  reasons
    for her decision.

20.  The First-tier Judge relied it is true on oral  evidence  but  also  on
    the documentary evidence which was before her.  There had been  regular
    visits as well as telephone calls and photographs.  The judge gives  an
    example of a detail in the sponsor's testimony in paragraph 19  of  the
    determination which contributed to her positive credibility assessment.
     It was open to her to find on the evidence that the sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility for the appellant's upbringing.

21.  The grounds do not disclose a material error of law  and  the  decision
    of the  First-tier  Judge  is  confirmed.   The  appeal  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer is dismissed.

Anonymity Order

The First-tier Judge made no anonymity direction and I make none.

FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.




Signed                                  Date 26 July 2016

G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal



