
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03605/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th February 2016                 |On 19th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                              Mr adeyemi odamo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Clara Odamo
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker (HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ievins, promulgated on 24th March 2015  following  a  hearing  at
    Taylor House on 6th  March  2015.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal of Adeyemi Odamo, who  subsequently  applied  for,
    and was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal,  and  thus
    the matter comes before me.



The Appellant's Claim

 2. The Appellant's claim is that, although in 2004  he  was  arrested  and
    sentenced for various offences involving fraud  in  the  UK,  and  then
    sentenced to two years' imprisonment, following which he  was  deported
    back to Nigeria on 20th November 2011,  he  had  subsequently  appealed
    that deportation, and his appeal reserved  by  Judge  Symes  at  Hatton
    Cross under reference OA/08130/2012 on 11th February 2013.  There was a
    considerable amount of evidence before Judge Symes.   The  judge  heard
    evidence from the Appellant's spouse and Sponsor, Crystal  Marie  Kagbo
    (now Odamo).

 3. The judge found her evidence to be credible and he allowed  the  appeal
    under paragraph 281 and 320 as well as paragraph 320(15) on  the  basis
    that this was a genuine and subsisting marriage relationship  and  that
    entry clearance should be granted to the Appellant to  return  back  to
    the UK.  The Appellant was now entitled to return to the UK.

 4. When Judge Ievins heard this  matter  on  6th  March  2015  he  rightly
    described the appeal as having "An unfortunate history, not least  that
    came before me as a 'floating case' ..." (paragraph 1).   Judge  Ievins
    observed how Judge Symes had weighed  the  Appellant's  family  history
    against the public interest in the continued exclusion of a person that
    committed crimes of dishonesty.  The previous Appellant had noted  that
    the risk of reoffending was low and the sentence was not at the highest
    end of the scale.

 5. Judge Symes found  that  the  proportionality  balance  tilted  in  the
    Appellant's favour and  allowed  the  appeal  under  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.  He observed (at paragraph 32) that,

         "Immigration  Rule  391(b)  provides  for  the  continuation  of  a
         deportation order to be the normal course of events for  ten  years
         following  the  sentencing  to  the  imprisonment  which  attracted
         deportation, unless such continuation  would  be  contrary  to  the
         Human Rights Convention.  As I have  found  this,  the  deportation
         order should be revoked".

 6. The  Respondent  sought  permission  to  appeal  against  Judge  Symes'
    decision.  This was on two grounds.  First that the person who was  the
    subject of a signed deportation order  was  required  under  paragraphs
    390, 390A, and 391 to apply to the Secretary of State to seek to revoke
    the deportation order prior to making an application to return  to  the
    United Kingdom.  This the Appellant had not done.  Second,  that  Judge
    Symes had erred in law by failing to give adequate reasons  as  to  why
    the Appellant's wife and child could not relocate to Nigeria instead.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Juliet
    Grant-Hutchinson and the appeal  came  before  a  panel  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal at Field House on 24th March  2013  and  was  heard  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Freeman and Deputy Upper Tribunal  Judge  Frances.   The
    Appellant had met his wife while he was in the  United  Kingdom.   They
    got married after his deportation in Nigeria on 5th  January  2012.   A
    child was conceived, a daughter [A] who was born in the United  Kingdom
    on 12th September 2012.

 8. The mother is a British citizen and that makes [A]  a  British  citizen
    too.  Before the child was born, however,  the  Appellant  had  already
    applied on 6th February 2012, for a visa to rejoin his  wife.   He  had
    disclosed his convictions and the  deportation  order.   Judge  Freeman
    concluded that the Entry Clearance Officer should have treated that  as
    an application to revoke the deportation order and  should  have  dealt
    with that first before dealing with the visa application on its merits.



 9. This was clear from paragraph 392 of the Immigration Rules which read:

         "The revocation of the  deportation  order  does  not  entitle  the
         person concerned to re-enter the United  Kingdom;  it  renders  him
         eligible to apply for permission under the Immigration  Rules.   An
         application for revocation of the order may be made  to  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer or direct to the Home Office".

10. What the Entry Clearance Officer had  instead  done,  however,  was  to
    consider the application and refuse it and the Tribunal concluded  that
    the application to revoke the deportation order did not need to be made
    to the Secretary of State but needed to be dealt with either before  an
    appeal against revocation could be heard, or a further visa application
    could be considered on its merits.

11. The Entry Clearance Officer had not done so.  The Respondent had failed
    to field a  Presenting  Officer  before  Judge  Symes.   Judge  Freeman
    referred to the case of Latif [2012]  UKUT  which  confirmed  that  the
    revocation needed to be  considered  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    first.

12. On this basis, as Judge Ievins  has  most  helpfully  set  out  in  his
    careful and comprehensive determination (see paragraphs 6  to  12)  the
    Upper Tribunal proposed the following  solution.   This  was  that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer in Nigeria was to treat  the  Appellant's  visa
    application as an application under paragraph 392 for  the  deportation
    order  against  him  to  be  revoked.   If  that  succeeded  then   his
    application was to be treated as an application for a  "husband  visa".
    No further fee was to be charged.  But when that application came to be
    considered the Entry Clearance Officer should apply paragraph 391 which
    requires ten years to lapse unless the continuation of the  deportation
    order "Would be contrary to the Human Rights Convention" or  there  are
    "Other  exceptional  circumstances  that  mean  the   continuation   is
    outweighed by compelling factors".  The Upper Tribunal emphasised  that
    the  ten  year  bar  to  revocation  of  deportation  orders  and   the
    Appellant's convictions were factors which had to  be  weighed  against
    the birth of the child to his wife.

13. However, what then subsequently complicated matters was a  letter  from
    UKBA of 13th May  2013  and  a  minute  from  Silo  Monekosso,  of  the
    Specialist Appeals  Team  at  Angel  Square  of  3rd  May  2013.   Silo
    Monekosso accepted the Upper Tribunal's conclusions.   He  pointed  out
    that that the Upper Tribunal had "Remitted the revocation decision back
    to the ECO".  He concluded that the file should be  sent  back  to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer in Lagos.  Silo Monekosso also  in  his  minute
    concluded that "The Appellant be granted entry clearance".   A  further
    letter from UKBA in Angel Square to an Entry Clearance Officer in Lagos
    on 15th May was to the effect that the Specialist Appeals Team were not
    challenging the Upper Tribunal's determination and  that  the  ECO  was
    asked if he "Could now act in accordance with any directions  given  by
    the  Tribunal  or,  if  none  had  been  given,  the  spirit   of   the
    determination,  and  in  the   light   of   the   applicant's   present
    circumstances" (see paragraph 14 of Judge Ievins determination).

14.  Further  correspondence  ensued  between  Ansah  Solicitors  and   the
    Respondent.  There was then the decision letter, which  gives  rise  to
    the appeal in this case, namely, the refusal letter  of  13th  February
    2014.  In this decision letter, Mr Odamo's application  to  revoke  his
    deportation order was refused under  paragraphs  390  and  391  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  His immigration history is set out.  It is observed
    that the application for revocation was to be considered in  the  light
    of all the circumstances, including  the  interests  of  the  community
    including  the  maintenance  of  effective  immigration  control.   The
    Secretary of State did have regard to the fact that he was married  and
    that his wife was a British citizen and there was a  child.   The  case
    law  was  properly  referred  to  and  that  his  best  interests  were
    considered.

15. The Appellant then gave Notice of Appeal.  The Appellant refers to  his
    family unit and family ties and the pain occasioned by  his  separation
    from his daughter.  The child was not to be held  responsible  for  the
    moral failings of her parents.  There  was  a  Case  Management  Review
    hearing a Taylor House before an unidentifiable  judge  on  8th  August
    2014.  The  Respondent  was  represented.   The  Appellant's  wife  was
    present.  Standard directions were issued.  The purpose was "To clarify
    the status of the Specialist Appeals Team minute dated 3rd May 2013  by
    5pm 22nd August 2014 and to serve such  clarification  on  the  Sponsor
    ..." (see paragraph 20 of Judge Ievins'  determination).   There  is  a
    further Case Management Review on 22nd August 2014.  This repeated  the
    specific direction earlier given.  The  case  was  listed  for  a  full
    hearing at Taylor House on 6th March 2015.  Attempts were made to speed
    up the process.  Nothing was heard from the Respondent it appears  that
    the directions were not complied with by the Respondent.

16. Judge Ievins gave  careful  consideration  to  the  oral  evidence  and
    submissions that he heard on  6th  March.   There  was  a  quantity  of
    documentary evidence that he heeded fully.  There were statements  from
    the Appellant's wife, Crystal Odamo, and his sister Clara Odamo.  Judge
    Ievins records the progress of the matter before him on that  day  (see
    paragraphs 22 to 36).  The appellant was represented by  able  Counsel,
    Miss Wass.

17. Miss Wass' submissions were that Tribunal Judge Symes  had  dealt  with
    both  aspects  of  the  Appellant's  case.   He  had  dealt  with   the
    revocation.  He had applied the relevant  law  at  the  time.   He  had
    considered the public interest at paragraph 31  of  the  determination.
    The points considered were no different now to  what  they  were  then.
    There was a low risk of reoffending.  There was today further  evidence
    that there were strong ties in 2013 which had  been  maintained.   Miss
    Wass also referred to the annex to a note of his true  proceedings  and
    said that the Entry Clearance Officer regarded himself as bound by  the
    decision of the Specialist Appeals Team.  The clarification sought from
    the Respondent Home Office had not been provided and,

         "The Appellant had found it difficult to prepare  for  the  hearing
         without  receiving  clarification  about  the  minute  and  without
         knowing what the Respondent conceded.  The initial position of  the
         First-tier Tribunal should be  the  starting  point  and  the  just
         outcome  of  the  case  required  immediate  revocation  ..."  (see
         paragraph 36 of the determination).

18. For his part, Judge Ievins did begin with the  initial  decision  as  a
    starting point by referring to the case of  Devaseelan  and  making  it
    clear that he was bound by Judge Symes' findings of fact when the  case
    came before him on 11th February 2013.

19. Judge Ievins ultimately concluded that he could  not  see  how  he  was
    bound by the remark in the memo of 3rd May 2013.  He concluded that,

         "I simply do  not  know  what  the  status  or  authority  of  Silo
         Monekosso might have.  I appreciate that the  Respondent  has  not,
         despite directions, clarified that minute but I consider  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal should act in accordance with the  findings  of
         the Upper Tribunal" (paragraph 38).

    It is this which is the crux of the dispute in the appeal  before  this
    Tribunal now.  The  question  here  is  now  whether,  given  that  the
    Specialist Appeals Team considered, by virtue of  what  Silo  Monekosso
    had intimated, itself to be bound by the decision of Judge  Symes  that
    entry clearance should be granted.  Or, whether  it  be  the  case,  as
    Judge Freeman stated in the Upper Tribunal, that the proper  course  of
    action is for the Entry Clearance Officer to consider  the  application
    to revoke a deportation order.  This had to be done before  a  decision
    could be made on whether to grant a spouse's entry  clearance  visa  to
    the Appellant to join his wife, Crystal Marie Odamo.

20. Judge Ievins went on to consider the appeal against the  decision  made
    by the Secretary of State.  Judge Ievins considered the fact  that  the
    Appellant had been deported following  any  connection  to  a  criminal
    offence (see paragraph 41).  He considered that  the  Appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his daughter  who  is
    under 18 and who is a British citizen (paragraph  42).   He  considered
    the obligations upon him under Section 55 of the BCIA  2009  (paragraph
    43).  He gave regard to Section 117  of  the  2002  Act.   Finally,  he
    followed the Razgar test (paragraph 46).

21. Judge Ievins ended by saying that the appeal  turns  upon  whether  the
    effect on the Appellant's genuine and subsisting relationship with  his
    wife, and his child, would be unduly harsh if the deportation order was
    not revoked (see paragraph 47).  He came to the finding that  it  would
    not be unduly harsh (paragraph 14) because [A] was conceived at a  time
    when the deportation order was in existence and her mother  and  father
    both knew that and they took the risk so that  their  child  was  born.
    Judge Ievins did find both witnesses to be credible, truthful, and well
    meaning.  He observed that they felt aggrieved that  the  Secretary  of
    State should be bound by the remark of Silo Monekosso in  his  memo  of
    3rd May 2013 which had not  been  clarified  at  all  despite  repeated
    requests by way of directions from the Tribunal.   Nevertheless,  Judge
    Ievins carried out a balancing exercise (paragraph 49).   He  concluded
    that the  interference  consequent  upon  the  refusal  to  revoke  the
    deportation order with the Appellant's right to respect for family  and
    private life was not disproportionate given the legitimate aim  of  the
    Respondent in the deportation of foreign criminals (paragraph 49).

Grounds of Application

22. The grounds of application state that the proper interpretation of  the
    Immigration  Rules  had  been  misconstrued  an  extent  to  which  the
    revocation decision was relevant with respect  to  the  memo  from  the
    Respondent direct to the ECO to grant  entry  clearance  had  not  been
    properly evaluated by the judge leading him to the wrong decision.

23. On 3rd September 2015, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Secretary
    of State.

Submissions

24. At the hearing before me  on  5th  February  2016,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Ms Clara Odamo, the eldest sister of the Appellant,  who
    indicated that the Tribunal had granted her permission to appear and to
    represent the Appellant.  I see at the outset that Ms Clara  Odamo  has
    presented the case on behalf of the Appellant with  considerable  skill
    and dexterity  and  has  left  no  stone  unturned  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant.  The Respondent, on the other hand, was  represented  by  Mr
    Walker, who most helpfully at the outset indicated that he  too  was  a
    member of the Specialist Appeals Team.  He confirmed that  it  was  not
    usual for an official to direct that entry clearance be granted.

25. Ms Clara Odamo directed my attention to the memo of 3rd May 2013.   She
    pointed out that on 15th May 2013 the Specialist Appeals Team wrote  to
    Lagos to say that they were not going to be appealing the  decision  of
    the court and that they should act in accordance with what Judge  Symes
    had directed and issue an entry clearance certificate.   She  submitted
    that two notifications to the same effect could not be a mistake.   The
    ECO wrote in May.  She also brought to my attention an email  addressed
    to the Appellant by the Lagos FCO office, which she submitted arose  as
    a result of the Appellant pestering them to give him  a  decision,  and
    this email, dated 13th May 2013, is from the Lagos office to  say  that
    "We are required to wait for a copy from the Appeals Authority  in  the
    UK to ensure  that  the  Immigration  Judge's  decision  is  not  being
    contested".

26. The indication here, submitted Ms Odamo, was plainly that everyone  was
    planning to run with  the  decision  of  Judge  Symes,  but  were  only
    awaiting confirmation to that effect.  It was only a year later that on
    13th February 2014, the Home Office then wrote with a fresh decision to
    say that they would not be revoking the deportation  order  because  it
    was not conducive to the public good to do so, since the Appellant  had
    been found guilty of credit card fraud to the tune  of  around  �17,000
    going back to 2005.

27. Yet, as Ms Odamo skilfully submitted before me, there had been a number
    of attempts by the Tribunal to get clarification of the status  of  the
    minute from Mr Silo Monekosso, and there were CMRs on 8th August  2014,
    on 22nd August 2014 and 15th December 2014, and  the  Home  Office  had
    steadfastly refused to provide any clarification.

28. Mr Walker accepted that there had been attempts  by  the  Tribunal  (as
    confirmed at paragraph 12 of the determination) to  seek  clarification
    and none was provided by the Home Office.  However, the Tribunal of UTJ
    Freeman and UTJ Frances had stated at paragraph 9 and at paragraph 5 on
    20th April 2015 that the proper course of action was not to grant entry
    clearance, but for  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to  first  consider
    revocation, and  until  that  was  done,  one  could  not  grant  entry
    clearance certificate for a husband to join a wife in the UK.

29. I adjourned the matter for twenty minutes, requiring Mr Walker to  take
    instructions on the fact that the Home Office had singularly failed  to
    provide clarification, despite three attempts by the Tribunal to do so,
    in relation to the minute from Silo Monekosso, because after  all,  the
    understanding during this entire period was that entry clearance  would
    now be granted on the basis of what Judge Symes had decided.

30. When the parties returned, twenty minutes later, Mr Walker stated  that
    the letter of Silo Monekosso had to be read in its entirety.   What  he
    states in the middle paragraph is that the

         "Immigration Judge has correctly identified the burden and standard
         of proof required, and has found as a fact: the judge of the  Upper
         Tier has allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article
         8, however remitted the revocation decision back to the  ECO.   The
         judge of  the  Upper  Tier  has  given  adequate  reasons  for  his
         findings".

31. The minute of 3rd May 2013 goes on to then say that, "I consider  there
    is no material error  of  law  disclosed  by  this  determination  and,
    therefore, no realistic prospect of securing permission to appeal".  It
    finally ends with the statement that "The Appellant to be granted entry
    clearance".  Mr Walker submitted that the middle paragraph  was  simply
    requiring the matter to be returned back to the ECO for a  decision  on
    whether or not to revoke the deportation order.

32. The letter of 15th May 2013  is  to  the  same  effect.   There  is  no
    revocation decision that has been made at all.  At paragraph 38 of  the
    determination, Judge Ievins has said, "I consider that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge should act in accordance with the findings of the  Upper
    Tribunal".  That was a correct direction  that  Judge  Ievins  made  to
    himself.  There is no error of law.

33. For her part, Ms Clara Odamo submitted that on the same minute  of  3rd
    May 2013 Silo Monekosso also states that it is the "Immigration  Judge"
    who  has  "Correctly  identified  the  burden  and  standard  of  proof
    required".  On the same minute it is said that  "The  Appellant  to  be
    granted entry clearance".  On the same minute it is said that "There is
    no material error of law disclosed by this determination".  That is how
    this determination was to be treated by the  Specialist  Appeals  Team.
    The Secretary of State did  not  appeal  the  decision.   Yet,  a  year
    afterwards a new decision letter has  been  sent  dated  13th  February
    2014.  That states that there is to be no revocation of the deportation
    order.  This does not make  sense  given  that  there  were  three  CMR
    direction hearings where clarification was sought of that minute of 3rd
    May 2013 which has never been forthcoming.  There is plainly  an  error
    of law.

No Error of Law

34. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA  2007)
    such that I should set aside that decision.  This is notwithstanding Ms
    Clara Odamo's powerful submissions before me.  The question is  whether
    there is an error of law.  The direction  that  Judge  Ievins  gave  to
    himself at paragraph 38, is stating that what  he  had  to  do  was  to
    follow the decision of the  Upper  Tribunal,  presided  over  by  Judge
    Freeman, is entirely correct.

35. Judge Freeman's own determination, promulgated on 30th April 2013,  was
    to the effect that Judge Symes had erred because he had

         "After  a  lengthy  consideration,   himself   decided   that   the
         deportation order should be revoked; but, as the  Rules  and  Latif
         make clear, that is something which had needed to be considered  by
         the Entry Clearance Officer in the first place, before  any  appeal
         against the refusal to do so could be  considered"  (see  paragraph
         5).

36. I have, of course, considered whether the refusal to clarify the status
    of that minute of 3rd May 2013,  despite  repeated  requests  from  the
    Tribunal, resulting even in a threat of wasted costs being made, amount
    to an abuse of power by the Secretary of State.  This is not  a  simple
    case  of  delay  resulting  from  a  deliberate   decision   to   defer
    consideration of the Appellant's application for entry clearance it  is
    arguably tantamount to depriving him of the benefit of  the  minute  of
    3rd May 2015, which  had  resultant  consequences  in  terms  of  other
    communications that then transpired in the light of  that  minute.   At
    the very least, there should have been clarification  of  that  minute.
    This is especially given that the Tribunal had repeatedly made requests
    to that effect.

37. The question, however, in relation to "abusive power", is whether there
    has been "conspicuous unfairness", a phrase  that  is  "More  naturally
    directed to the consequences of the acts or remission in question  than
    the motives behind them" (see Moore-Bick LJ in R (S)  [2007]  EWCA  Civ
    546).  Whether any  particular  act  or  decision  meets  the  test  of
    "conspicuous unfairness" is dependent on the particular  facts  of  the
    case.

38. In this case, it was always open to the Respondent to make  a  decision
    whether  or  not  to  revoke  the  deportation  order,  before   giving
    consideration to whether the Appellant should have entry  clearance  to
    enter as the spouse  of  his  British  citizen  settled  wife  in  this
    country.  That being so, I cannot  conclude  that  there  has  been  an
    abusive power such as to amount to an unlawful decision in the end.

Decision

There is no material error of law in the  original  judge's  decision.   The
determination shall stand.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss    13th February 2016

