
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03623/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On  26 June 2013                              |On 1 July 2013               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     TL
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER-BANGKOK

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr B.Lams, Counsel instructed by The Legal Resource
Partnership
For the Respondent: Ms H. Horsley, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. The appellant is a citizen of Burma, born on 16 September 1981.  Her
       appeal against the refusal  of  entry  clearance  as  the  unmarried
       partner of a refugee was  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Kimnell after a hearing on 29 August 2012.  After  a  hearing  on  1
       March 2013 I decided that there was an error of law in the  decision
       of the First-tier Tribunal. I set the decision aside to  be  re-made
       in the Upper Tribunal. The error of law decision is attached  as  an
       annex.

    2. The re-making of the decision proceeded by way of  submissions  only
       and I  have  summarised  them.  I  make  further  reference  to  the
       submissions as necessary in the course of my assessment.

    3. The parties agreed that some findings made by the  First-tier  judge
       should be preserved. These are to be found at [44], [47],  [51]  and
       [53] of  the  First-tier  judge's  determination.  In  essence,  the
       preserved findings are that the appellant and the  sponsor,  Mr  MT,
       have been  involved  in  a  long-term  relationship  and  that  they
       probably intended to marry in time. They are in  a  relationship  of
       boyfriend and girlfriend and they have now married. The appellant is
       the girlfriend to which  the  sponsor  referred  during  his  asylum
       interview. There is ample evidence of contact since  then  and  they
       have maintained contact by e-mail, Gtalk "and other means".

    4.  Although  not  referred  to  at  the  hearing,   it   is   probably
       uncontentious to conclude that a  further  finding  that  should  be
       preserved is to be found at [51], namely that it is  not  reasonable
       to expect the sponsor to return to Burma.

Submissions

    5. Mr Lams relied on the skeleton argument.  The  appellant's  and  the
       sponsor's evidence as to the two year period of cohabitation  should
       be accepted. That evidence is supported by the evidence of Professor
       W.

    6. The IDI's dated March 2006, which were said  still  to  be  current,
       were relied on. The IDI's indicate that the purpose of the  Rule  is
       to allow genuine long term relationships to continue.  Short  breaks
       in the period of cohabitation are acceptable according to the IDI's.
       Paragraph 352AA does not need to be construed narrowly as  requiring
       two years cohabitation prior to the refugee coming to  the  UK.  The
       period could include time after he arrived.

    7. So far as evidence of cohabitation is concerned, the expectation  of
       what could be provided depends on the circumstances. In this case it
       should be borne in mind that the country where the  appellant  lived
       with the sponsor is an isolated country and the  events  took  place
       some nine years ago. The  Operational  Guidance  Note  (dated  2006)
       indicates that it would have been impossible for  the  appellant  to
       visit  the  sponsor  and  there  would  have  been  difficulties  in
       obtaining an exit visa. She would have  to  disclose  that  she  was
       visiting him (a person that has now been granted refugee status).

    8. If Article 8 needs to be considered it is important to bear in  mind
       that the appellant would not be able to return to Burma. There is no
       obvious third country where  they  could  live  together  and  enjoy
       family life.

    9. Ms Horsley relied on the notice of immigration  decision.  The  view
       that culturally it would not have been acceptable for the  appellant
       and the sponsor to live together  in  Burma  without  being  married
       should be given some  weight.  This  was  a  matter  raised  in  the
       interview. In that interview the appellant had said  that  they  had
       not married because the sponsor said that he was not ready to marry.



   10. She was not able to produce photographic evidence  of  their  having
       lived together. The appellant had not  in  the  interview  mentioned
       Professor  W  and  what  evidence  he  could  give   as   to   their
       cohabitation. His evidence does not in any  event  confirm  the  two
       year period. Even if she was not able to provide evidence  of  bills
       or  photographs,  evidence  from  family  members  could  have  been
       provided. The letter from the sponsor's mother does  not  deal  with
       the issue of their living together for two years.

   11. The rule is clear in requiring a period of  two  years  cohabitation
       before the sponsor/refugee came to the UK and the  IDI's  cannot  be
       used to interpret the rule differently.

   12. If the appellant is not able to meet the requirements of  the  Rule,
       under Article 8 it would be proportionate to refuse entry  clearance
       in the interests of consistent immigration control.

   13. In reply Mr Lams submitted that the  statement  from  the  sponsor's
       mother  reinforces  the  contention  that  this  was  not  a  casual
       relationship. As to the point about the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
       ("ECO")  local  knowledge   of   the   cultural   acceptability   of
       cohabitation, no evidence has been submitted on this and given their
       engagement other cultural considerations  could  arise.  Photographs
       would not be able to establish cohabitation.

My conclusions

   14. Paragraph 352AA, so far as material, provides as follows:

        " The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter or
        remain in the United Kingdom as the unmarried or the same-sex
        partner of a refugee are that:

        (i) the applicant is the unmarried or same-sex partner of a person
        who is currently a refugee granted status as such under the
        immigration rules in the United Kingdom and was granted that status
        in the UK on or after 9th October 2006; and

        (ii) the parties have been living together in a relationship akin
        to either a marriage or a civil partnership which has subsisted for
        two years or more; and

        (iii) the relationship existed before the person granted asylum
        left the country of his former habitual residence in order to seek
        asylum; and

        (vi) each of the parties intends to live permanently with the other
        as his or her unmarried or same-sex partner and the relationship is
        subsisting..."


   15. Mr Lams, if I understood his submissions correctly, argued that  the
       Rule does not require a  strict  two  year  period  of  cohabitation
       before the sponsor came to the UK. The IDI's  referred  to  are  not
       apparently specific to refugee cases but I accept the premise of the
       IDI's, namely that "The intention of the Rules relating to unmarried
       and same-sex partners is to allow genuine long-term relationships to
       continue" (emphasis as in the original). However, even if the  IDI's
       are legitimately to be used as  an  aid  to  construction  (which  I
       doubt, following Mahad [2009] UKSC 16 at [10] and [11]), they do not
       indicate anything other than that a period of two years cohabitation
       is a requirement of the Rule.

   16. When one looks at the relevant Rule here, the parties  are  required
       to have been living together in a relationship akin  to  a  marriage
       which has  subsisted  for  two  years  or  more.  Subparagraph  (ii)
       provides that the relationship must be one that has three qualities:
       that it involved living together, that it be akin  to  marriage  (in
       this case) and that it has subsisted for  two  years  or  more.  The
       subsistence for two years or more  describes  the  duration  of  the
       married-type/living  together   relationship.   Subparagraph   (iii)
       requires that that relationship existed before the [sponsor] left to
       come to the UK.

   17. The intention of the Rule must surely be that 'mere cohabitation' is
       not sufficient. The Rule requires evidence of some  history  to  the
       relationship and that has been fixed at two  years  cohabitation.  A
       different construction would mean that any  period  of  cohabitation
       would suffice provided the relationship itself had existed  for  two
       years, with only a small period of time involving cohabitation.

   18. Mr Lams' opening submission was in these circumstances correct. I do
       need to make an assessment of whether I accept the evidence  of  the
       appellant and the sponsor  to  the  effect  that  they  were  living
       together for two years before the sponsor came to the UK. That  does
       not precisely articulate what the Rule requires but it is sufficient
       shorthand for present purposes.

   19. It is as well at this stage  to  deal  with  the  'cultural'  issue:
       whether it would have been culturally acceptable for  the  appellant
       and the sponsor to cohabit in Burma without being married.  Mr  Lams
       was correct to observe that the issue was not raised in  the  notice
       of decision. It arises only as a result of a  question  put  to  the
       appellant during the interview in relation to this  application,  to
       the effect  that  it  was  very  uncommon  in  Burmese  society  for
       unmarried partners to live together. The  appellant  explained  that
       they had "tried to marry", that the sponsor was not ready to  do  so
       (a matter the sponsor explains in his witness statement),  that  she
       loved the sponsor  and  that  her  mother  agreed  to  their  living
       together. In the First-tier Tribunal's  determination  at  [21]  the
       sponsor said that  it  was  socially  acceptable  if  the  relatives
       agreed.

   20. Thus, there is no evidence to support the  proposition  put  to  the
       appellant in interview. The basis of the interviewer's knowledge  of
       the issue is unknown. The only evidence on the point comes from  the
       sponsor, and what the appellant said in interview.

   21. The ECO in the notice of decision doubted the  relationship  between
       the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  and  their  intention   to   live
       permanently with each other as partners.  From  my  summary  of  the
       preserved findings made by Judge Kimnell it is  established  that  a
       substantial proportion of those doubts have  now  been  resolved  in
       favour of the appellant. It is implicit in those findings  that  the
       First-tier judge accepted that the appellant and the sponsor were in
       a relationship in Burma. This fact is also evident from  the  asylum
       interview that took place in June 2007.

   22. The contention  that  they  were  in  a  relationship  in  Burma  is
       supported by the written evidence of  Professor  W,  dated  31  July
       2012. He states that the appellant and the sponsor were his "clients
       in 2004 to 2006" and that he "knew that they lived together like man
       and wife".  It goes on to state that they took  medical  advice  and
       assistance from  him  in  relation  to  contraception,  the  sponsor
       planning to go abroad and not wanting to leave the  appellant  alone
       with a baby. He states that the appellant regularly  took  pregnancy
       tests and stopped contraception when the sponsor left Burma.

   23. As I observed  in  the  error  of  law  decision,  the  evidence  of
       Professor W does not specify the length of time  they  are  said  to
       have lived together. Between 2004 and  2006  would  not  necessarily
       amount to two years, depending on  when  in  2004  the  cohabitation
       started and when in 2006 it ended.

   24. The letter is however,  evidence  that  they  were  in  a  committed
       relationship  in  Burma.  It  is  evidence  that  they  were  in   a
       relationship akin to marriage. By itself it does not establish  that
       they were living together or that they  lived  together  in  such  a
       relationship for at least two years in Burma. What  it  does  do  is
       lend support to the evidence of the appellant  and  the  sponsor  in
       relation to those issues.  It  covers  a  period  of  time  that  is
       consistent with the required two year period. It is to be remembered
       that the bona fides of this evidence has not been doubted.

   25. In her entry clearance interview the appellant said that they met on
       1 February 2004 and that their relationship  began  on  14  February
       2004. They moved in together  in  March  2004.  She  said  that  the
       sponsor left Burma on 28 May 2006. In his  first  witness  statement
       the sponsor gave  the  same  dates  for  when  they  met,  when  the
       relationship started, when they moved in together and when  he  left
       Burma. He said in evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  that  he
       stopped living with the  appellant  when  he  "absconded"  from  the
       authorities in April/May 2006. In the asylum interview he said  that
       he would meet the appellant in  the  short  period  before  he  left
       whenever he was able to whilst trying to avoid the authorities.

   26. On the visa application form ("VAF") between questions  114-121  the
       appellant gave the same dates for their meeting, the  start  of  the
       relationship, their moving in together and when he left Burma.

   27. At page 32 of the appellant's bundle that was before the  First-tier
       Tribunal is a copy and translation of a letter that is  said  to  be
       from the sponsor's mother stating that the appellant and the sponsor
       became engaged on 27 March 2004. In the  appellant's  interview  she
       said that "We were engaged as we live together" and that they became
       engaged "When  I  moved  into  the  house".  The  letter  therefore,
       supports the account of their having moved in together in March 2004
       and that this was the time of, or amounted to, their engagement.

   28. It is clear therefore, that all the evidence from the appellant  and
       the sponsor in relation to significant dates is consistent. There is
       a minor credibility issue in the sponsor's evidence in  relation  to
       the asylum interview, referred to at [11] and [38] of the First-tier
       Tribunal's determination. However, when seen in the  context  of  my
       analysis of the asylum interview in the error of law decision, it is
       not significant in relation to the issues which I have to determine.

   29. I do not attach any significance to the  short  time  between  their
       meeting and when they are  said  to  have  started  cohabiting.  The
       appellant was asked about that in the interview. She explained it in
       terms of his parents and her mother agreeing. It  is  not  an  issue
       that features in the notice of decision. The sponsor gave  the  same
       explanation as the appellant, when he was asked about it in evidence
       at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal. There is no  evidence
       before me to indicate that such a short interval between meeting and
       cohabiting is not culturally acceptable in Burma.

   30. It may be the case that there could have  been  more  evidence  from
       sources other than the appellant and  the  sponsor  to  support  the
       claim of their cohabitation for just over two years. For example, as
       suggested on behalf of the respondent before me,  there  could  have
       been evidence from family members. What other evidence  there  could
       have been is not easy to envisage in circumstances  where  it  seems
       they are said to have been living  in  accommodation  that  was  not
       their own. Photographic evidence probably would not have established
       much. I also bear in mind the lapse of time since the  sponsor  left
       Burma in 2006.

   31. The evidence that I do  have  has  been  entirely  consistent.   The
       appellant's and the sponsor's evidence is supported by the  evidence
       of Professor W and the letter from the sponsor's mother. I also bear
       in mind that the standard of proof to be applied  is  a  balance  of
       probabilities.

   32. With all these factors in mind, I am satisfied  that  the  appellant
       has established that in Burma she and the sponsor lived together  in
       a relationship akin to marriage which subsisted for a  period  of  a
       little over two years. The issue of their intention at the  date  of
       decision, to live together permanently as partners, was  settled  by
       the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, but I would  in  any  event
       have resolved that issue in favour of the appellant on the  evidence
       before me.





Decision

   33. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  an
       error on a point of law. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is
       set aside and the decision re-made allowing  the  appeal  under  the
       Immigration Rules.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008) and consequently, this  determination  identifies  the
appellant by initials only.










Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek
                                                 27/06/13






















                            ANNEX

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr B.Lams, Counsel instructed by The Legal Resource
Partnership
For the Respondent: Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Introduction

     1. The appellant is a citizen of Burma, born on 16 September 1981. Her
        appeal against the refusal of  entry  clearance  as  the  unmarried
        partner of a refugee was dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Kimnell after a hearing on 29 August  2012.  Permission  to  appeal
        having been granted, the appeal came before me.

     2. Judge Kimnell accepted that the appellant and the sponsor were in a
        relationship of boyfriend and girlfriend and that they intended  to
        marry (and have now married). However, he did not accept that  they
        lived together in Burma in a relationship akin to marriage  for  at
        least two years before the sponsor left Burma. The ground of appeal
        based on Article 8 of the ECHR was dismissed on the basis that  the
        decision was a proportionate one.

     3. The grounds of appeal before me contend, in summary, that the First-
        tier judge's assessment of the evidence of  their  relationship  in
        Burma was flawed and  that  the  proportionality  assessment  under
        Article 8 was similarly erroneous.

     4. I do not consider it necessary to set out a separate summary of the
        parties' submissions which I refer to as necessary  in  my  reasons
        below. Suffice to say that on behalf of the respondent,  Mr  Tarlow
        relied on the 'rule 24' response and submitted that the  First-tier
        judge's determination was more than  adequately  reasoned.  He  did
        refer specifically to a doctor's letter to  which  I  refer  below,
        submitting  that  the  judge's  assessment  of  that   letter   was
        satisfactory.

        My assessment

     5. Paragraph 352AA of  HC  395  (as  amended),  so  far  as  material,
        provides as follows:


        "...
        (ii) the parties have been living together in a relationship akin
        to either a marriage or a civil partnership which has subsisted for
        two years or more; and


        (iii) the relationship existed before the person granted asylum
        left the country of his former habitual residence in order to seek
        asylum..."

     6. In issue in this appeal is subparagraph (ii). Part of the  evidence
        before Judge Kimnell in  relation  to  the  two  year  cohabitation
        period was a letter dated 31 July 2012 from a  Professor  [W]  from
        [...] in Burma. It states that the appellant and the sponsor  "have
        been my clients in 2004 to 2006" and that he knew that  "they  live
        together like man and wife". It goes on to  state  that  they  took
        medical  advice  and   assistance   from   him   in   relation   to
        contraception, the sponsor planning to go abroad and not wanting to
        leave the appellant alone with a baby. He states that the appellant
        regularly took pregnancy tests.

     7. At [43] Judge Kimnell noted that although Professor  [W]  confirmed
        that they were both his patients between 2004 and 2006 he does  not
        specify the length of time that they lived together as husband  and
        wife and he does not state how he  came  by  that  information.  He
        concluded that given the nature of the advice that  was  given,  it
        was not clear that there would have been any need for a home  visit
        and thus he could not  conclude  that  his  observation  about  the
        couple's relationship was based on his own observation.

     8. The grounds of appeal, relied on in submissions, suggest that  this
        evidence is compelling contemporaneous evidence that a relationship
        akin to marriage existed, otherwise why would consultations between
        2004 and 2006 have taken place. It  is  also  suggested  that  this
        evidence would not have been fabricated  in  anticipation  of  this
        application eight years hence. It  is  argued  that  there  was  no
        challenge to the bona fides of the doctor at  the  hearing  and  no
        questions were asked of the sponsor in relation to it.

     9. It is suggested in the grounds that  the  judge  misunderstood  the
        significance of that piece of evidence. I do not agree. The  First-
        tier judge plainly did understand the potential significance of the
        evidence which is why he gave  it  careful  consideration.  He  was
        entirely correct to state that although the letter states that they
        were his patients between  2004  and  2006,  the  doctor  does  not
        specify the length of time they are said to  have  lived  together.
        Even if it was between 2004 and 2006, that  would  not  necessarily
        amount to two years, depending on when  in  2004  the  cohabitation
        started and when in 2006 it  ended.  Similarly,  as  Judge  Kimnell
        said, it is not evident how he is said to have known that they were
        living together.

    10. Subject to what is said below at [17], the judge's  conclusions  on
        the letter have nothing to do with the credibility  of  the  doctor
        and it was not incumbent on the judge to question the sponsor about
        that evidence which was advanced by the appellant in support of the
        appeal.

    11. In concluding that the appellant and  the  sponsor  had  not  lived
        together for a period of two years, the First-tier judge considered
        what was said by the sponsor in his asylum interview, which appears
        to have taken place in June 2007. At [11] and [18] he  referred  to
        the sponsor's evidence in relation to what he said  in  the  asylum
        interview. At [38]-[41] he concluded that  the  evidence  from  the
        interview as to the sponsor's visits to the appellant whilst he was
        still living in Burma, indicated that he was  not  in  fact  living
        with her at all.

    12. The grounds of appeal argue that  the  judge's  assessment  of  the
        evidence from the interview fails to take account  of  the  context
        which indicates that the visits that the sponsor was making to  the
        appellant were when he was 'on the run' from the authorities, after
        they had already been living together for two years in Burma.

    13. The First-tier judge did not have the full asylum interview  before
        him, although  it  was  provided  to  me.  I  have  considered  the
        interview as a whole and the context of the answers that the  judge
        referred to and about which the sponsor was questioned.  From  that
        context it is clear that the visits to his  family  and  girlfriend
        that the sponsor was referring to  in  his  asylum  interview  were
        visits during the time that he says he was  seeking  to  avoid  the
        authorities. At question 118 he is recorded as having said that  he
        would go and meet his girlfriend when he had  the  opportunity,  as
        well as his mother niece and sister. However, from  questions  116-
        118 and earlier questions, it is clear that this was whilst he  was
        waiting to leave the country. For example at question  117  he  was
        asked whether he was worried  about  the  authorities  finding  him
        (whilst-question 116-he was waiting for the visa  and  tickets  for
        travel).

    14. The judge referred to question 135  where  the  sponsor  was  asked
        where he would meet his girlfriend. He is recorded as  having  said
        that he would go and collect her from  where  she  lived  and  they
        would then go to the park or a  pagoda.  Again  however,  from  the
        context of the earlier questions it is apparent  that  the  sponsor
        was again  referring  to  a  time  when  he  was  hiding  from  the
        authorities. The same observation holds  good  for  his  answer  to
        question 136 that the judge also relied on. In this respect he said
        at [40] that if he was living with his girlfriend he would not have
        needed to take the steps referred to in question 136. There he said
        that he was worried about the authorities when he  was  seeing  his
        family and girlfriend but he did not know when he  would  see  them
        again as he was planning to leave the country.

    15. I note that at [41] Judge Kimnell  stated  that  he  rejected  "the
        sponsor's evidence" that  he  was  meeting  his  girlfriend  having
        absconded to live elsewhere. He concluded  that  he  would  not  be
        likely to have returned  frequently  to  see  his  parents  at  the
        address where he lived, or would be meeting his  girlfriend  either
        from her  home  or  from  work  if  he  was  trying  to  avoid  the
        authorities.

    16. What the judge appears to have been referring to here, in terms  of
        the sponsor's "evidence", is evidence that he gave at the  hearing,
        set out in summary  at  [11].  The  conclusion  set  out  at  [41],
        referred to above, was  not  made  with  reference  to  the  asylum
        interview.

    17. I am satisfied that in considering what the  sponsor  said  in  the
        asylum interview the  judge  did  erroneously  fail  to  take  into
        account the context of the questions he referred to. That erroneous
        assessment was plainly crucial to his conclusion at [44]  that  the
        appellant and the sponsor had "concocted a story  of  having  lived
        together for a period of slightly over two years before the sponsor
        came to the United Kingdom to claim asylum." The relevance  of  the
        doctor's letter comes back into play in this context because, as is
        suggested in the grounds of appeal, the credibility of the doctor's
        letter was not challenged and it relates to  a  period  from  2004,
        well before this present application. This relates to  the  judge's
        conclusion that the account of living together for  two  years  has
        been concocted.

    18. I am thus satisfied that the First-tier judge erred in law  in  his
        assessment of the credibility of the claim that the  appellant  and
        the sponsor have been living together in  a  relationship  akin  to
        marriage which has subsisted for  two  years  or  more  before  the
        sponsor came to the UK to seek asylum. That error of law is such as
        to require the decision to be set aside.

    19. Mr Lams, rather  tentatively  it  should  be  said,  canvassed  the
        question of whether, in the event that I was to find  an  error  of
        law requiring the decision to be set aside, the  matter  should  be
        remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for   reconsideration.   I
        expressed my provisional view that I did  not  consider  that  that
        would be an appropriate course of action. I am still of  that  view
        having regard to the  Practice  Statement  at  paragraph  7.2.  The
        decision therefore is to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.

    20. I have considered then, whether it is possible for me to go  on  to
        re-make the decision on the basis of the evidence already provided,
        taking into account the positive findings made by Judge Kimnell. It
        does seem to me that that  is  an  appropriate  course  of  action.
        However, at the hearing I did not hear submissions from the parties
        as  to  the  merits  on  any  re-making.  Those  submissions  could
        reasonably be provided in writing. However, I have decided  in  the
        first instance to list the matter for hearing for submissions only.

                   DIRECTIONS

           1. The appeal is listed for further  hearing  on  the  basis  of
           submissions only.

           2. The parties must be in a position at the next hearing to make
             submissions as to what findings of the First-tier Tribunal can
             be preserved.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order  pursuant  to  rule  45(4)(i)  of  the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008) and consequently, this  determination  identifies  the
appellant by initials only.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                     1/05/13
