
IAC-AH-KEW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: Oa/03648/2014
                                                               OA/03649/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 May 2015                       |On 1 June 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                       MISS Yi CHEN (FIRST APPELLANT)
                     MASTER JIE CHEN (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIJING
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms E Rutherford, Counsel, instructed by Lin & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants appeal to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing their appeals against the decision of an
    Entry Clearance Officer (post reference  Beijing\1503657  and  1503668)
    refusing to grant them entry clearance for the purposes  of  settlement
    as the children under the age of 18 of parents who  are  settled  here.
    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do
    not  consider  that  the  appellants  require   anonymity   for   these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Both appellants are Chinese nationals.  The first appellant was born on
    18 December 1995, and the second appellant born on 13 May  1997.   Just
    before the first appellant's 18th birthday, both appellants applied  to
    join their parents in the United Kingdom.  At the time of  application,
    their father had indefinite leave to remain, having  been  granted  ILR
    under the legacy programme in 2010.  Their mother, Yu He,  neither  had
    settled status nor limited leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

 3. Yu He was born in China on 3 January 1973.  Her husband arrived in  the
    UK in 1999 and claimed asylum.  The asylum claim was  refused,  but  he
    remained in the country.  Yu He left the  appellants  in  the  care  of
    their grandparents, and arrived in the United Kingdom  on  29  December
    2005.  She also claimed asylum.  Like her husband, her application  for
    asylum was refused.  Her appeal against that refusal was dismissed in a
    determination promulgated on 20 February 2006.

 4.  On  7  April  2010  the  Case  Resolution  Directorate  wrote  to  the
    appellants' father, Mr Chen, to say that his case was in a  backlog  of
    older asylum applications that the UK Border Agency was in the  process
    of concluding.  The aim of the Case  Resolution  Team  was  to  resolve
    cases such as his  by  either  removing  individuals  from  the  United
    Kingdom or granting them leave to remain in  accordance  with  existing
    law and policy.  It was  important  that  they  held  the  most  recent
    information about his case, and he was asked to  provide,  among  other
    things, information about any of his dependants.  In particular, if  he
    was married, he was asked to provide details of his partner along  with
    evidence of their address and immigration status.

 5. On 14 April 2010 Mr Chen completed a case resolution checklist in which
    he identified his wife Yu He as his dependant, and  provided  the  Home
    Office reference number which appeared on  the  notice  of  refusal  of
    leave to enter decision served on her on 6 January 2006.

 6. On 8 July 2010 Mr Chen was granted ILR, following a review of his case.
     It had been decided  to  grant  him  ILR  exceptionally,  outside  the
    Immigration Rules: "this is due to your strength of connections in  the
    United Kingdom, and your length of residence in the United Kingdom."

 7. On 27 September 2010 the Case Resolution Team sent to Yu  He,  care  of
    the appellants' solicitors, the same standard  letter  which  had  been
    sent out to her husband in April 2010.  On  15  December  2011  the  UK
    Border Agency explained to Yu He's local MP in writing that as she  had
    claimed asylum in her own right, she  was  not  a  dependant  upon  her
    husband's application.  On 12 September 2013 Yu He's solicitors sent  a
    letter in which they said that if a decision was not made upon her case
    within 30 days an application for judicial review would be made.

 8. An application for judicial review was made on  or  about  13  November
    2013.  The case advanced on behalf of Yu He was that the Home  Office's
    delay in considering her case under the legacy scheme was  unreasonable
    and unlawful.  When her husband was given ILR in 2010 under the  legacy
    scheme, she and her husband were a family unit, and her representatives
    had been requesting that she should be given leave  in  line  with  her
    husband since 2010.  She had resided in the United Kingdom in excess of
    six years, and the Home Office  policy  contained  in  the  enforcement
    instructions and guidance at paragraph 53.1.1 prima  facie  applied  to
    her.

 9. The appellants made  their  applications  for  entry  clearance  on  31
    December  2013,  while  the  judicial  review  proceedings  were  still
    pending.  They had not been concluded by the date of decision.

10. The appellants' applications were refused on  11  February  2014.   The
    letters submitted from their parents acknowledged that their mother did
    not have settlement status or limited leave as a partner.  Accordingly,
    they did not meet any of the gateway requirements for  entry  clearance
    under paragraph 297(1), including the requirement contained in sub-sub-
    paragraph (f):

         'One parent or relative  is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
         Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for  settlement  and
         there are serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations
         which  make  exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and   suitable
         arrangements have been made for the child's care.'

11. In their grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellants'
    representatives raised no argument under the Rules, but  relied  solely
    on the proposition that the decision was unlawful under  Section  6  of
    the Human Rights Act 1988.  They relied on the same case that had  been
    advanced in the application for judicial review.  If the sponsor's wife
    had been granted leave in line with the sponsor in 2010, she would  now
    have settled status in the UK.  The decision breached  the  appellants'
    rights to respect for family life.  They were completely  dependent  on
    their parents, and they had a right to enjoy their family life together
    in the UK.

12. Following the refusal decisions, their mother was granted limited leave
    to remain on 22 May 2014 for a period of two and a half years.

13. On 3 September 2014 an Entry Clearance Manager  gave  his  reasons  for
    upholding the refusal decisions, notwithstanding the grounds of  appeal
    and the additional evidence that had been provided.  He could  now  see
    that the appellants' mother had been  granted  leave  to  remain  until
    2016.  But she still held discretionary leave only.  She was  therefore
    not present and settled in the  UK  for  the  purposes  of  the  Rules.
    Furthermore, it had not been shown and it was not  contended  that  the
    appellants' father had had sole responsibility  for  their  upbringing.
    So the appellant still did not meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.
    Given that the sponsor's future in  the  UK  was  not  guaranteed,  the
    correct course of action for the appellants was to await the result  of
    any  proceedings  and  to  reapply  if  their  mother  became  settled.
    Although this might cause some interference with their family life,  it
    was the sponsor's decision to leave China and bring about the  family's
    separation.  So the refusal decision did not amount to an  interference
    with the appellants' family life rights sufficient to engage Article  8
    ECHR.

14. Either before the ECM review (and if so, unknown to the ECM)  or  after
    the ECM review, Yu He withdrew her application for judicial review:  Yu
    He's witness statement dated 14 October 2014, paragraph 6.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

15. The appellants' appeals came before Judge Lagunju sitting in the First-
    tier Tribunal at Sheldon Court, Birmingham on 20  October  2014.   Miss
    Rutherford of Counsel appeared on behalf of  the  appellants.   At  the
    outset of the hearing, the judge granted permission to Miss  Rutherford
    to amend the grounds of appeal to include  consideration  of  paragraph
    297(i)(f).

16. In his subsequent decision, she referred to the ratio of  Mundeba  (S55
    and Paragraph 297(1)(f)) 2013 UKUT 0088  IAC  at  paragraph  [11].   In
    paragraph [12], she summarised the case advanced by Counsel  on  behalf
    of the appellants:

         "Counsel on behalf of the appellants  relies  on  the  respondent's
         failure to grant the appellants' mother leave in 2010 in line  with
         their father under the legacy  policy,  to  show  the  serious  and
         compelling  circumstances  which  make  the  appellants'  exclusion
         undesirable.  The sponsor was granted leave under the legacy policy
         on 6 July 2010 however despite being listed  as  a  dependant,  the
         appellants' mother was not granted leave in line with her  husband.
         Despite repeated requests  to  reconsider  and  a  judicial  review
         application, she has not been granted the leave  she  seeks.   Miss
         Rutherford of Counsel argues that although this  situation  relates
         directly to the mother of the  appellants  it  also  has  a  direct
         impact on the appellants. "

17. At paragraph [13], the judge said that after careful  consideration  of
    all the circumstances, she did not find  the  failure  to  grant  their
    mother leave in line to be either serious or  compelling.   It  was  of
    course unfortunate that their mother's leave was not  granted,  but  it
    was not a serious or compelling circumstance "which directly relates to
    the children."

18. At paragraph [14],  she  observed  that  although  Counsel  blamed  the
    respondent for "this error," she had not been directed to any  specific
    policy which confirmed that a dependent spouse was always to be granted
    in line with the main applicant.  She further noted the respondent  had
    not since sought to rectify the said mistake  by  granting  her  leave,
    neither had the respondent accepted that a mistake,  administrative  or
    otherwise was made, neither did the judicial review application  assist
    with determining who was at fault.

19. The judge continued in paragraph [15]:

         "I was informed  the  judicial  review  application  was  withdrawn
         following the grant of discretionary leave, which suggests that the
         matter was resolved with an acceptable outcome for both sides.   To
         suggest now that it was either a serious or compelling situation is
         to overstate matters.  Had  it  been  shown  that  the  appellants'
         mother  had   been   wronged   or   prejudiced   or   significantly
         disadvantaged in some way, perhaps there would have been a stronger
         argument for it being compelling or serious and having some  direct
         effect on the children, however that is not the case as the  matter
         appears to have been resolved amicably."

20. The judge found that the appellants had not discharged  the  burden  of
    proving that they met the requirements of paragraph 297(1)(f),  or  any
    of the other alternative requirements under paragraph 297(1).

21. The judge then went on to consider the alternative claim under  Article
    8 ECHR.  The appellants had not shown it would be unreasonable for them
    to remain in their country of origin.  She accepted that  Article  8(1)
    was engaged, as there was family life between the appellants and  their
    parents.  But  the  decision  did  not  amount  to  a  disproportionate
    interference with family life.  Her reasoning was  the  appellants  had
    thus far spent the majority of their lives in China and this was likely
    to consist of education, culture, family and  friends.   Although  they
    had been apart from their parents, they had been able  to  continue  to
    live their lives in China  apparently  without  great  difficulty.   It
    would not therefore be in their best  interests  to  uproot  them  from
    their lives in China.

The Application for Permission to Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

22. Miss Rutherford settled the application for permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal.  She submitted that the judge's approach to Mundeba was
    flawed.  The judge had no regard to the right of the appellants  to  be
    reunited with their parents, or that the starting point was their  best
    interests were served by them being with both or at least one of  their
    parents.  At present they were with neither of their parents. Given the
    type of leave which the Secretary of State had granted to their mother,
    she would only be able to apply for settlement after ten years.   As  a
    consequence of this, and their respective ages,  the  appellants  would
    never be able to meet the requirements of  the  Rules  as  children  of
    parents who were living  in  the  UK.   But  for  the  failure  of  the
    Secretary of State to grant their mother indefinite  leave  to  remain,
    they would be entitled to join their parents here regardless  of  their
    ties to China.  If both parents had ILR, the consideration mentioned by
    the judge in paragraph [21] would be irrelevant.

23. Alternatively, the judge had erred in her  rejection  of  the  evidence
    regarding dependants being granted ILR to remain in the UK in line with
    the main applicant.  Whilst it was not explicit in chapter  53  of  the
    enforcement instructions that the  dependants  were  granted  the  same
    leave as the main applicants, it was implied.

24. Further, the judge placed too much  emphasis  on  Yu  He's  failure  to
    pursue a judicial review application.  While it could  be  argued  that
    the type of leave granted could have been challenged, the fact remained
    that by the very act of granting her discretionary leave to remain, the
    Secretary of State was acknowledging that her future was now in the UK.
     But in view of the ages of the two appellants, they would not be  able
    to apply for leave to enter the UK to join their parents because by the
    time Yu He was able to  apply  for  ILR,  they  would  be  adults.   In
    dismissing the appeal, the judge had failed to  have  regard  to  these
    matters, and if they were considered by another judge, there was a very
    real prospect that the appeal would be allowed.



The Grant of Permission

25.  On  26  January  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  De  Haney  granted
    permission to appeal on all grounds raised.

The Rule 24 Response

26. On 6 February 2015 a member of the Specialist Appeals  Team  settled  a
    Rule 24 response on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer. The  grounds
    advanced a mere disagreement with a negative outcome to the appeal, and
    did not disclose any material arguable errors  of  law  that  would  be
    considered capable of having a material impact upon the outcome of  the
    appeal.

The Appeal Hearing

27. At the hearing before me, Miss Rutherford directed my attention to  the
    skeleton argument she  had  prepared  for  the  hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and she sought to address my query as to whether the  failure
    to grant the appellants' mother leave in line with her husband had been
    deliberate as opposed to accidental.

28. On behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer, Mr Smart submitted  that  the
    decision not to grant the appellants' mother leave in line  with  their
    father had been deliberate.  He referred me to Che v Secretary of State
    for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 2220 (Admin), Geraldo and Others  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC 2763 (Admin) and
    SH (Iran) and Another v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1469.  In the light of these authorities, it had been a
    wise decision for the  appellants'  mother  not  to  have  pursued  her
    application for judicial review.  He accepted that up to July 2011  the
    practice of the Secretary of State had been to grant ILR,  rather  than
    limited leave to remain, to applicants who had  accrued  six  to  eight
    years' residence; but, as the authorities showed,  this  did  not  mean
    that it was unlawful for the appellants' mother not have  been  granted
    ILR before there was a change of policy to granting applicants like her
    only limited leave to remain.

Discussion

29. In SH (Iran) at paragraph [65], Davis LJ, giving the  leading  judgment
    of the court, said this:

         "The position with regard  to  legacy  cases  on  these  particular
         points is now to be taken as laid to rest.  There  have  been  many
         decisions in the last two years on the salient points, all of which
         are in substantial accord.  There is no separate  legacy  'policy.'
         There is no basis for relying on delay as, in itself, a ground  for
         obtaining leave to remain.   There  is  in  the  ordinary  case  no
         relevant legitimate expectation, other than that the case  will  be
         considered on applicable law and policy at the time the decision is
         made.  There is no basis for saying that there is a  commitment  on
         the part of the Secretary of State to 'conclude' the case either by
         effecting actual removal or by granting leave to remain."

30. This authoritative statement by the Court of Appeal  has  ramifications
    for this appeal, as underlying the case for the appellants,  both  here
    and below, is the proposition that the appellants' mother has been  the
    victim of an historic injustice, in that she ought to have been granted
    indefinite leave to remain under the legacy "policy" at the  same  time
    as her husband was granted indefinite leave to remain  under  the  same
    policy.  Establishing this alleged historic injustice is  an  essential
    building block in the argument that there are compelling  circumstances
    which make the children's exclusion undesirable because,  but  for  the
    alleged  historic  injustice,  they  would  have  qualified  for  entry
    clearance on the ground that both parents were present and  settled  in
    the UK.

31. But as the authorities provided by Mr Smart illuminate,  there  was  no
    merit whatsoever in Yu He's application  for  judicial  review  on  the
    grounds of unreasonable delay.  Moreover, the evidence disclosed to the
    First-tier Tribunal did  not  sustain  an  argument  that  (a)  in  the
    particular circumstances of her case Yu He had a legitimate expectation
    of being granted ILR at the same time as her husband was  granted  ILR,
    or (b) that it was only an administrative oversight on the part of  the
    Secretary of State which had deprived her of this enhanced status.

32. Yu He had not sought leave to enter the United Kingdom as the dependant
    of her husband, but had sought asylum in her own right.  Following  the
    dismissal against her appeal against the refusal  of  asylum,  and  her
    appeal rights being exhausted, she was liable to removal.  As  she  was
    not removed, she became eligible for  consideration  under  the  legacy
    programme.  She had no legitimate expectation of a decision being  made
    on whether to grant her leave to remain or to remove her being made  by
    a particular end date.   Although  her  husband  was  invited  to  give
    details of his dependants, no representation was made by the  Secretary
    of State that any dependants that he had would be granted leave in line
    with any leave that was decided to be granted to him.

33. The appellants  did  not  place  any  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to show that in 2010 the Secretary of State  was  operating  a
    policy of granting dependants with no status leave to  remain  in  line
    with the grant of leave to the main applicant.  Miss Rutherford accepts
    that chapter 53 of the enforcement instructions do not in  terms  spell
    out such a policy.  It was incumbent on the  appellants  to  prove  the
    terms of the policy relied upon. They did not do so.

34. The solicitors for Yu He did not in terms request the  Case  Resolution
    Directorate to make a decision on her legacy "claim" at the  same  time
    as making a decision on her husband's claim,  nor  did  they  in  terms
    request that a decision on her immigration status as a dependant on her
    husband be made at the  same  time  as  a  decision  was  made  on  her
    husband's legacy claim.  The mere fact that her husband  identified  Yu
    He as his dependant  and  as  being  a  fellow  legacy  claimant,  when
    providing further information in support of his own legacy  claim,  did
    not trigger an obligation on the part of the Secretary of State to make
    a decision at that juncture on whether or not to remove  Yu  He  or  to
    grant her leave to remain.

35. In short, not only was the judge's finding on the Rules one  which  was
    reasonably open to her on the evidence and on the  law,  no  reasonable
    Tribunal properly directed could have reached any other conclusion.  As
    submitted  in  the  Rule  24  response,  the  grounds  of  appeal   are
    essentially no more than an expression of disagreement with  adequately
    reasoned findings.

36. It is convenient to deal with grounds 2 and 3 first, as they relate  to
    the paragraph 297(1)(f).  Ground 2, is that the judge erred in  law  by
    rejecting the  evidence  that  if  "Ms  He's  case  had  been  properly
    considered in July 2010 she would have been granted indefinite leave to
    remain."  In July 2010 Yu He had not in  fact  accumulated  six  years'
    residence in the UK, and so she prima facie did not yet qualify for ILR
    under the policy or practice which was  then  in  operation.   But  the
    principal way in which Miss Rutherford put the case before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was that there was a policy in existence in 2010  whereby
    dependants were granted ILR in line with the main applicant, if  he  or
    she was granted ILR.  Miss Rutherford further  contended  that  it  was
    through administrative error on the part of  the  respondent  that  the
    appellants' mother had not been granted ILR in line with her husband in
    July 2010.  The judge gave  adequate  reasons  in  paragraph  [14]  for
    rejecting both limbs of this argument.  She was  not  directed  to  any
    specific policy which confirmed that a dependent spouse was  always  to
    be granted in line with the main  applicant;  and  she  was  not  shown
    evidence  that  the   respondent   had   accepted   that   a   mistake,
    administrative or otherwise, had been made.

37. Ground 3 is that the judge erred in law in placing  significant  weight
    upon Yu He's failure to pursue her  application  for  judicial  review,
    once  she  had  been  granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain.   Miss
    Rutherford argues that the judicial review claim became  academic  once
    Yu He had been granted limited leave to remain.  But the maintenance of
    the judicial review claim was of crucial  importance  as  it  was  only
    through the mother's immigration status being elevated to that  of  ILR
    that she could support an application by the  children  for  settlement
    pursuant to paragraph 297.

38. As was noted by Vice President Ockelton, sitting as a Deputy High Court
    Judge, in Che at paragraph [24], the legacy programme gave  rise  to  a
    significant number of judicial  review  claims,  which  fell  into  two
    categories.  One category of cases was where the claimant complained he
    had not received a legacy decision granting him leave  to  remain;  the
    other category were cases in which the claimant had received a grant of
    leave and complained that he should have received a grant of indefinite
    leave to remain.  It was Yu He's case in the judicial review claim that
    she should be treated consistently with those  claims  resolved  before
    July 2011 when the Case Resolution Directorate granted  ILR  in  legacy
    cases.  So the fact that this claim was withdrawn following  the  grant
    of limited leave to remain fully justified the finding by the judge  in
    paragraph [15] of her decision.

39. Ground 1 is that the judge's approach to the Upper Tribunal's  decision
    in Mundeba was flawed.

40. In Mundeba, the Upper Tribunal held inter alia as follows:

         "(iv)    family considerations require an evaluation of the child's
             welfare including emotional needs.  Other considerations  come
             into play where there are other aspects of a child's life that
             are serious and compelling for example where an  applicant  is
             living in an unacceptable  social  and  economic  environment.
             The focus needs to be on the circumstances of the child in the
             light of his or her age, social backgrounds and  developmental
             history and will involve enquiry as to whether:-

             (a)  there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

             (b)  there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

             (c)  there are stable arrangements for  the  child's  physical
                  care: and the  assessment  involves  consideration  as  to
                  whether the combination of circumstances are  sufficiently
                  serious and compelling to require admission.

         (v)  as a starting point the best interests of a child are  usually
             best served by being with  both  or  at  least  one  of  their
             parents.  Continuity of residence is another factor; change in
             the place of residence where a child has grown up for a number
             of years when socially aware is important ..."

41.  Miss Rutherford submits the judge fell into error  by  not  considering
    the starting point to be that  the  appellants  should  with  be  their
    parents.  This is not actually what Mundeba says.  What it says is that
    as a starting point the best interests of a  child  are  "usually  best
    served by being with both or at least one of their  parents".   So  the
    Tribunal in Mundeba expressly contemplates the possibility  that  there
    will be situations in which the best interests  of  a  child  are  best
    served by remaining where they are, with  other  family  members.   The
    judge has given adequate reasons for finding that this is one of  those
    cases.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  stands.   This
appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

