
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/03220/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 21 July 2015                      |On 17 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (DHAKA)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             KUHINUR AKTHER EMA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G. Davison, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically the Entry Clearance
    Officer, represented by the Secretary of State,  is  the  appellant  in
    this appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.     The  respondent  refused  the  appellant's  application   for   entry
    clearance as a spouse  in  a  decision  dated  16  February  2014.  The
    respondent was not satisfied that  the  appellant  produced  sufficient
    evidence  to  show  that  she  had  contracted  a  valid  marriage   in
    Bangladesh. The respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the  UK  sponsor
    divorced his first wife according to the Muslim Family  Laws  Ordinance
    1961 and was therefore free to marry the  appellant  on  26/06/13.  The
    respondent also refused the application in relation  to  the  financial
    requirements but the respondent does not seek to challenge  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's findings in relation to that issue.

3.    The appellant appealed against the decision. First-tier Judge  Herbert
    allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on  10  April  2015.  The
    First-tier Judge's findings were succinct and were as follows:

         "24.     In particular I had the  appellant's  two  statements  and
             that of the sponsor. I had the marriage certificates,  English
             as a second language certificate at page.43-46, the  sponsor's
             supporting documents including the  letter  from  the  Islamic
             Sharia Council at  page  59  confirming  that  the  laws  were
             consistent with Bangladeshi Muslim Personal Law  code  and  it
             was an accepted divorce certificate under Islamic Sharia law.

         ...

         30.      The UK Sponsor was entirely credible in terms of his being
             full and candid about his relationship with his wife  and  the
             circumstances of his divorce.  I  find  that  there  is  ample
             documentary evidence to substantiate this.

         31.      The authorities are clear that the onus rests of the party
             asserting that documents are fraudulently obtained or false. A
             generalised comment by the Respondent that documents  such  as
             divorce certificates are commonly obtained  in  Bangladesh  is
             insufficient.

         32.      The burden rests upon the  Respondent  to  establish  some
             basis for alleging that the document  is  fraudulent  in  this
             case and it is not simply sufficient  to  say  that  they  are
             generally available easily in Bangladesh.

         ...

         33.      I am satisfied on a  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
             relationship  with   his   former   wife   had   broken   down
             irretrievably  and  they  had  a  divorce  under  Islamic  law
             recognised as such by the Islamic Sharia Council of the United
             Kingdom confirmed by [them] in writing."

4.    The respondent was granted permission to appeal against the  decision.
    The respondent argued that the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  failed  to
    engage with the contention that the sponsor was not free to marry.  The
    sponsor's divorce  would  only  be  recognised  in  the  UK  if  formal
    requirements were met. There was no evidence to show that he had  given
    notice to the Chairman of the Ward in writing with a copy also going to
    his wife in accordance with the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961.

5.    The matter comes before the Upper Tribunal to  determine  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law.

6.    I heard submissions from both parties, which have  been  noted  in  my
    record of proceedings and  where  relevant  are  incorporated  into  my
    findings.

Decision and reasons

7.    After having considered the grounds of appeal, the oral arguments  and
    the documentary evidence I am satisfied that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision involved the making of an error of law.

8.    The First-tier Tribunal Judge correctly  stated  that  the  burden  of
    proof is on the respondent to produce cogent  evidence  to  support  an
    allegation of  forgery.  However,  the  respondent  did  not  make  any
    specific allegation that any of the documents produced  in  support  of
    the application were false documents. The respondent questioned whether
    the evidence produced by the sponsor was  sufficient  to  show  that  a
    valid divorce took place thereby leaving the sponsor free to marry  the
    appellant on 26 June 2013. In order to assess  whether  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge made an error of law it is  necessary  to  consider  the
    evidence produced in support  of  the  appeal  in  order  to  ascertain
    whether his conclusions relating to the "divorce certificate" (in  fact
    the evidence is an entry from the register) are sustainable or not.

9.    The notice of refusal stated that the sponsor did  not  produce  a  UK
    divorce certificate even though both he and his first wife lived in the
    UK. The talaq divorce certificate issued in Bangladesh  would  only  be
    recognised in the UK  if  it  complied  with  the  formal  requirements
    governing divorce in that country, which was  the  Muslim  Family  Laws
    Ordinance 1961. The talaq divorce was not obtained through formal court
    proceedings and was therefore obtained  "otherwise  than  by  means  of
    proceedings" for the purpose of the Family Law Act 1986.

10.   Section 46(1) of the  Family  Law  Act  1986  states  that  a  divorce
    obtained by means of "proceedings" shall be recognised in the UK if the
    divorce is effective under the law of  the  country  in  which  it  was
    obtained and at the relevant date either party to the marriage was:

         (i)      habitually resident in the country in which  the  divorce,
         annulment or legal separation was obtained; or

         (ii)     was domiciled in that country; or

         (iii)    was a national of that country.

11.   Section 46(2) of the  Family  Law  Act  1986  states  that  a  divorce
    obtained "otherwise than by means of proceedings" shall  be  recognised
    in the UK if the divorce is effective under the law of the  country  in
    which it was obtained and at the relevant date:

         (i)      each party to the marriage was domiciled in that  country;
         or

         (ii)     either party to the marriage was domiciled in that country
         and the other party was domiciled in a country under whose law  the
         divorce, annulment or legal separation is recognised as valid; and

         (iii)    neither party was habitually resident in the UK throughout
         the period of one year immediately preceding that date.

12.   Section 54(2) of the Family Law  Act  1986  defines  "proceedings"  as
    "judicial or  other  proceedings".  The  respondent's  policy  document
    "Partner: Recognition of  marriage  and  divorce"  (IDI  -  Chapter  8,
    Section FM 1.3 - July 2012) states that a talaq divorce  registered  in
    accordance with the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance  1961  is  treated  as
    "proceedings" for the purpose of section 46(1) of the  Family  Law  Act
    1986.

13.   Section 7(1) of the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961 states that  any
    man who wishes to divorce his wife shall, as soon as may be  after  the
    pronouncement of talaq, give the Chairman  notice  in  writing  of  his
    having done so, and shall supply a  copy  to  the  wife.  Section  7(3)
    states that a talaq shall not be effective until the expiration  of  90
    days from the day on which the notice is delivered to the Chairman. The
    purpose of the 90 day period is to  allow  time  for  the  Chairman  to
    convene an Arbitration  Council  for  the  purpose  of  bringing  about
    reconciliation between the parties before  the  divorce  becomes  final
    (section 7(4)).

14.    As  evidence  of  his  divorce  the  sponsor  produced  a  copy   and
    translation of the divorce register dated 23 June  2013.  The  register
    appears to refer to an entry made on 05 June 2013. The sponsor and  his
    first wife are both named and it states that the divorce was  given  to
    his wife by way of talaq. Section (6) is headed "whether the bride  has
    accepted Khula Talak in presence of  Registrar"  and  the  record  then
    states "according to the viva & written petition and Divorce  Notice  &
    on sheet affidavit cause of description".

15.   The sponsor also produced a copy of the Nikah Nama  for  his  marriage
    to the appellant dated 25 June 2013. The form only asks for information
    as to whether the bride is divorced but  rather  unhelpfully  does  not
    request the same information of the groom. However, in  section  21  of
    the Nikah Nama the form specifically asks  whether  the  groom  has  an
    existing wife  and  whether  he  has  secured  the  permission  of  the
    Arbitration Council to marry another according  to  the  Muslim  Family
    Laws Ordinance 1961 (section 6). The Nikah Nama states "none".

16.   On the face of these two pieces of evidence the sponsor's divorce  was
    registered on 05 June 2013 and when he married  on  25  June  2013  the
    Nikah Nama gives no  indication  that  he  had  an  existing  wife.  No
    specific challenge was made to these two pieces of evidence save to say
    that such documents were "readily available" in Bangladesh. The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was correct to say that the burden  rested  on  the
    respondent to show that a document is fraudulent and that  the  general
    comments made in the notice of decision were insufficient to  meet  the
    burden of proof.

17.   If that been the only evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  I
    would  have  no  hesitation  in  concluding  that  his  findings   were
    sustainable. However, I have now had the benefit of detailed  arguments
    on the law and evidence and must consider whether the  failure  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge to consider other  aspects  of  the  evidence
    amounted to an error that was material to the outcome of the appeal.

18.   After the application was refused the sponsor wrote a  letter  to  the
    respondent dated 11 July 2014 and enclosed further evidence in  support
    of the application. Although the letter does  not  state  exactly  what
    evidence was submitted there are at least two other documents that post
    date the initial decision that are relevant  to  the  question  of  the
    validity of the marriage. I find that I can take these  documents  into
    account in so far as it is likely  that  they  were  before  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager when the case was reviewed on 09 January 2015. In any
    event the documents relate to the validity of the marriage  as  it  was
    said to stand at the date of the original decision.

19.   The first document is an affidavit sworn by the sponsor  in  which  he
    pronounces talaq to his first wife. The document is dated 22  May  2013
    but the translation is dated 20 March 2014. The application was refused
    on 16 February 2014. I find that it is reasonable  to  infer  from  the
    date of the translation that the  document  was  translated  after  the
    notice of decision and therefore it is likely  that  it  was  sent  for
    consideration after the application was refused. On the face of it this
    document complies with  the  requirement  of  the  Muslim  Family  Laws
    Ordinance 1961 to notify a talaq to his wife in writing  but  in  other
    respects it does not comply with the  requirements.  The  date  of  the
    affidavit and the date when the divorce is said to have been registered
    on 05 June 2013 does not appear to comply with the requirement of a  90
    day reflection period in which the  Arbitration  Council  may  seek  to
    reconcile  the  couple.  The  period  between  the  affidavit  and  the
    registration of the divorce is only around two weeks.

20.   The affidavit does not mention any previous notification of the  talaq
    and on the face of the wording it appears to be the document  in  which
    talaq is formally announced four times. There is no  evidence  to  show
    that it was served on the Chairman of the Union Parishad before  it  is
    said the divorce was registered on 05 June 2013 although  the  register
    itself indicates that his wife received some documents.

21.   The sponsor also produced a copy of a letter from the Chairman of  his
    local Union Parishad dated 16 March 2014. The letter states:

         "For the creation of dispute between  the  both  parties,  the  1st
         party Shamsul Haque Ali on last 22/05/13 by  registered  post  sent
         the affidavit of divorce (by husband to  wife)  before  the  notary
         public Sylhet to 2nd party Mst. Parvin Akther  Ali.  Afterwards  on
         last 05/06/13 A.D. the 1st party divorce the 2nd party  vide  Khola
         talak form of Marriage Registrar & Kazi Office.

         Being informed that the marriage is terminated by the  evidence  of
         affidavit before the Notary Public and divorce by Khola Talak Form,
         this certificate of divorce is issued."

22.   The translation is not in clear English but nothing in  this  document
    appears to suggest that the affidavit was sent to the Chairman  of  the
    Union Parishad at the time when it was made. It only makes reference to
    the affidavit being served on the  sponsor's  first  wife.  The  letter
    purports to be a "certificate of divorce" but it  quite  clearly  post-
    dates the date when the sponsor claims the divorce was  registered  and
    the sponsor's  subsequent  marriage  to  the  appellant.  There  is  no
    suggestion from the Chairman of a reflection period or  any  effort  to
    convene and Arbitration Council in accordance with  the  Muslim  Family
    Laws Ordinance 1961.

23.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge placed weight on  the  letter  from  The
    Islamic Shari'a Council in the  UK  dated  12  June  2014.  The  letter
    stated:

         "This is to confirm that  we  have  seen  the  Bangladeshi  divorce
         certificate No.30 dated 22/05/13  between  Shamsul  Haque  Ali  and
         Parvin Afkhter Ali is accordance with Bangladeshi  Muslim  personal
         Law code. We certify that this is an accepted  divorce  certificate
         under Islamic Sharia Law."

24.   I find that no weight can be placed on this document as evidence  that
    a valid divorce took place in accordance with Bangladeshi law. Firstly,
    it is unclear what expertise The Islamic Shari'a Council in the UK  has
    in Bangladeshi law. The letter does not make correct reference  to  the
    Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961.  Secondly,  the  letter  appears  to
    refer to the affidavit dated 22 May 2013 and not to the validity of the
    entry made in the divorce register. On the face of the affidavit it was
    nothing more than a bare talaq, which might be sufficient under  Sharia
    law but not for the purpose of the Family Law Act  1986.  Thirdly,  the
    opinion of The Islamic Shari'a Council has no legal force in the UK  in
    so far as it confirms the validity of a divorce in Bangladesh.

25.   If the divorce register and Nikah Nama were the only documents  before
    me I would conclude that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was entitled  to
    find that the respondent had failed to produce sufficient  evidence  to
    undermine  the  validity  of  those  documents.  However,  the  sponsor
    produced further evidence after the application was  refused  which  is
    inconsistent with the terms of the Muslim Family  Laws  Ordinance  1961
    and therefore undermines the reliability of the initial  evidence  that
    he produced in relation to the divorce. As such the evidence  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge appears to have  overlooked  was  capable  of
    making a material difference to the  outcome  of  the  appeal  and  his
    failure to consider that evidence amounts to an error of law.

26.   Both parties made detailed submissions and were  content  to  rely  on
    them if I found an error of law and went on to remake the  decision.  I
    have  already   incorporated   the   various   points   made   by   the
    representatives both for and against the weight to be given to  various
    documents. Even if the respondent did not produce  sufficiently  cogent
    evidence to show that the copy of the  divorce  register  was  a  false
    document the overall burden of proof is still on the appellant to  show
    that the documents produced in support of the appeal were  reliable  as
    evidence to show that the sponsor contracted a valid  divorce  for  the
    purpose of UK law before marrying the appellant on 25  June  2013.  The
    appellant does not seek to argue that there is an alternative procedure
    for divorce in Bangladesh so it is necessary to show that  the  divorce
    was carried out in accordance with the relevant law in Bangladesh.  The
    appellant cannot not succeed in arguing that the divorce  was  obtained
    "otherwise than by means of proceedings" because  the  Family  Law  Act
    1986 requires neither party to be habitually resident in the UK for  at
    least one year immediately preceding  the  date  and  the  sponsor  was
    habitually resident in the UK. The appellant must show that the divorce
    was obtained by way of "proceedings"  and  under  Bangladeshi  law  the
    relevant proceedings take place under the Muslim Family Laws  Ordinance
    1961.

27.   I bear in mind that the standard of proof, which  is  the  balance  of
    probabilities, allows some room for doubt but  even  taking  that  into
    account the inconsistencies in the further  evidence  produced  by  the
    sponsor appear to diverge quite starkly from the procedure outlined  in
    the Muslim Family Laws Ordinance 1961. As such I cannot be satisfied on
    the balance of probabilities that a valid divorce took place before the
    sponsor remarried on 25 June 2013. While  some  evidence  supports  the
    appellant's case other pieces of evidence undermine it. As a whole  the
    evidence is sufficiently unreliable to satisfy me that a valid  divorce
    took place at the relevant time for the purpose of section 46(1) of the
    Family Law Act 1986.

28.   No arguments were put forward in relation to  the  appellant's  family
    life under Article 8 of the European Convention. It is clear  from  the
    evidence that the sponsor is able to visit the appellant in Bangladesh.
    The Court of Appeal in SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 made clear
    that Article 8 will only be engaged outside the immigration rules where
    there are compelling circumstances and  that  it  is  likely  to  be  a
    slightly more stringent test in cases involving  entry  clearance.  The
    appellant's case has not been prepared with human rights issues in mind
    and the witness statements are silent as to the effect of the decision.
    For these reasons I conclude that no issues relating  to  human  rights
    are engaged on the evidence currently provided in this case.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside

I remake the decision and DISMISS the appeal



Signed      [pic]      Date 13 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

