
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03644/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20th October, 2016                      |On 28th October, 2016            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mrs Nasreen Akhtar
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Olson, Counsel, instructed by Mohammed & Co
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this appeal is the  Secretary  of  State,  to  whom  I
    shall refer as,  "the  claimant".   The  respondent  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan born on 15th December, 1975.  The respondent applied for leave
    to enter the United Kingdom as the parent of a child under paragraph EC-
    P.1.1 of Appendix FM of the Statement of Changes in  Immigration  Rules
    HC 395 (as amended).  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  Islamabad  refused
    entry clearance on 29th January, 2015.

2.   The respondent's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Thorne,
    who in a determination promulgated on 29th  February,  2016,  indicated
    that maintenance was to be provided by the respondent's niece.  He  had
    been addressed by  the  Presenting  Officer,  who  had  suggested  that
    support from the niece amounted to third  party  support  and  was  not
    permissible.  He found, in paragraph  43  of  his  determination,  that
    offers of financial support from a sponsor were not impermissible third
    party  support.   The  claimant  sought  to   challenge   the   judge's
    determination.

3.   Addressing me today, Ms Olson suggested that third party  support  from
    the sponsor was not impermissible.  In any event,  she  suggested,  the
    appeal ought to be allowed under Article 8.  Mr Harrison  urged  me  to
    find that third party support was impermissible.  The sponsor was not a
    spouse  or  partner,  but  a  third  party.  Counsel  agreed  that  the
    respondent could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

4.   With his customary fairness Mr Harrison, indicated that  he  could  not
    argue against the respondent's Article 8 appeal  being  allowed.  I  am
    satisfied that he was correct in doing so.  In the  circumstances,  the
    respondent's appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer
    is granted.  The First Tier Judge did err in law.  I set  his  decision
    aside and remake it.  The respondent's immigration appeal is dismissed.
     The respondent's human rights appeal is allowed under Article 8 of the
    European Convention for the Protection of Human Rights and  Fundamental
    Freedoms.

Notice of Decision

The respondent's appeal is dismissed on immigration grounds.  The appeal  is
allowed on human rights grounds

No anonymity direction is made.

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

