
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: oa/03453/2015
                                                               OA/03454/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th August 2017                           |On 26th October 2017          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                                    [M K]
                                    [H K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms P Heidar (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are citizens of Afghanistan, the  first  born  in  April
    2002 and the second in January 2000.  Their appeals against refusal  of
    entry clearance  were  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  C  M
    Phillips ("the judge") in a decision and reasons  promulgated  on  24th
    November 2016.

2.   The appellants applied  to  accompany  their  adoptive  mother  to  the
    United Kingdom and to join their adoptive father and sponsor here.  The
    Entry Clearance Officer  ("the  ECO")  found  in  each  case  that  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules ("the rules") were not  met  and,
    additionally, that refusal of entry  clearance  would  not  breach  the
    Article 8 rights of the appellants or anyone else.

3.   It was common ground before the judge  that  the  appellants  were  the
    nephews of their sponsor in the United Kingdom.  They applied for entry
    clearance on 29th October 2014, as dependants of  his  wife.   She  was
    granted a visa as a spouse on 28th January 2015, at the  same  time  as
    the appellants' applications were refused.  It was also  common  ground
    that the procedure for an overseas adoption set out in  the  rules  was
    not followed.  It was contended that the  appellants'  case  should  be
    assessed as a de facto adoption under paragraph 309A and paragraph  310
    of the rules.

4.   The judge found that the requirements of the rules  in  these  contexts
    were not met.  The evidence fell short of showing, inter alia, that the
    sponsor's wife had in fact lived with the appellants for the periods of
    time specified in paragraph 309A or that a genuine transfer of parental
    responsibility had occurred.  Overall, the judge found that the  burden
    of proof had not been discharged.

5.   The appellants submitted that, in the alternative, if the  requirements
    of paragraph 309A and 310 of the rules were not met,  the  applications
    should be considered under paragraph  297(i)(f)  of  the  rules,  as  a
    family relationship between the appellants and their  sponsor  existed.
    The judge found here that the evidence was insufficient to show serious
    and compelling family or other considerations making the  exclusion  of
    the children undesirable.  There were other persons willing and able to
    care for them, as shown by the fact that their sponsor's wife chose  to
    travel to join him in the United Kingdom for a period of time,  leaving
    the appellants in Afghanistan.

6.   The judge went on to consider  whether  the  appellants'  circumstances
    merited entry clearance outside rules, in accordance with Article 8  of
    the Human Rights Convention.  Here too she found  that  the  appellants
    had not discharged the burden of proof and had not shown an established
    family life with their sponsor and his wife.  The  public  interest  in
    the maintenance of fair and  consistent  immigration  control  was  not
    outweighed.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

7.   It was contended that the judge failed to properly  take  into  account
    the lateness of the Entry Clearance Manager's review,  in  relation  to
    reports adduced by the appellants having  not  been  produced  earlier.
    Any delay was caused by the failure  of  service  of  the  respondent's
    review statement.  In addition, the judge  failed  to  give  sufficient
    weight to a police report showing that the appellants' natural  parents
    were reported as missing in Afghanistan in January 2012.  She  attached
    little weight to the report but her finding that it was  not  based  on
    independent investigation was speculative and  not  properly  reasoned.
    Similarly, although the report was  not  mentioned  in  a  testamentary
    certificate ("the certificate") relied upon by  the  appellants,  there
    was no real reason why it should have  been.   The  police  report  was
    central to the appellants' appeal.   So  far  as  the  certificate  was
    concerned,  the  judge's  findings   here   were   insufficient.    The
    appellants' expert, Dr A Giustozzi, found that  it  was  authentic  and
    confirmed that adoptions  were  not  allowed  by  law  in  Afghanistan,
    although guardianship arrangements were.  Nonetheless, the judge  found
    that she had no expert evidence before her showing that the certificate
    was sufficient to allow the sponsor's wife  to  remove  the  appellants
    from Afghanistan.  As it confirmed that she  had  guardianship  of  the
    appellants, following their parents' disappearance, the certificate was
    sufficient for this purpose.

8.   So far as the rules are concerned, it  was  contended  that  the  judge
    erred in finding that the sponsor had failed satisfactorily to  explain
    why he chose not to follow the route set out in  paragraph  309B.   The
    rules showed that  where  a  child  is  related  to  adoptive  parents,
    consideration should first be given to whether  he  or  she  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 297 of the rules. The rules did  not  require
    evidence of contact and affection and the judge failed  to  assess  the
    appellants' circumstances properly or consider their best interests  as
    minors.  The judge also erred in finding as a fact that the certificate
    contained both the  sponsor's  and  his  wife's  names.   The  document
    contained only the wife's name as the appellants'  legal  guardian  and
    she had lived with them and made the entry clearance applications.  The
    wife had been living abroad for at least eighteen  months.   The  judge
    also failed to give due weight to  a  statement  from  the  appellants,
    regarding the disappearance of their parents.

9.   Finally, it was contended  that  the  judge  erred  in  her  Article  8
    assessment as she made no findings regarding  the  appellants'  current
    circumstances, save that she believed  that  no  transfer  of  parental
    responsibility had occurred.

10.  Permission to appeal was granted on 26th  June  2017  by  a  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The grant  is  very  brief  and  merely  records  that
    permission was granted on the basis that the judge may  have  erred  in
    failing to apply the correct law and  in  failing  to  give  sufficient
    weight to items  of  evidence  including  the  police  report  and  the
    certificate.  The respondent provided a Rule 24 response on  10th  July
    2017.  The appeal was opposed by the Secretary of State  as  the  judge
    had carefully assessed the evidence before her,  including  the  report
    from Dr Giustozzi.  She was entitled to find that Dr Giustozzi's report
    did not amount to expert evidence confirming the accuracy  or  adequacy
    of the contents of the certificate or confirming the  powers  conferred
    by it.  The judge's findings were consistent with  the  conclusions  in
    the report  itself.   The  judge  also  properly  considered  paragraph
    297(i)(f) of the rules.

Submissions on Error of Law

11.  Dealing first with the weight given  by  the  judge  to  parts  of  the
    evidence, Ms Heidar said that  the  police  report  was  considered  at
    paragraph 39 of the decision.  The judge gave the report little weight,
    noting that it appeared to have been obtained in February 2012 but  was
    not provided until October 2016.  The fact that  it  was  not  produced
    until then was irrelevant.  It clearly predated  the  decisions  giving
    rise to the  appeal.   The  judge  found  that  it  was  not  based  on
    independent investigation but inevitably, the report would be based  on
    what was said by the adoptive mother, regarding  the  disappearance  of
    the appellants' parents.  The certificate came from the  Supreme  Court
    of Afghanistan and the original was shown to the judge, who noted  that
    it  contained  the  sponsor's  wife's  name.   Dr  Giustozzi's   report
    confirmed that the certificate was authentic and  that  there  were  no
    adoption proceedings as such available in Afghanistan.  Paragraph 45 of
    the decision appeared to show that the judge found Dr Giustozzi not  to
    be an expert but he had explained how the certificate was assessed  and
    had status as an expert in these matters.  Looking at  the  certificate
    in translation on page 13 of the appellants' bundle, although there was
    nothing expressly saying that the wife could remove the appellants from
    Afghanistan, this was implied because she had guardianship.  There  was
    no need for a specific clause on removal. Overall, it  was  clear  that
    the judge had given insufficient weight to this evidence.

12.  There was evidence before the judge showing the  children  living  with
    their sponsor's wife but the decision did not show that  the  statement
    made by the children, at pages 9 and 10 in the appellants' bundle,  was
    considered.

13.  Afghanistan was not a signatory to The Hague Convention.   Although  de
    facto adoption was relied upon, it was accepted  that  the  appellants'
    sponsor had not lived with the children for eighteen months before  the
    application.  However, his wife had done  so.   She  applied  with  the
    children,  for  entry  clearance.   The  appellants'  application   was
    refused, in part on the basis that the sponsor had not  approached  the
    United  Kingdom  authorities,  as  appropriate  in  an  adoption  case.
    Turning to paragraph 297(i)(f) of the rules, the judge's findings  were
    insufficient.  This was largely due, again, to a failure  to  give  due
    weight to the police report, the certificate and the evidence given  by
    the sponsor, and by his wife and children in their statements.

14.  Ms Willocks-Briscoe said that  the  police  report  and  the  testament
    certificate were both considered and assessed  by  the  judge,  as  was
    clear from paragraph 44 of the decision.  She also took into account Dr
    Giustozzi's report and particularly paragraphs 4 to 8 of it.  She  took
    issue with the absence of any description or  analysis  of  the  powers
    bestowed on the sponsor's wife.  The Tribunal was asked to  infer  that
    the sponsor's wife had the same rights as would be given to an adoptive
    parent but Dr Giustozzi's report did not contain any evidence  to  this
    effect.  There was no consideration in detail  of  Afghan  law  or  any
    other  international  requirements.   The  document  showed   that   an
    individual in a court in Afghanistan had looked at  a  document  placed
    before him.  He confirmed what the case was about and recorded that the
    numbers corresponded with what was held in Afghan records and that  the
    stamps applied were correct.  Given the importance  of  procedures  for
    adoption, the judge was unable to find what guardianship  entailed  and
    whether it permitted the removal of the children from Afghanistan.  The
    judge was mindful of the fact that adoption orders issued by an  Afghan
    court are not recognised in the United Kingdom and was also mindful  of
    the other routes available to the appellants and  their  sponsor.   The
    case was presented on the basis that the children would join  him.   At
    paragraph 50, the judge assessed the evidence before her, including the
    oral evidence.  She explained her reservations regarding  the  lack  of
    supporting evidence that the requirements of the  rules  were  met  and
    highlighted the difficulties with the police  report  and  certificate.
    Even if the requirements of Afghan law were met  for  the  purposes  of
    guardianship, that was  not  the  relevant  standard.   The  judge  was
    entitled to find that the requirements of the rules were  not  met  and
    that there was a lack of evidence substantiating  the  claim  that  the
    children had resided with the sponsor's wife for the  required  period.
    There was no independent evidence  from  a  social  worker  or  similar
    professional.

15.  Turning to the police report, this did not disclose  any  investigation
    into the circumstances of the  disappearance  of  the  parents  or  the
    results of any investigation, if any were made.  This was an  important
    point as it bore on the issue of  whether  there  had  been  a  genuine
    transfer of parental responsibilities.  This was relevant to  paragraph
    310 of the rules.  The judge was entitled to  consider  the  source  of
    information and whether there was anything else supporting the  claims.
    There was no other evidence showing that the parents  were  missing  or
    presumed dead.  Even if all that had been established, paragraph 297 of
    the rules still required serious  or  compelling  circumstances  to  be
    shown.  The judge dealt with this issue at paragraphs 53 and 54 of  the
    decision.  The correct approach was set out  in  the  judgment  of  the
    Court of  Appeal  in  MN  [2008]  EWCA  Civ  38.   Afghanistan  has  no
    equivalent to adoption so the first avenue, under paragraph 310 of  the
    rules,  was  not  available.   De  facto  adoption,   under   paragraph
    310(vi)(b) of the rules was  considered  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    paragraph 15 of the judgment but the judge in the present appeal found,
    correctly, that there was no period  of  residence  with  the  adoptive
    parent for the required minimum period.  If a court or Tribunal is  not
    satisfied that a de facto adoption has taken  place,  there  remains  a
    procedure available under the Adoption and  Children  Act  2002.   This
    again was considered by the Court of Appeal in MN.  Overall, the scheme
    is framed so that if de facto adoption is available, the  Adoption  and
    Children Act 2002 is not needed.  If there is  no  de  facto  adoption,
    then the Adoption and Children Act 2002 procedure should be followed.

16.  In the present appeal, there was  no  de  facto  adoption  because  the
    sponsor himself had not lived with the children.   Only  his  wife  had
    done so, in Afghanistan.

17.  The Court of Appeal emphasised the  importance  of  proper  checks,  at
    paragraph 32 of the judgment in MN.

18.  The decision in SK [2006] UKAIT 00068 was also relevant  as  it  showed
    the correct approach to the adoption rules.   In  essence,  the  scheme
    could not  be  segregated  from  the  general  law.   Just  because  an
    arrangement is described as a de facto adoption,  it  does  not  follow
    that it is as a matter of law, where the requirements of  the  relevant
    rules are not met.  Paragraphs 30 to 32 of SK make this clear.

19.  In the present appeal, the judge began with paragraph 309A,  looked  at
    the evidence and noted the application naming both the sponsor and  his
    wife.  Only the wife had resided with the children so the  requirements
    of the rules were not met.  The police report and the certificate taken
    together showed that the arrangement  might  have  been  recognised  in
    Afghan law but this was not sufficient to show a  genuine  transfer  of
    parental responsibility or that  the  appellants'  sponsor's  wife  had
    authority to remove them from Afghanistan.  The judge noted that orders
    made in Afghanistan were not recognised by the United  Kingdom  and  it
    was clearly important for the judge to be satisfied that  the  evidence
    showed that the children were properly adopted in some form.  The judge
    found that the requirements of paragraph 309, overall,  were  not  met.
    She moved to  paragraph  310.   The  sponsor  had  not  approached  the
    authorities of the United Kingdom under the Adoption and  Children  Act
    2002.  Turning  then  to  paragraph  297,  the  judge  found  that  the
    arrangement showed that the children were being cared for and there was
    no  evidence  showing  that  their  needs  were  not  met.   In   those
    circumstances, the requirements of that paragraph were also not met.

20.  In a brief response, Ms  Heidar  said  that  the  appellants  were  not
    required to produce adoption orders as such  and  the  requirements  of
    Afghan law were met.  The certificate  came  from  the  Supreme  Court.
    There was no reason to doubt the validity  of  it  and  Dr  Giustozzi's
    report showed that it was a genuine document.  The judge added  in  her
    own  requirement  that  the  appellants  have   permission   to   leave
    Afghanistan to come to the United Kingdom.  Dr Giustozzi concluded that
    the adoptive mother had full guardianship and if a  person  were  given
    guardianship by their country of nationality, they would  be  permitted
    to bring children to  the  United  Kingdom.   This  was  logical.   The
    children would go where the  guardian  went.   The  wife  had  made  an
    application to  join  her  husband.   The  only  parent  named  in  the
    certificate  was  the  adoptive  mother  and  the  children  were   her
    dependants.  They came under an arrangement which amounted to de  facto
    adoption.  The appellants' sponsor had not lived in Afghanistan  as  he
    returned  to  the  United  Kingdom  but  it  was  his  wife   who   had
    guardianship.  The de facto adoption requirements could  apply  to  one
    parent or both.  Her evidence was that she had lived with the  children
    since 2012.  This was also  the  evidence  of  the  child  who  made  a
    statement.  The judge made no findings about this.  The best  interests
    of the children were not properly considered under section  55  of  the
    2009 Act.  The sponsor was not required to approach the authorities  of
    the United Kingdom.  He was the children's uncle.  Even if  there  were
    no de facto adoption, paragraph 297(i)(f) of the rules applied.   There
    were serious and compelling reasons showing why the  exclusion  of  the
    children was undesirable.  The sponsor's wife was not  present  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing  as  she  was  moving  between  the  United
    Kingdom and Afghanistan, looking after the children.





Findings and Conclusions on Error of Law

21.  I am grateful to the two representatives for the careful way  in  which
    they presented their cases.  I find that no material error of  law  has
    been shown in the judge's decision and that it must stand.

22.  The judge set out her material findings at paragraphs 32 to 57  of  the
    decision.  She  began  by  recording  what  was  accepted  between  the
    parties, regarding the circumstances  in  which  the  applications  for
    entry clearance were made.  She summarised the sponsor's wife's witness
    statement (at paragraph 36) and noted the results of  DNA  tests.   The
    Entry Clearance Manager raised the issue of the  disappearance  of  the
    appellants' parents and the judge made  an  assessment  of  the  police
    report prepared in response.  She gave it little weight, observing that
    it did not appear to be based on any independent investigation and  was
    not referred to in the  certificate  which  recorded  the  guardianship
    arrangements.   In  the  written  grounds,  the  judge's  approach   is
    described as speculative.

23.  It is clear from the decision that  the  judge  considered  the  report
    carefully.  I find that she was entitled to give it little weight.   It
    appeared before her in a separate bundle, with a DNA report.  It  is  a
    brief document which, in translation, shows that it is nothing more and
    nothing less than a response to a "confirmation request"  made  by  the
    sponsor's wife.  It simply records a statement by her that her brother-
    in-law and his wife went missing on a highway on 15th January 2012, one
    week before the date of the  police  report.   At  the  bottom  of  the
    document is a very short response to the "confirmation  request"  which
    records that two named  individuals  "went  missing".   The  judge  was
    perfectly entitled to find that the police report was not based on  any
    independent investigation and she did not err in her  observation  that
    the certificate makes no mention of it, although there  is  mention  of
    the disappearance of individuals.

24.  So far as the certificate is concerned, the judge was entitled to  find
    that it does not show  that  the  appellants'  sponsor  here  has  been
    awarded any rights in relation to the appellants.   Only  his  wife  is
    mentioned in it.  That bears on the question  whether  the  appellants'
    sponsor is an adoptive parent at all.  Ms Heidar  put  the  appellants'
    case on the basis that it was his wife who  sought  to  present  as  an
    adoptive parent.

25.  The important finding made by the judge about the certificate  is  that
    it falls short as evidence showing precisely which powers are conferred
    on the sponsor's wife and as evidence that she is  entitled  to  remove
    the  appellants  from  Afghanistan.   Reliance  was  placed   upon   Dr
    Giustozzi's report and the judge's approach was criticised by Ms Heidar
    as including an apparent finding that he is not  an  expert.   However,
    paragraph 45 of the decision shows that the judge has not questioned Dr
    Giustozzi's expertise as such.  Her precise finding was that there  was
    no expert  evidence  before  her  to  show  that  the  certificate  was
    sufficient to empower the sponsor's wife to remove the  appellants.   A
    careful reading of Dr Giustozzi's report shows that  this  finding  was
    open to the judge.

26.  The operative part of the report is contained in paragraphs 4 to 8,  on
    page 30 of  the  appellants'  bundle.   Dr  Giustozzi's  researcher  in
    Afghanistan, based  in  Kabul,  sent  a  scanned  colour  copy  of  the
    certificate to a head of department at  the  Fourth  Zone  Court  Human
    Source Department.  The document was checked and the head of department
    confirmed that it was genuine.  Paragraph 8 then records Dr Giustozzi's
    view, which is unsourced, that adoptions are  not  allowed  by  law  in
    Afghanistan.  All that is allowed is guardianship and, he  states,  the
    document "concerns this" and is  "the  standard  paperwork"  issued  in
    guardianship cases.  Nowhere in the report is there an  explanation  of
    precisely what guardianship means in Afghanistan.   Nor  is  there  any
    description of the extent  of  the  legal  powers  a  guardian  has  in
    relation to children.  The judge was  properly  cautious  as  the  case
    concerns two young appellants.  I do not accept Ms Heidar's  submission
    that the fact of guardianship entailed an inference that  the  document
    was sufficient to enable the sponsor's wife to remove  the  appellants.
    The evidence fell short in this regard.

27.  The grounds also contained a submission that the law  was  not  applied
    correctly.  I find that there is no merit here.   The  requirements  of
    the rules in paragraphs 309A and 310 were not met.  Ms Heidar  did  not
    seek to persuade me that they were.  The judge found that the  evidence
    did not show a genuine transfer of  parental  responsibility  and  that
    finding too was open to her.  At paragraph  53  of  the  decision,  she
    found the evidence before her insufficient to show that the appellants'
    parents have disappeared.  The due weight to be given to the supporting
    evidence in this  context,  particularly  the  police  report  and  the
    certificate, was a matter for her and no error of law has been shown in
    her approach.

28.  So far as paragraph 297(i)(f) is  concerned,  the  judge  reviewed  the
    evidence at paragraph 53, noting  that  it  consisted  largely  of  the
    certificate, the police report and evidence from the appellants,  their
    sponsor and his wife.  Her assessment was that this evidence was sparse
    and lacking in detail and did not show serious and compelling family or
    other considerations making the exclusion of the children  undesirable.
    She was entitled  to  find  that  sources  of  support  and  care  were
    available in Afghanistan, in the light of the sponsor's wife's decision
    to leave them for a time and to join her husband in the United Kingdom.

29.  The judge's Article 8  assessment,  made  after  consideration  of  the
    rules,  was  criticised  as  not  including  a  finding  regarding  the
    appellants' current circumstances and the written grounds suggest  that
    she made no finding regarding the parents being missing.  This  is  not
    so.  The judge had these issues in mind and found that the evidence was
    lacking.  The Article 8 assessment is free from error.  In the light of
    the adverse findings the judge made and the paucity of evidence showing
    compelling family or other considerations, she  was  entitled  to  find
    that the overall balance between the competing interests fell in favour
    of the respondent, leading  to  a  conclusion  that  refusal  of  entry
    clearance was a lawful and proportionate response which did not  breach
    the human rights of the appellants or anyone else.

30.  In summary, the decision contains no material error of  law  and  shall
    stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, containing  no  material  error  of
law, shall stand.




Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



Anonymity

The judge made no direction or order for anonymity and none has been  sought
before me.  In these circumstances, I make no order or direction under  rule
13 of the 2014 Procedure Rules.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

