
IAC-TH-CP-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03508/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 February 2015                  |On 18 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                 MS DIL JAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nasim of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 15  July  1955.   She
    appealed against the respondent's decision dated  5  February  2014  to
    refuse leave to enter to join her children in the United Kingdom.

 2. The respondent refused the application on the  basis  that  the  family
    reunion provisions did not apply to the appellant and that was conceded
    at the hearing before Judge  Maciel  (the  judge)  by  the  appellant's
    Counsel.  The judge dismissed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules
    and on  human  rights  grounds.   She  did  not  find  the  appellant's
    daughters to be credible.  She found there were no credible  compelling
    circumstances to consider the appellant's case outside the  Immigration
    Rules.

 3. The  grounds  at  [1]-[5]  set  out  the  judge's  adverse  certificate
    findings.  The grounds claim the judge erred in her adverse credibility
    findings, in failing to take into account that the appellant's cousin's
    husband, Abdul Hadi, wrote a letter headed "Confession of  Abdul  Hadi"
    which was sent with the appellant's application dated 1  October  2013.
    Mr Hadi confirmed in the letter that he lived in  Wardak  province,  he
    had taken care of the appellant for one and a half years, he was not in
    a good state of finance, he had lived in rented  property  and  had  to
    move to his own home province Maidan  Wardak  to  look  after  his  own
    family, he was disabled and could no longer look after  the  appellant.
    The  information  was  provided  prior  to  any  rejection   from   the
    respondent.  It was argued the judge failed to take into  account  that
    extremely relevant piece of evidence which supported  and  corroborated
    the sponsor's evidence.

 4. The judge further rejected the assertion that  the  appellant  did  not
    travel to the UK with her children as there were insufficient funds but
    there was no evidence to suggest the same.  Soma Bakshi  gave  evidence
    that when the house was sold there was "not enough for all of us".  The
    judge appeared to have rejected the  evidence  based  on  the  previous
    adverse findings of credibility which it was claimed  were  unsafe  for
    the reasons set out.

 5. Judge McDade granted permission to appeal as he found it  was  arguable
    that the judge's failure to consider the evidence of Abdul Hadi was  an
    arguable error of law.

Submissions on Error of Law

 6. Mr Nasim's submissions did not limit themselves to the grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal.  He sought  to  introduce  additional  issues  as
    follows:

      a) There is new provision in the Immigration Rules for  a  refugee  to
         sponsor a parent.

      b) Both the Entry Clearance Officer and the judge failed  to  consider
         that new family reunion policy.

      c) The judge erred at [35] in finding  that  there  were  no  credible
         compelling circumstances to consider the appellant's  case  outside
         the Rules.  The judge was obliged to carry out a two stage  process
         in terms of Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74.  See [66].  A Razgar test was
         necessary and the judge failed to carry it out.

 7. Mr Nasim submitted that the judge's failure to consider the letter from
    Abdul Hadi impacted upon her adverse credibility findings at  [30]  and
    [31] of the decision.

 8. Mr Jarvis opposed Mr  Nasim's  application  to  alter  the  grounds  to
    include the issues I have set out at [6](a)-(c)  above.   Nevertheless,
    he submitted  that  even  if  those  issues  were  allowed  in  for  my
    consideration, they had no merit.

Conclusion on Error of Law

 9. The grounds were drafted by  the  same  Counsel  that  represented  the
    appellant at the hearing before the judge.  The decision was clear that
    the  appellant's  Counsel  had  conceded  she  could   not   meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and that the  only  issue  before
    the judge was Article 8.  See [2] of the decision.

10. What Mr Nasim's submissions attempt is to introduce  issues  before  me
    which either had not been argued before  the  judge  or  alternatively,
    were not argued in the grounds.  There was no  suggestion  that  either
    case law or the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 provided
    for allowing into the appeal before me, the matters raised by Mr Nasim.
     Rather, what he argued was that I had a discretion in that regard  and
    that I should exercise it in favour of the appellant.

11. There are two issues, which I can deal with briefly.  I do  not  accept
    that Mr Nasim on behalf of the appellant can argue a  point  which  was
    not put to or considered by the judge.  Further, I  do  not  accept  in
    these circumstances that the appellant should be entitled to alter  her
    grounds of appeal, out  of  time,  without  notice.   Counsel  for  the
    appellant was well aware of the issues as of the hearing and  when  she
    prepared the grounds.

12. I next consider the ground on which leave was granted, the  claim  that
    the judge failed to consider the evidence of  Abdul  Hadi.   The  judge
    clearly had in mind the  letter  from  Mr  Hadi.   Whilst  it  was  not
    mentioned in terms at [4], the judge recorded  that  the  evidence  was
    contained in the appellant's application, the notice of appeal and  the
    documents submitted.  In submissions, Counsel for  the  appellant  drew
    the letter from Mr Hadi to the judge's attention in confirmation of the
    difficulties faced by the appellant  in  Afghanistan  which  the  judge
    referred to at [24].

13. What the letter from Mr Hadi says is as follows:

                          "Confession of Abdul Hadi

         I Abdul Hadi s/o Sadow Khan  primary  residence  of  Maidan  Wardak
         province and present residence of Kabul province am a dedicated Son-
         in-law of Mrs Del Jan the  mother  of  Late  Jamil  Bakhshi,  Salma
         Bakhshi, Soma Bakhshi, Lamha Bakhshi and Amal Bakhshi.

         From one year and half I look after Mrs Del Jan in my house.  As  I
         am not in a good state of finance recently and  live  in  a  rented
         house I have to move to my home province  Maidan  Wardak  and  look
         after my own family.  Also I am a disabled person too  and  am  not
         able to look after Mrs Del Jan any more.  I wish from the  son  and
         daughters of Mrs Del Jan to look after their mother  afterward  and
         decide about her future.

         Note: There is  a  copy  of  my  Disabled  Card  attached  to  this
         Application Form for your consideration."

14. The judge considered the various contradictions in the evidence of  the
    witnesses at [30] and [31]. The judge did not find the witnesses to  be
    credible regarding where the appellant was currently living  which  she
    claimed was Wardak.  That was because one witness said that her  mother
    "...... never left the house" whereas her sister said that  her  mother
    "...... walked to the pharmacy" when she had to  buy  medication.   The
    fact that she certainly did  leave  the  house  was  confirmed  by  the
    sponsor commenting that neighbours did not like it when  they  saw  the
    appellant about the neighbourhood.

15. As I understand the evidence, the  claim  that  the  appellant  was  no
    longer welcome to live with the Hadi family was only raised when it was
    understood she would not be automatically entitled to  entry  clearance
    under the family reunion provisions.  Mr Hadi claimed in his letter  to
    be disabled and not able to look after the appellant any more but there
    was no suggestion in the oral evidence before the judge  regarding  his
    disability or that he could no longer look after the  appellant.   What
    the judge was told in oral evidence was that Mr Hadi had lost  his  job
    in Kabul.  If that was true, it did  not  explain  the  sponsor's  oral
    evidence that Mr Hadi had been a self-employed  taxi  driver  for  many
    years in Kabul such that in the absence of any additional  evidence  to
    explain the same, he had not lost his job there.  I also bear  in  mind
    that there was no suggestion in Mr Hadi's letter that he had  lost  his
    job, although I accept he said he was not in a good state of finance.

16. It was the appellant's  claim  and  that  of  the  oral  witnesses  her
    daughters, that she was living in Wardak province  but  was  no  longer
    welcome with the Hadi family. Further, that she was at  risk  of  being
    forced into marriage there as she was  a  widow  and  that  there  were
    difficulties in her obtaining medication  without  assistance  although
    that evidence was contradicted by the sponsor's oral evidence that  her
    mother walked to the pharmacy to buy medication when her cousin was not
    able to get it.  In such circumstances, whilst I accept that the  judge
    did not take into account Mr Hadi's letter at [30] and [31]  I  do  not
    find the error to be material given that the judge made quite  separate
    adverse credibility findings regarding which the letter did not  assist
    the appellant.  The judge gave clear and cogent reasons  for  rejecting
    the appellant's claim that she was living in Maidan Wardak, that  there
    was no credible evidence that she was at  risk  of  being  forced  into
    marriage, that her reason for not travelling to the United Kingdom with
    her children was not insufficient funds to finance the trip,  that  she
    did  not  suffer  with  medical  conditions  that  rendered  her   more
    vulnerable living in Afghanistan, none of which issues were assisted by
    Mr Hadi's letter.

17. I have rejected the argument that the grounds be amended to  include  a
    challenge to what the  judge  had  to  say  regarding  there  being  no
    circumstances to consider the appellant's case outside the  Immigration
    Rules because that issue was not raised in Counsel's grounds. See  [11]
    above. Nevertheless, even if I had allowed in that  ground,  I  do  not
    accept that it would assist  the  appellant.   The  judge  referred  to
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  640
    (IAC) and found that only if  there  were  arguably  good  grounds  for
    granting leave to remain outside the Rules was it necessary for Article
    8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  were  compelling
    circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the  Rules.   Lord
    Underhill in Singh [2015] EWCA Civ 74 commenting on Izuazu (Article 8 -
    new Rules) [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC) and  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  7200  (Admin)
    commented  that  Article  8  claims  "outside  the  Rules"  were  still
    possible, though the  scope  for  their  operation  was  reduced.   The
    Izuazu/Nagre  approach  was  adopted  in  Gulshan   which   the   judge
    considered.  Taking into account the adverse credibility  findings  she
    made, the judge rejected the appellant's evidence of the  circumstances
    in which she was living in Afghanistan.  In such  circumstances,  I  do
    not accept that there was an arguable case that  there  might  be  good
    grounds for granting leave to remain  outside  the  Rules  such  as  to
    oblige the judge to go on to consider whether for  Article  8  purposes
    there were compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised  under
    the Rules.  Accordingly, I do not accept she was obliged to  carry  out
    an Article 8 Razgar type assessment "outside the Rules" but even if she
    was so obliged, her adverse credibility findings would have led to  the
    same conclusion; the appellant cannot succeed under Article 8.

18. I conclude that the decision does not contain a material error of  law,
    such that it should be set aside.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law  and  shall
stand.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date  24 February 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
