

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                  Appeal
Number: OA/03144/2014

                                                            OA/03137/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at:  Field House                |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On:  6th July 2015                    |                On 20th July 2015    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer, Nairobi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          Master Abdallah Ahmed Ali
                        Master Abdul Kadir Ahmed Ali
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Westmaas, Counsel instructed by City Legal
                       Partnership


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents are both nationals of  Somalia  currently  resident  in
    Ethiopia. They are brothers who are now aged 15 and 14 respectively. On
    the 30th January  2015  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  R  Sullivan)
    allowed their linked appeals against decisions  to  refuse  them  entry
    clearance to the UK with a view to settlement  as  the  children  of  a
    person present and settled in the UK.  The Entry Clearance Officer  now
    has permission  to  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal[1].


 2. The boys had made applications to come to live in  the  UK  with  a  Mr
    Ahmed  Ali  Hassan,  whom  they  claimed  to  be  their   father.   The
    applications were refused on the 4th February 2014  with  reference  to
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules. The ECO considered there to  be
    insufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  the  relationship  was  as
    claimed. Nor was it accepted that their mother had  died  in  2001,  or
    that their  claimed  father  had  had  sole  responsibility  for  their
    upbringing.  In a review dated 22nd April  2014  these  decisions  were
    maintained, and so the matter proceeded to the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. The First-tier Tribunal was satisfied, on the  evidence  before  it[2],
    that the Respondents are the biological sons of Mr  Ahmed  Ali  Hassan.
    There is no challenge to that finding.  It  was  further  accepted  and
    found as fact that their own mother had died in 2001; that  finding  is
    expressly accepted in the grounds of appeal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    had heard and  accepted  evidence  that  Mr  Ahmed  Ali  Hassan  was  a
    polygamist who had been married four times,  with  at  least  three  of
    these marriages subsisting concurrently. The Respondents are  the  sons
    of his first wife, Mrs Nasro Yusuf Mahamud.  When Ahmed Ali Hassan came
    to the UK in 2005 to live with his third wife, he  had  left  his  sons
    with his second wife, Mrs Bisharo Omar Hassan. She has been referred to
    throughout the appeals as their "stepmother". The reason  that  he  now
    seeks to bring them to the UK was because she is ill treating them  and
    will not look after them properly. They are running away and living  on
    the streets.  Having heard all of that evidence  the  Tribunal  allowed
    the appeals with reference to paragraph 297(i)(d) of the Rules:

         "one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom  or  being
         admitted on the same occasion for settlement and the  other  parent
         is dead".

    The determination does not go on to address whether the Respondents met
    the requirements of any alternative provision.

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer now has permission to appeal on the  ground
    that the  Respondents  cannot  meet  the  requirements  of  sub-section
    297(i)(a) because they have  a  'parent'  who  is  alive  and  well  in
    Ethiopia, namely  their  "step-mother"  Mrs  Bisharo  Omar  Hassan.  In
    paragraph 6 of the Rules the term "parent" is defined to include "step-
    parent".


 5. Mr Westmaas defended the decision. He pointed out that  ECO  had  never
    raised the issue about Mrs Bisharo Omar Hassan  being  a  "step-mother"
    and that this was a new point. The "step-mother" defined at paragraph 6
    of the rules as a "parent"  is  operating  in  a  completely  different
    cultural context. Mrs Bisharo Omar Hassan is not a "step-mother" as  we
    would understand it.






    My Findings

 6. The relevant chronology is as follows:


    1996   Sponsor marries wife #1, the mother  of  the  Respondents  Nasro
           Yusuf Mahamud


    1997   Sponsor marries wife #2, Bisharo Omar Hassan


    1999   First Respondent born


    2000   Second Respondent born


    2001   Sponsor marries wife #3
           Wife #1,  mother  of  Respondents,  killed  in  mortar  fire  in
    Mogadishu


    2003    Sponsor marries wife #4


    2004   whole family move to Ethiopia


    2005   Sponsor and wife #3 (who is a British citizen) come to  live  in
    the UK


            Children of wife #1 (the Respondents), wife #2 and wife  #4  all
      remain
           in Ethiopia in the household of wife #2. Sponsor  supports  them
           from the UK.

 7. Paragraph 297 provides that a child can  be  admitted  to  the  UK  for
    settlement in one of the following circumstances:
         (a) both parents are present and settled in the United Kingdom; or
         (b) both parents are being admitted on the same occasion for
         settlement; or
         (c) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and the
         other is being admitted on the same occasion for settlement; or
         (d) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
         being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and the other
         parent is dead; or
         (e) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
         being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has had sole
         responsibility for the child's upbringing; or
         (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in the United
         Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and
         there are serious and compelling family or other considerations
         which make exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable
         arrangements have been made for the child's care;



 8. Paragraph 6 of  the  Immigration  Rules  defines  the  term  parent  to
    include:
          (a)  the stepfather of a child whose father is dead and the
         reference to stepfather includes a relationship arising through
         civil partnership;
         (b)  the stepmother of a child whose mother is dead and the
         reference to stepmother includes a relationship arising through
         civil partnership and;
         (c)  the father as well as the mother of an illegitimate child
         where he is proved to be the father;
         (d)  an adoptive parent, where a child was adopted in accordance
         with a decision taken by the competent administrative authority or
         court in a country whose adoption orders are recognised by the
         United Kingdom or where a child is the subject of a de facto
         adoption in accordance with the requirements of paragraph 309A of
         these Rules (except that an adopted child or a child who is the
         subject of a de facto adoption may not make an application for
         leave to enter or remain in order to accompany, join or remain with
         an adoptive parent under paragraphs 297-303);
         (e) in the case of a child born in the United Kingdom who is not a
         British citizen, a person to whom there has been a genuine transfer
         of parental responsibility on the ground of the original parent(s)'
         inability to care for the child.
 9. In closing submissions Mr Clarke accepted that the Rules had to be read
    in a purposive way and that where possible they should  be  interpreted
    as compliant with Article 8, and indeed s55 of the Borders, Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009: Laurent wa Mundeba (s.55 and para  297(i)(f))
    [2013] UKUT 000888 (IAC).  Nevertheless it remained the ECO's  position
    that Bisharo Omar Hassan was the boys' stepmother as a matter  of  law.
    He submitted that she was validly married to their father under the law
    of Somalia and that the marriage was therefore considered legal in  the
    UK, albeit not one that could be relied upon to gain  entry  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  Furthermore she is actually looking after them.


10. There are three reasons why this argument cannot, in my view succeed.

11. The first is that the ECO has produced no evidence at all to support Mr
    Clarke's bald assertion that the marriage between the Sponsor  and  Mrs
    Bisharo Omar Hassan would be considered  "legally  valid"  in  Somalia.
    Although polygamy has been practised over the years in Somalia  I  have
    been shown no evidence to establish that this second customary marriage
    was contracted in accordance with the civil code of Somalia. In Islamic
    Family Law: A Global Resource Book ed. An-Na'im, Abdullahi A.  (London,
    2002) it states that polygamy is permitted but that  the  husband  must
    seek the written permission of the District Court before  the  marriage
    is contracted:

         "the court's authorization requires ascertainment  of  one  of  the
         following conditions: sterility of the wife of  which  the  husband
         was not aware at the time of  marriage,  attested  by  a  panel  of
         doctors; incurable chronic  or  contagious  illness  of  the  wife,
         certified by a doctor; the wife's sentencing to more than two years
         in prison; the wife's unjustified absence from the matrimonial home
         for more than one year; or the existence of social necessity"

      This short extract serves to illustrate the kind of hurdles that would
      need to be surmounted before the Sponsor's  second,  third  or  indeed
      fourth marriages could be considered valid. In the absence of evidence
      I am not prepared to infer from customary practice that  Bisharo  Omar
      Hassan is, as a matter of law, the Respondents' stepmother.

12. The second difficulty is that the evidence indicated that  Mrs  Bisharo
    Omar Hassan was not in fact looking after the Respondents. That was the
    whole point of them making these applications.   The  grounds  complain
    that  there  was  "no  evidence"  to  support   this   "unsubstantiated
    allegation", but in fact there was. The Judge had heard  live  evidence
    from the sponsor, which he had accepted in its entirety.   The  Sponsor
    expressed fear and concern about the welfare of his sons, stating  that
    he was receiving "continuous" reports from friends and neighbours about
    the problems they were having, including the  denial  of  accommodation
    and food by Mrs Hassan.  This had been  confirmed  in  writing  by  two
    different sets out neighbours of the Respondents in  Ethiopia  who  had
    confirmed their concern that the children were being neglected.


13. The third is  that  the  relationship  between  these  boys  and  their
    father's second wife is not one of "step-parent" as we would understand
    it.   It  is  apparent  from  the  admittedly  non-exhaustive  list  at
    paragraph 6 of the Rules that polygamous relationships  have  not  been
    included. One can imagine the consequences for the Rules if they  were.
    It may be the case that in some families the relationship enjoyed by  a
    child with his father's second, third or fourth wife  in  a  polygamous
    union is akin to that of a parent. That is not however the  case  here.
    If the relationship is not, in  substance,  a  parental  one,  then  it
    cannot properly be relied  upon  to  defeat  an  otherwise  meritorious
    application under the Rules.

14. For those reasons I dismiss this appeal. The decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal does not contain an error of  law.  I  add  for  the  sake  of
    completeness that given the nature of  the  evidence  accepted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal the appeals could  also  have  been  allowed  under
    paragraph 297(i)(f).


      Decisions

15. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an  error
    of law and it is upheld.


16. I was not asked to make a direction for anonymity and on  the  facts  I
    see no reason to make one.







                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               14th July 2015






      Fees


      These appeals have been allowed, but largely on evidence that was not
      available to the ECO at the date of decision. The ECO did not have the
      benefit of the DNA evidence or the Sponsor' live testimony. For that
      reasons I make no fee award.







                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                               14th July 2015


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 19th March 2015 by First-tier Tribunal
PJM Hollingworth
[2] This included a DNA report by Cellmark Diagnostics

