

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number OA/03120/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Sheldon
                      Determination Promulgated
On 9th September 2014                                  On 18th September
2014
Prepared 16th September 2014



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                   T C A C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr N Nwaiwu (Legal representative,
For the Respondent: Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against the determination of
   First-tier Tribunal Judge Snape promulgated on the 27th of May 2014 in
   which the Appellant's appeal had been allowed. The grounds of appeal are
   to the effect that the Judge relied on post-decision evidence in reaching
   the decision and that the position of the Appellant's mother was such
   that she did not meet the requirements of the rules, the article 8
   findings were vitiated by the errors.

2. The Appellant's case had to be considered as it stood at the date of the
   decision in respect of the Immigration Rules and article 8. Post-
   decision, if admitted, must relate to the situation "appertaining at the
   date of the decision", section 85A(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and
   Asylum Act 2002.

3. The Judge correctly directed herself on legal issues in paragraph 30 of
   the determination including the relevance of the date of the decision.
   However, in paragraph 33 the Judge referred to the Appellant's mother
   having been granted leave to remain by the date of the hearing and at
   paragraph 35 referred to the Appellant's sister having been granted ILR
   on the 18th of December 2012, again post-decision.

4. In paragraph 37 the Judge noted that at the date of the decision the
   Appellant's mother's application was undecided and that she was
   considering whether there were serious and compelling circumstances that
   would make his exclusion from the UK undesirable.

5. Paragraph 38 related to his step-father being granted asylum in 2002.
   Paragraph 39 related to the Appellant's mother appeal being allowed, this
   was clearly post decision. Paragraph 40 concerned the Appellant who
   "remains in Zimbabwe" and was also post decision. Paragraph 41 the
   Appellant's circumstances "now" were considered. Paragraph 42 set out the
   conclusion that "taking all those circumstances into consideration" the
   Judge was satisfied that there were serious and compelling family
   circumstances that made his exclusion undesirable.

6. That finding was followed by paragraphs 43 and 44. Paragraph 43 related
   to the duty that applied under section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and
   Immigration Act 1955 and in paragraph 44 she referred to an absence of
   evidence to show that the ECO had taken account of his sister's impending
   admission to the UK. The latter again being post decision. Article 8 was
   considered in paragraphs 47 and 48 where it was found that the decision
   was disproportionate as evidence did not show he would be a burden to the
   public purse if admitted.

7. If the post decision findings are removed the only matters that the
   Judge referred to were the section 55 consideration and the fact that the
   Appellant's step-father had been granted refugee status in the UK in
   2002, some 12 years ago.

8. Given that the bulk of the Judge's findings were on matters that were
   post-decision and that the matters that appertained at the date of the
   decision were so limited I find that the determination is fundamentally
   flawed by the errors set out. So far as article 8 is concerned the
   findings are flawed as it was based on the "reasons outlined above",
   article 8 also has to be assessed at the date of the decision. The
   decision cannot stand and has to be set aside. At the hearing I indicated
   that that would be the course of action undertaken and submissions were
   received from the representatives on what the final decision should be.

9. At the date of the decision under appeal, the 27th of November 2012, the
   Appellant's mother had no leave to remain in the UK and had no
   expectation of being permitted to remain here, the fact that she was
   later granted leave is not relevant. There is nothing in the evidence to
   suggest that the Appellant was in danger or that there was a risk of
   abuse or anything of that nature. At the time of the decision the
   Appellant had relatives in South Africa and in Zimbabwe and was receiving
   education.

10. Having regard to the terms of paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules
   the Appellant would face a number of problems. Even if his step-father
   has supported him for years his step-father is not to be regarded as a
   parent unless the child's natural father is dead, Immigration Rules
   paragraph 6. I am not aware of any evidence to that effect. The
   Appellant's mother's circumstances did not bring her within the ambit of
   the rule either.

11. There is no evidence that I can find to show that the Appellant's
   circumstances amounted, at the date of the decision, to being such that
   there were serious and compelling family or other circumstances that
   would make his exclusion undesirable. At the time of the decision the
   Appellant was being cared for and receiving education. His circumstances
   might have been better but the evidence did not show that they could be
   regarded as being serious and compelling and at the date of the decision
   neither his mother or sister had leave to enter or remain in the UK.

12. I find that the Appellant has not discharged the burden of proof to
   show that he meets the requirements of the Immigration Rules. He is not
   assisted by the provisions of section 55 of the 2009 Act, there is no
   evidence to show that at the date of the decision there were protection
   or safeguarding issues in relation to him. With regard to article 8 of
   the ECHR the absence of evidence to show that there were serious or
   compelling circumstances justifying his admission effectively answer the
   questions that have to be addressed and I find that the decision is
   proportionate.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal dismissing the appeal of T C A C.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 17th September 2014


