
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03969/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8th February 2016                     |On 4th April 2016                   |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                              MRS KULDEEP KAUR
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N S Ahluwalia instructed by Hounslow Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Ms S Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless I  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal, that is Mrs Kuldeep  Kaur  as
    the appellant and the  Secretary  of  State  as  the  respondent.   The
    respondent applies with permission to appeal against  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 4th September 2015 allowing  the
    appellant's appeal against the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision  to
    refuse leave to enter as an adult dependent relative.

 2. The grounds requesting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal noted
    that the judge had allowed the appellant's appeal  under  paragraph  E-
    ECDR of Appendix FM but asserted the judge had failed to give  adequate
    reasons,  failed to apply the correct standard and burden of proof  and
    failed to make a finding on a material fact.

 3. The judge had failed to record and failed to make any findings  on  the
    submissions raised by the respondent's representative  at  the  hearing
    and the application relied on  the  case  of  Budhathoki  (reasons  for
    decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) which stated:

    "it is, however, necessary for  judges  to  identify  and  resolve  key
    conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and  brief  terms  their
    reasons, so that the parties can understand why they have won or lost".



 4. The respondent submitted that as a party to  the  proceedings  she  was
    entitled to know why the submissions were not considered.  There was no
    record of any submissions made and indeed from an  initial  reading  of
    the determination there was no indication the respondent even  attended
    the appeal and therefore indicated that the judge had materially  erred
    in law.

 5.  The  respondent's  representative  submitted  that  the  sponsor   had
    confirmed  in  his  evidence  there  were  potential  care   facilities
    available to the appellant if she relocated to Delhi but the judge  had
    made  no  findings  on  this  submission  and  not  even  recorded  the
    submission and had failed to  consider  the  obvious  point  that  poor
    service from one single care agency in India did not in  any  way  meet
    the requirement for there to be no person in India who could reasonably
    provide the care.

 6. It was further submitted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  adequately
    address and consider the required standard and burden  of  proof.   The
    judge appeared to accept without supporting evidence the claim that  in
    Sikh culture daughters in effect abandon all responsibility  for  their
    parents.  The respondent submits this  claim  was  unsupported  by  any
    objective evidence, which it was submitted, would be  easily  available
    if indeed this was a cultural norm accepted by the Sikh community.   On
    the balance of probabilities the absence of  any  evidence  to  support
    such a claim did not discharge the burden of proof.

 7. There was before me indeed a minute from  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, Ms Stacey-Ann Willoughby relating to submissions that had been
    made, which included that it should be open to the appellant to move to
    Delhi where the  sponsor  had  also  advised  that  there  were  agency
    services that provided medical treatment.   Further  it  was  submitted
    that it could not be found that the care  was  not  affordable  as  the
    sponsor was currently financially supporting the appellant.

 8. The decision had not engaged with the points  made  by  the  presenting
    officer in the first tier tribunal and which included why the appellant
    could not move to Delhi or why the daughter could not move to where the
    mother was to provide care.  From the oral evidence the sponsor  stated
    that care was available in Delhi but stated it was too far away to  get
    it.  It was submitted that the appellant could move  to  Delhi  to  get
    care.   It  was  stated  by  the  sponsors  that  it   was   culturally
    unacceptable for care to be undertaken by the daughter  and  should  be
    undertaken by the elder son.  It was quoted that the doctor had  stated
    that the appellant needed care of the family and if that was the  case,
    the appellant's sponsor could relocate to India.

 9. At this point I was reminded by Mr Ahluwalia that the  claim  was  made
    under the  Immigration  Rules  and  not  Article  8  and  there  is  no
    requirement that the sponsor should move to India.

10. That said, the submissions for the respondent include that  it  is  the
    appellant who is required to show that there is no  available  care  in
    India and that there appeared to be an inconsistency in that  presently
    the appellant was indeed securing agency care and that it could not  be
    shown that there is no  available  care  in  India  for  the  appellant
    because of some difficulties in the provision of that care.  Further it
    was submitted that the appellant had not provided evidence of  what  24
    hour care would be provided and could not say it was not affordable.

11. Mr Ahluwalia contested that there was reference to the Entry  Clearance
    Officer's position as this was set out at paragraph 31.   He  submitted
    that the key conflicts of evidence had been explained,  and  the  judge
    had set it out in  a  properly  structured  manner  and  rehearsed  the
    evidence and set out  the  relevant  Immigration  Rule.   Mr  Ahluwalia
    submitted that the judge applied  the  civil  standard  and  burden  of
    proof, analysed the form  of  Rules  at  paragraph  22  and  the  entry
    clearance guidance at paragraph 31 and had note of the medical  reports
    regarding  the  physical  difficulties.   There  was  no  challenge  in
    relation to the issue at paragraph 26.  Crucially at Paragraph  30  the
    judge had set out the oral evidence and indeed there was much  evidence
    regarding cost during the case before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    medical evidence accepted that the appellant  required  full-time  care
    and the sponsor was just able to afford the lower care of two hours per
    day.  The �300 he sent each month only covered the part-time nurse.

12. Mr Ahluwalia advanced that  there  was  no  evidence  provided  by  the
    Secretary of State to the effect that  the  appellant's  sponsor  could
    afford it.  Even absent the finding that the appellant should go  to  a
    different agency he could still not meet the cost of  24 hour care.  In
    relation to cultural factors there was evidence from the family  member
    that this was the cultural reality  and  for  this  daughter  and  this
    family living in the circumstances that she did it was clear  that  she
    would not be able to be responsible for the appellant.  The  judge  had
    set out the reasoning at paragraph 32.

13. I find that there is an error of law in  that  it  is  clear  that  the
    submissions of the Presenting Officer had  not  been  adequately  dealt
    with or at least the findings in relation thereto have not  been  made.
    The submissions recorded from the Home Office Presenting Officer in the
    record of proceedings run to two and half pages of hand written  script
    and appear to reflect the points made in the application for permission
    to appeal.   These include whether the appellant could  move  to  Delhi
    where care is available, the fact that at  present  the  appellant  was
    receiving care, the lack of evidence in relation  to  the  availability
    and cost of care and the lack of affordability.

14. At paragraph 30 the judge does state that the staff  provider  for  the
    appellant was often unreliable but the  submission  made  by  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer was that the mother could move to Delhi to be
    nearer the sister, and I note  from  the  witness  statement  that  the
    appellant's daughter in Delhi does not say that she does  not  see  her
    mother at all but rather that it is a long way away.  In particular the
    judge seems to rest the decision on the "unreliability of the  carers".
     The  submission  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  that  the
    appellant could move to Delhi was one which was  a  fact  which  should
    have been taken into account by the judge even if only  to  reject  it.
    As stated, there was no objective  evidence  to  the  effect  that  the
    cultural factors relating to the female family members in India and  it
    should be noted  that  the  guidance  refers  to  whether  someone  can
    "reasonably provide a required level of care".  This applies  to  "home
    help, housekeeper, nurse, carer or care or nursing home".

15. Even though the guidance refers to relevant cultural factors such as in
    countries where women are unlikely to be able to provide support, there
    appeared to be no evidence provided in relation to this.

16. With regard to  the  burden  and  standard  of  proof  it  is  not  the
    responsibility of the Entry Clearance Officer to  provide  evidence  of
    the full-time care affordable in Delhi.

17. It was put clearly in the frame by the Entry Clearance Officer that  he
    was not satisfied the appellant was unable to obtain the required level
    of care in India and that any care,  if  required,  could  be  provided
    through financial help from the sponsor.  I find that the judge did not
    make the appropriate and relevant findings in relation to  the  issues,
    particularly in the context of the  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer's
    submissions which the judge recorded.

18. I therefore find that the judge made and error of law which is material
    and I set aside and re-make the decision.

19. The relevant Immigration Rules are found at EC-DR 1.1(d) and refer to

         E-ECDR 2.4

         The applicant or, if  the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
             sponsor's partner or grandparents,  the  applicant's  partner,
             must as a result of age illness or  disability  require  long-
             term personal care to perform everyday tasks

         E-ECDR.2.5

         The applicant, or if  the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
         sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must be
         unable, even with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,
         to obtain the required level of care in the country were  they  are
         living, because -

         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
             can reasonably provide it; or

         (b)  it is not affordable."

20. The relevant date for my decision is the date of the  decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer  which  is  20th  January  2014.  The  detailed
    medical evidence from the Apollo Clinic dated 5th March 2015  postdates
    that decision by over a year.  The issue is the personal care  that  is
    needed and would be available to the appellant as at the  date  of  the
    decision. The appellant stated that she had a  double  hip  replacement
    and walked with a zimmer frame.  From the medical evidence supplied  it
    would appear that the replacement took place in 2013.   A  report  from
    Escorts Hospital dated 28th January 2014 stated that the appellant  had
    been operated on twice for fracture hips due to severe osteoporosis and
    that

    'patient is now dependent on external support for day to day activates.
     She also needs moral support to keep her going as she can not  do  her
    dally chores on her own.  She will need day to day active care in  view
    of her age and osteoporosis to rehabilitate her'.

21. This referred to  rehabilitation  but  not  long  term  personal  care.
    Further there was no reason given as to why this  personal  care  could
    not be given by a nursing carer or home help at her home.   The sponsor
    gave evidence that she needed assistance with cooking cleaning, bathing
    shopping and washing.  The sponsor pays for a part time maid /nurse who
    attends to the appellant a couple of hours a day to do such  tasks  but
    that once the maid goes the appellant is on her own for the rest of the
    day and the entire night. The helper, the  sponsor  asserted,  was  not
    always reliable and sometimes did  not  turn  up  or  come  later  than
    agreed.  On those occasions the appellant has to turn  to  one  or  two
    neighbours who are able to offer  limited  assistance.  This  does  not
    suggest that the care was  fundamentally  unsuitable  or  unreasonable.
    Further, there was no firm evidence that the  appellant  had  cognitive
    needs or required 24 hours or night  care.   Nor  was  there  any  firm
    financial assessment of  that  cost  and  thus  any  detailed  or  firm
    assessment of the sponsor's financial ability (albeit  bank  statements
    were produced) to meet this save for his assertions that he  would  not
    be able to meet 24 hour care.

22. I find that the evidence for the need  for  care  when  viewed  in  the
    context of the  applicant's  own  statements  is  limited  indeed.   At
    paragraph 1.16 of the application when asked "could your UK sponsor  or
    another close relative/person pay for your  care  arrangements  in  the
    country where you are living?", the appellant replied 'yes'.  She added
    "my son can pay but to get quality and long-term care is  not  possible
    as I am getting very old and need proper  care  and  emotional  support
    which is only possible by staying with family".

23. There was no evidence of the cost of full-time care as at the  date  of
    decision.  With reference to that date,  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager
    review stated

         "No evidence has been submitted now to show that  she  does  indeed
         require constant care or to show why she  cannot  secure  full-time
         domestic help.  It would seem that the appellant would  prefer  not
         to have live-in care .... the  Rules  are  not  in  place  to  suit
         individual people's individual preference".

24. There was a suggestion that the daughter  in  Delhi  could  not  assist
    because of cultural reasons.  No firm objective evidence  to  that  end
    was submitted and additionally this is not what the  appellant  records
    in her application form because at paragraph 1.14 the appellant  states
    "daughter in India cannot provide care because she is married and  busy
    with her own family and cannot come and stay with me".   There  was  no
    mention of cultural factors at that point.  The appellant does see  her
    daughter as confirmed in her application albeit on  an  irregular  time
    scale as she lived far away.  A witness statement of the daughter dates
    from March 2015, which is after the refusal, and this asserts that  'as
    per our culture mothers don't live with daughters after the  marriage'.
    This is merely a general assertion and even if that were  accepted,  it
    is not a requirement that she should live with the daughter merely that
    she might wish to live closer to supervision.  There  was  no  evidence
    submitted as to why the appellant herself could not move to  Delhi  and
    indeed it was suggested that she was  going  to  be  relocated  to  the
    United Kingdom, much further than Delhi, and  all  the  disruption  and
    costs that that entailed.

25. The key issue in this is that  there  was  no  medical  or  other  firm
    evidence as at the date of decision that  the  appellant  actually  did
    require 24 hour care or indeed, or the  level  of  care  required,  was
    unsuitable and could not be provided  for  financially.   The  guidance
    cited  in  relation  to  Family  Members  Under  Appendix  FM  of   the
    Immigration  Rules  appendix  FM  Section  FM  6.0-   Adult   Dependent
    Relatives' identifies that  care  does  not  need  to  come  only  from
    relatives and refers rather at 2.2.3 to 'no person in the  country  who
    can reasonably provide care'.  The guidance  continues  that  this  may
    derive from a home  help  or  carer.    When  addressing  the  cultural
    factors, even if the appellant has no close family members in India who
    are able to assist  in  providing  the  care  she  needs,  it  was  not
    demonstrated that care could not reasonably be  provided  by  the  home
    help or carer.

26. I find that on remaking the decision the appellant  has  not  fulfilled
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules.  I  am  not  persuaded  that
    there are further relevant matters to  be  considered  in  relation  to
    Article 8 which have not already been addressed under the Rules.   Even
    if that were  incorrect  and  family  life  were  engaged,  applying  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27, the decision was in accordance with the
    law and necessary for the protection of rights and freedoms  of  others
    through the maintenance of immigration control. The starting point must
    be the Immigration Rules which sets out the position of  the  Secretary
    of State.  As to proportionality the appellant has a daughter in  India
    and neighbours to whom she can  turn,  home  help,  and  the  financial
    assistance of the sponsor in this country which could continue.  I have
    considered the interests of the family in the  United  Kingdom,  Beoku-
    Betts (FC) (Appellant) v SSHD [2008] UKHL  39,  and  I  note  that  the
    sponsor may have difficulty in visiting but as at the date of  decision
    is able to keep in contact via modern methods and visits are  possible.
    I must also engage Section 117B  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and there was no indication that this  appellant  could
    speak English and this is a factor  which  I  take  into  account  when
    balancing the rights of the individual  against  the  public  interest.
    Although there was an indication that  private  health  care  could  be
    enlisted when the appellant  was  in  the  United  Kingdom,  I  am  not
    persuaded that she would not be a burden on the NHS system when located
    n the United Kingdom.  At the date of decision I conclude that it would
    be reasonable to  expect  the  appellant  and  sponsor  and  family  to
    continue conduct family life as has been done hitherto.  That said,  if
    the medical conditions are now such  that  they  meet  the  Immigration
    Rules it is open to the appellant to make a fresh application.

27. Following Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11, and taking full account  of  all
    considerations, I did not consider that any family or private  life  of
    the claimant was prejudiced in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount
    to a breach of the fundamental right protected by Article 8.

28. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) and remake the decision  under  section
    12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007 and dismiss the appeal.

Order

I dismiss the appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  Human  Rights
grounds.



No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date 22nd March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 22nd March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
