
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03080/2012
     OA/03081/2012
     OA/03077/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 13th June 2013                               |On 18 June 2013            |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN
                     dEPUTY Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge

                                   Between

                                  Juma Sowe
                                  Awa Sarr
                                brian Bojang
                         (Anonymity Order Not Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - accra

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant :        Mr R Ahmed (instructed by Samuel & Co,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent :   Mr I Jarvis (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellants  with
    permission granted by an  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  on  16th  April  2013
    against the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Mathews)
    promulgated on 18th February 2013.

 2. The Appellants are nationals of Gambia and are the daughters and son of
    their UK Sponsor. They were born in 1995, 1998  and  2006  respectively
    and they had applied for entry clearance to settle with their mother in
    the UK. The applications were refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on
    12th January 2012 and it was their appeal against  that  decision  that
    was heard by Judge Mathews on  25th  January  2013.  He  dismissed  the
    appeal under the Immigration Rules  and on human rights grounds finding
    that  the  Sponsor  had  not  shown  that  she   had   exercised   sole
    responsibility for the Appellants and finding  also  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that there was adequate accommodation for them in the UK.

 3. Mr Ahmed, on behalf of the Appellants, relied upon the grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal. He referred us to  paragraph  7  of  the  grounds
    which referred to paragraph 17 of the determination.  At  paragraph  17
    the Judge accepted the Sponsor's evidence that  she  communicated  with
    the children using phone cards and Skype and that she visited them from
    5th January until 6th February 2012. He accepted this on the  basis  of
    her oral evidence and having had sight of her passport.

 4. Mr Ahmed referred us to paragraph 10 of the grounds which  referred  to
    paragraph 21 of the determination.  At paragraph 21 the Judge  accepted
    that the Sponsor had sent funds to her children in Gambia.

 5. Mr Ahmed pointed out that this is not a case where the Sponsor had left
    her children in her home country for a long time. She had only come  to
    the UK in 2009.

 6. Relying on paragraph 12 of his grounds Mr Ahmed said that  it  was  not
    clear on what basis the Judge had found that the  maternal  grandmother
    had had substantial responsibility for the  children's  upbringing  and
    why mum had not had sole responsibility. He referred to paragraph 23 of
    the determination where the Judge made that finding and submitted  that
    it was inadequately reasoned and not  based  upon  the  evidence.   The
    Judge, he argued, had not followed the guidance of the  Tribunal  given
    in TD (paragraph 297 (i) (e): "responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT  000
    49.

 7. He referred us to the fact that grandmother  has  health  problems  and
    intends to travel to the USA and that there  was  a  letter  confirming
    that in the bundle together also with a letter from the children's aunt
    confirming that she was to resume education and would be unable to look
    after the children.

 8. The second ground relied upon by Mr Ahmed was the  Judge's  finding  in
    relation to the adequacy of accommodation. We  indicated  to  Mr  Ahmed
    that we agreed with him that the Judge had erred in his approach to the
    accommodation. The Sponsor's oral evidence was  that  she  lived  in  a
    three bedroom property. There was a tenancy  agreement  confirming  the
    three-bedroom property. The Judge's requirement that there should be  a
    property report was an error.

 9. Mr Ahmed then submitted that the determination was also flawed  in  the
    way  in  which  the  Judge  dealt  with  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.  He  referred  us  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal case of Mundeba (s. 55 and para 297 (i) (f)) [2013] UKUT 00088
    (IAC). He referred to the head note and in particular  paragraph  5  of
    the head note which states that as a starting point the best  interests
    of a child are usually best served by being with both or at  least  one
    of their parents. Continuity of residence is another  factor;  changing
    the place of residence where a child has grown up for a number of years
    when socially aware is important.

10. He submitted that although the Judge made reference in paragraph 18  of
    the determination to section 55 and the best interests of the child  he
    did not then make proper findings or carry out an analysis of the  best
    interests of children in this case. He submitted also that the  Article
    8 assessment was insufficient and that if the Judge had carried  out  a
    proper balancing exercise he could not have  found  there  were  enough
    reasons to keep these children in Gambia and away from their mother.

11. On behalf of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  Mr  Jarvis  defended  the
    determination. He referred us to the Court of Appeal case of  Buydov  v
    Entry Clearance Officer, Moscow [2012] EWCA Civ 1739 and in  particular
    paragraphs 14 to 16 of that judgement.  He  referred  to  paragraph  15
    where the Court of Appeal quoted another case  which  stated  that  one
    must look at what has actually been done in  relation  to  the  child's
    upbringing, by whom and whether that is being done under the  direction
    of the parents settled here.  At  paragraph  16  the  Court  of  Appeal
    referred to another case where it had been said that the question was a
    question of fact and each case  would  depend  on  its  own  particular
    facts. The general guidance is to look at whether what has been done in
    relation to the upbringing has been done under  the  direction  of  the
    sponsoring settled parent.

12. He submitted that the positive findings relied upon by  Mr  Ahmed  were
    not as positive as had been suggested. In  particular  he  referred  to
    paragraph 21 in relation to funds sent by  the  Sponsor   pointing  out
    that what the Judge  actually said was:-

         "I am also prepared to accept that the Sponsor  has  sent  whatever
         funds she has been able to her children since arriving in  the  UK,
         but I can make no findings as to actual amount since  there  is  no
         documentary evidence."

13. With regard to the grandmother's physical problems he referred  to  the
    fact that the Judge had in fact rejected the claim that  she  had  been
    unable to cope and at paragraph 20 had said:-

         "I note too that I have a letter from  the  children's  grandmother
         Mrs Jallow. It was received in December 2012. It sets out that  Mrs
         Jallow wishes to travel to the United States in order to  help  one
         of her other children with childcare. She states that she  will  be
         in the USA for six months. I am willing to find Mrs Jallow has some
         health problems, but that letter persuades me that she  still  able
         and indeed willing to  undertake  childcare  responsibilities,  her
         health is not in my judgement a bar to such matters."

14. He suggested that the Judge, on the evidence before him was entitled to
    reach the conclusion that grandmother  had  substantial  responsibility
    for the children's upbringing.  My Jarvis referred to  other  documents
    in the bundle which supported that finding that were also  referred  to
    by the Judge.

15. He referred us to  a  document  headed  "Appeal  against  Decision;"  a
    document prepared by the Sponsor. She said in that document:-

         "I also  do  call  to  take  part  in  decisions  concerning  their
         education,  health,  emotional  well-being   and   very   important
         decisions regarding their future in life."

    That, he submitted indicates a shared responsibility rather  than  sole
    responsibility. He submitted that the determination, when read  in  its
    entirety showed that the findings  made  by  the  Judge  were  properly
    reasoned and supported by the evidence before him.

16. As regards the best interests of the children, Mr  Jarvis  referred  to
    paragraph 18 of the determination where the Judge  indicated  that   in
    his considerations he had at the forefront of  his  mind  the  need  to
    consider the best interests of the children at all times  and  that  he
    was under a duty to address such interests. Again at paragraph  25  the
    Judge said:-

         "The fact that the children have relatives in the Gambia  who  have
         acted as responsible carers and whose health and circumstances have
         allowed  them  to  be  carers,  prevents  me   finding   that   the
         compassionate circumstances are such that their entry to the UK  is
         required. Indeed the  proposed  move  would  interfere  with  their
         settled home life and education, a matter that  weighs  heavily  in
         considering their best interests."

17. Mr Jarvis referred to paragraph 30 of the determination  in  which  the
    Judge said that the children were settled and well  cared  for  in  the
    Gambia and do not demonstrate compassionately compelling  circumstances
    beyond the fact that their mother has chosen to move to the UK.

18. In response Mr Ahmed suggested  that  the  sentence  from  the  "Appeal
    against Decision" referred to by  Mr  Jarvis  in  fact  indicated  that
    mother had had sole responsibility. He argued that the  Sponsor's  case
    was that she was the person who  made  decisions  in  relation  to  the
    children and that was what the letter said. He  reiterated  again  that
    mother had only left the children in Gambia for a short period of time.

19. He referred to paragraph 15 of Buydov relied  upon  by  Mr  Jarvis  and
    indicated there was nothing in the determination to indicate  that  the
    Judge had considered and made specific findings  in  relation  to  sole
    responsibility in this case.

Findings

20. We find that the Judge did make an error of law in his treatment of the
    question of accommodation.

21. However, we do not find that the Judge erred in any other respects  and
    thus the error in relation to accommodation is not material  such  that
    the determination should be set aside. The evidence in this  case,  out
    of the Sponsor's own mouth, in the statement prepared by  her  confirms
    that she was exercising joint responsibility with her mother.

22. The other evidence also supports the finding that grandmother had  been
    exercising responsibility. The statements  from  both  grandmother  and
    grandfather  make  it  quite  clear  that  they  had  guardianship  and
    responsibility for the children since their mother left the  Gambia  in
    2009. In her statement mother refers to the fact that she  was  brought
    up by her grandparents as is the custom in Africa. It seems to us  that
    what happened in this  case  is  that  mother  did  leave  the  Gambia,
    transferring responsibility for the children to her parents. She  would
    now like to reclaim that responsibility and have the children with  her
    in the UK. However, the evidence does not support the argument that  in
    the intervening period she has had sole responsibility for their  care.
    On the basis of the evidence  before  him  the  Judge's  findings  were
    entirely reasonable, properly reasoned and open to him on the evidence.

23. We are not impressed either by the argument  that  the  Judge  did  not
    properly deal with section 55 or article 8. The judge clearly  had  the
    best interests of the children in his mind and he referred to  it  more
    than once in the determination. The fact that they are well  cared  for
    and have spent their  entire  lives  in  the  Gambia,  that  they  have
    relatives there and are settled there all supported  his  finding  that
    the refusal to grant entry clearance  was not a disproportionate breach
    of their right to family life nor was it a decision contrary  to  their
    best interests.

24. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date 14th June 2013


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
