
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03436/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 September 2015                 |On 24 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                Khadija Adam
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Zamba-Jinadu, instructed by UK Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Procedural Background

    1. This is re-made appeal following the  identification  of  a  material
       error of law in the determination of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
       Lobo, promulgated on 23rd December 2014,  in  which  he  allowed  the
       Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  refusal   of   entry
       clearance as the spouse of a refugee. The  single  issue  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal, as it is before me, is whether the Appellant was
       married to the sponsor and in a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
       with him before he left Eritrea and successfully sought asylum in the
       United Kingdom. The First-tier Tribunal's decision was set aside  for
       want of sufficient reasoning.  The  Judge  failed  to  give  adequate
       reasons  in  support  of  his  factual  findings  and  there  was  no
       explanation as  to  why  the  Judge  accepted  the  evidence  of  the
       witnesses. A copy of the 'error of law' decision is annexed  to  this
       decision.

Appellant's background

    2. The appellant was born on 17th January 1985  and  is  a  national  of
       Eritrea. She applied to enter the United Kingdom under paragraph 352A
       of the Immigration Rules.  This rule establishes the requirements for
       entry clearance for somebody who is a spouse of a  person  recognised
       as a refugee.

    3. In a decision dated  31  January  2014  the  Respondent  refused  the
       application. The Respondent  noted  the  Appellant's  claim  to  have
       married her sponsor on 1st July 2003 in Eritrea, and that a  marriage
       certificate had been produced in support. The Respondent was  however
       of the view that this was a very poor quality document  and  was  not
       verifiable. The Respondent noted the absence of any other evidence of
       the marriage, or of the time  that  the  Appellant  and  her  sponsor
       claimed they had lived together. There was, for example,  no  witness
       statement relating to the attendance  of  anyone  who  witnessed  the
       wedding, and no photographs of the wedding.  There  was  said  to  be
       insufficient  evidence  to  show  a  pre-flight   relationship.   The
       Respondent did acknowledge that someone with the Appellant's name was
       identified as the sponsor's spouse in his  asylum  interview  shortly
       after his arrival in the United Kingdom, but the Respondent  believed
       this statement could not be considered in  isolation  and  maintained
       that it could simply have been a statement of future  intent  on  the
       part of the sponsor.

    4. There was additionally said to be an absence of any other evidence of
       contact or intervening devotion since the  sponsor  left  Eritrea  in
       2011. Given these factors the Respondent was not satisfied  that  the
       relationship was genuine or  subsisting  or  that  the  marriage  had
       occurred at a time before the sponsor arrived in the United Kingdom.

Documentation provided

    5. The Respondent's bundle contained, inter alia,

        i) the Notice of Decision and the Entry Clearance Manager's  Review
           (ECM);

       ii) copies of a covering letter accompanying the application and the
           entry clearance application completed by or  on  behalf  of  the
           Appellant;

      iii) copies of  the  sponsor's  (Mohamed  Ahmed  Mohamed  Nor  Farag)
           screening and asylum interviews;

       iv) the Notice of Appeal and the Grounds of Appeal.

    6. The Appellant relied on the same bundle of documents that was  before
       the First-tier Tribunal. This included, inter alia,

        i) statements from the sponsor, his  brother  (Hussien  Mohammednur
           Farag) and Suleman Ali Idris;

       ii) a copy of the marriage certificate purporting to relate  to  the
           Appellant and the sponsor, and a certified translation;

      iii) three post-decision money remittal slips relating to funds  sent
           by the sponsor to the Appellant;

       iv) copies of international telephone cards;

        v) a skeleton argument;

       vi) background material relating  to  the  position  of  imagery  of
           individuals in Islam.

    7. To the extent that I am entitled to do so under section  85A  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 I have taken account  of
       these documents so far as  they  relate  to  the  factual  matrix  in
       existence at the date of the Respondent's decision.

The hearing

    8. I maintained a detailed record of the proceedings. I have taken  full
       account of the evidence before me, both  documentary  and  oral.  The
       following is a summary of the evidence given and submissions made  at
       the hearing. The sponsor, his brother and Mr  Idris  all  gave  their
       evidence via their Tigre interpreter.

    9. The sponsor adopted his statement  of  31  October  2014.  In  it  he
       explained why he left Eritrea and why he fear he would be  persecuted
       if returned. He indicated that, in his screening interview,  he  gave
       his wife's name and the date of their marriage (01 July 2003). He had
       been married to his wife for almost  11  years.  In  order  to  avoid
       regime security checks on their correspondence the Appellant moved to
       Sudan. He disputed the allegation in the Notice of Decision that  his
       reference to being married could have  merely  been  a  statement  of
       'future intent'. The sponsor referred to further  evidence  from  the
       Eritrea Sharia High Court relating to the marriage  certificate,  and
       the statement from his brother, who was a recognised refugee and who,
       it was claimed, had attended the wedding. He  also  referred  to  the
       phone cards and money remittance slips as  evidence  of  his  contact
       with the Appellant.

   10. The sponsor adopted his statement. There was no examination-in-chief.
       In cross-examination the sponsor was asked about  how  often  he  was
       allowed to return home from his army duties at the border in Eritrea.
       He said he was allowed to return every one to two years, for  between
       5 and 15 days at a time. When he got married he had been  allowed  to
       return for around 30 days. He was therefore only able to see his wife
       every one to two years. He could not recall exactly how many times he
       was able to see the Appellant but it was between 4 and 6 times before
       he finally fled Eritrea. While he  was  in  the  army  he  maintained
       contact with his wife by giving letters to individuals who were going
       on leave who would then hand the letters to his family. There were no
       celebrations as such when he returned on leave but  the  family  were
       very happy. Once he fled Eritrea in 2011 the sponsor  was  scared  to
       contact his wife or family directly so he contacted her  through  his
       sisters who were in Sudan. He was scared  to  contact  his  wife  and
       family directly because the Eritrean authorities were  arresting  the
       parents and wives of individuals who left the country illegally.  His
       sisters physically travelled from Sudan into Eritrea  to  convey  any
       message.

   11. In response to questions from me the  sponsor  explained  that  there
       were no photographs of the wedding because of his father's  religious
       wishes. His father believed it was not right to take  photographs  or
       pictures of people in  Islam.  In  re-cross-examination  the  sponsor
       explained that, according to his father's wishes, there could  be  no
       pictures at all, not just of the wedding.

   12. The sponsor's brother adopted his statement dated 31 October 2014. In
       it he confirmed that he arrived in the United Kingdom in  April  2010
       and claimed asylum. His asylum claim was accepted on 17 May 2010  and
       he was granted leave to remain for 5 years. He confirmed that, at the
       date of the marriage (01 July 2003), he was on  leave  from  National
       Military Service. This leave was  secured  taking  into  account  the
       sponsor's marriage. Culturally, the brother  took  responsibility  in
       facilitating and organising the marriage ceremony with other  fellow,
       elderly religious Eritreans, in accordance with local  and  religious
       customs. He was one of those who attended the marriage ceremony.

   13. There was no examination-in-chief. In cross-examination  the  brother
       claimed he obtained leave for between 10 and 12 days at the  time  of
       the wedding. As the sponsor's brother  he  had  responsibilities  for
       organising the wedding. As per custom the sponsor would  sit  in  his
       place and the brother would act as facilitator  by  welcoming  guests
       and providing food and drinks. The religious person was the  one  who
       organised the actual marriage certificate. When asked why there  were
       no photographs of the wedding the brother explained that their father
       was very strict in religious matters and this was a decision taken by
       him. They all lived as a family under their father's authority and he
       never allowed photographs to be taken. The brother confirmed  he  was
       married and that his wife recently joined him in the United Kingdom.

   14. Suleman Ali Idris adopted his statement. In it he confirmed  that  he
       was an Eritrea national who arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  July
       2014 and claimed asylum. He was granted asylum in  October  2014  and
       had limited leave to remain until 2019. He had been  invited  to  and
       attended the Appellant's marriage ceremony. The  sponsor  had  always
       been a friend and neighbour and it was customary for Mr Idris  to  be
       part of the ceremony. The ceremony was a cultural and  religious  one
       and everyone was happy to be part of it.

   15. There was no  examination-in-chief.  In  cross-examination  Mr  Idris
       confirmed that he was granted 15 days leave from the army  to  attend
       the ceremony. He and the  sponsor  and  the  sponsor's  brother  were
       neighbours and had grown up together. He was  married  and  his  wife
       currently resided in Eritrea.

   16. In submissions Mr Walker recalled the basis of the  original  refusal
       of entry clearance. He noted that we now had two  witness  statements
       supporting to claimed marriage. He  additionally,  and  very  fairly,
       noted that, on the sponsor's account, he would only have  had  direct
       contact with his wife for the few times he was granted leave  between
       2003 and 2011, when he fled the country.  He  noted  that  the  issue
       concerning the absence of photographs  had  now  been  addressed.  He
       noted  the  absence  of  much  pre-flight  cohabitation  between  the
       Appellant and sponsor but indicated that such  opportunity  would  be
       limited given the nature of the sponsor's military service.

   17. Ms Zamba-Jinadu elide on  the  skeleton  argument  contained  in  the
       Appellant's bundle. She referred me to the marriage  certificate  and
       noted the absence of any suggestion that it was forged or unreliable.
       The sponsor's claim that he only managed to see the Appellant 5 or  6
       times  since  their  marriage  was  consistent  with  the  background
       material. She invited me to allow the appeal.

   18. Having carefully considered and evaluated all the  evidence,  and  in
       light  of  the  helpful  submissions  from  both  representatives,  I
       indicated that I would allow the appeal.

The law

   19. The Appellant applied for entry clearance under paragraph 352A of the
       immigration rules (HC 395). She was refused on the basis that she did
       not meet the  requirements  of  paragraph  352A(i)  and  (iv).  These
       require that;

        i) the applicant is married to or the civil partner of a person who
           is  currently  a  refugee  granted  status  as  such  under  the
           immigration rules in the United Kingdom ; and

       ii) each of the parties intends to live permanently with  the  other
           as  his  or  her  spouse  civil  partner  and  the  marriage  is
           subsisting.

   20. The burden of proof rests on the Appellant  to  prove  that,  on  the
       balance  of  probabilities,  she  meets  the  requirements   of   the
       immigration rules. As this is an entry clearance application the date
       for consideration of the evidence is the date of the decision.

Finding of fact and application of the law

   21. The Respondent was not satisfied the Appellant and the  sponsor  were
       legally  married.  The  Respondent  supported  this   conclusion   by
       reference to the poor quality of the  marriage  certificate  and  the
       fact that its authenticity could  not  be  verified.  The  Respondent
       failed to particularise the ways in which  the  marriage  certificate
       was of 'poor quality'. No issue was raised with the  content  of  the
       marriage certificate, or its lay-out or syntax,  or  with  any  other
       particular aspect of the document.  At  the  hearing  Mr  Walker,  on
       behalf of the Respondent, did not challenge the  reliability  of  the
       document. The marriage certificate is consistent with  the  evidence,
       both oral and documentary, given by the sponsor and his witnesses. It
       is consistent with his answers in his screening and asylum  interview
       in respect of the name of his wife and the date  of  their  marriage.
       Given that the Appellant and her sponsor were  married  in  2003  the
       document would, quite naturally, attract some  wear  and  tear  as  a
       result of its age. In the absence of any particularisation as to  the
       nature of the 'poor quality' of the marriage certificate, and  having
       holistic regard to my other credibility findings  detailed  below,  I
       find the document to be reliable.

   22. I note, with reference to the sponsor'  asylum  interview,  that,  at
       12a, he stated he was married, and at 14 and 15, gave the Appellant's
       names, and at 17 stated she was "aged 18 in 2003". In the  main  body
       of the interview he confirmed that he was still married (question 39)
       and that he had no children but that  his  family  looked  after  his
       sister's children's family (question 41).  This  is  consistent  with
       1.32  of  the  Appellant's  application  form.   The   above   points
       demonstrate consistency between the sponsor's account given  in  2012
       and the Appellant's evidence given in 2014. I regard the Respondent's
       assertion that the evidence  given  by  the  sponsor  in  his  asylum
       interview relating to his marriage as being merely  'a  statement  of
       future intent' to be highly unlikely given the detail provided by the
       sponsor, and to be inconsistent with the  totality  of  the  evidence
       before me, including the marriage certificate,  the  explanation  for
       the absence of photographs of the marriage ceremony and the  evidence
       from the sponsor's brother and Mr Idris.

   23. The Respondent took issue with the absence of any photographs of  the
       wedding ceremony. Both the sponsor and  his  brother  explained  that
       their father did not allow the taking of photographs as  he  regarded
       this to be an affront to his strict religious beliefs. The  Appellant
       has produced some background materials, unchallenged  by  Mr  Walker,
       indicating that the recording of images is abhorrent to some branches
       of Islam. I would, even in the absence of such evidence,  have  taken
       judicial notice of the fact that that  the  depiction  of  images  of
       individuals,  such  as  photographs,  but  also  in   paintings,   is
       considered religiously inappropriate by some  branches  of  Islam.  I
       find this an inherently plausible explanation for the absence of  any
       photographs of the wedding.

   24. The Respondent held against the Appellant the absence of any  witness
       statements  from  individuals  who  attended  the  wedding.  I   have
       carefully considered the statements from the sponsor's brother and Mr
       Idris. Their evidence was tested in cross-examination. Mr Walker  did
       not challenge the credibility of either witness. Their oral  evidence
       was given in an  open  and  forthright  manner.  Their  evidence  was
       relatively detailed and was consistent with the documentary  evidence
       before me and the background evidence relating to  the  depiction  of
       images in Islam. There was no perceptible attempt at embellishment by
       any of the witnesses. I find that I can attach weight to the evidence
       given by the sponsor and to his two witnesses  in  respect  of  their
       attendance at the wedding ceremony.

   25. There was some evidence of intervening devotion in the form of  money
       remittance slips and phone cards that the sponsor claimed he used  to
       contact the Appellant. Given that the sponsor was required  to  serve
       in the Eritrean army, a fact that has been recognised as giving  rise
       to a genuine claim for asylum, it is not  surprising  that  there  is
       relatively scant evidence of  his  relationship  with  the  Appellant
       during the near 11 years of their marriage. They would only have been
       able to spend a very few days together given that he was only granted
       leave once every one to two years. In these circumstances  I  do  not
       hold the absence of such evidence against the Appellant.

   26. Having regard to the totality of the evidence before me, and for  the
       reasons that I have already given, I am satisfied that the  Appellant
       and the sponsor were validly married in 2003 and that, at the date of
       the decision, their relationship was still genuine and subsisting.

Notice of Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
law. I have remade the decision allowing the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]    24 September 2015

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
