
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/03260/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 December 2016                            |On 24 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                              meg bahadur thapa
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NEW DELHI, INDIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Jaisri, Counsel instructed by Sam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by Meg  Bahadur  Thapa  against  a  determination  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Turquet promulgated on 8 July  2016  refusing
    his appeal against refusal of entry clearance, that decision being made
    on 14 January 2015.  The appellant, who was born on 7 December 1982, is
    a citizen of Nepal and he applied for entry clearance to settle in  the
    United Kingdom as the dependent son of a former Gurkha  soldier  on  18
    October 2014. His father and his mother also applied on that date.  His
    father had served with distinction for  eighteen  years,  reaching  the
    rank of corporal.  He and the appellant's mother arrived in the  UK  on
    18 March 2015, having been granted indefinite  leave  to  remain  on  5
    January 2015.

2.   The appeal before us was on the basis of  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  In summary the grounds are to  the  effect
    that the judge's findings on family life are inadequate and in addition
    the judge failed to pay proper regard to the decision in  Gurung.   The
    reasons for refusal by the Entry Clearance Officer are set out  in  the
    decision letter and are summarised in the determination.  These are all
    matters of record.  We shall revert to this. Suffice it to say  in  the
    meantime that the Entry Clearance Officer was not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant was dependent on his father and  did  not  require  long-term
    personal care.  His parents, it  was  said,  were  more  likely  to  be
    dependent on him.  He would be likely to be reliant on public funds and
    in short, for a number of reasons, he failed to meet  the  requirements
    of the Immigration Rules.  It was his parents' choice to come to the UK
    knowing that there would be no guarantee he could  accompany  them  and
    there was no provision  in  the  Rules  or  guidance  relating  to  the
    admission of dependants of ex-Gurkhas so that they could care for their
    parents.

3.   The Entry Clearance Officer also considered Article  8.   He  indicated
    that he had taken account of Article 8 and  the  case  of  Ghising  and
    Others [2013] UKUT 567, where it was found that Article 8  was  engaged
    and, but for the historic wrong which is well-documented and into which
    we need not go, the appellant would have been  settled  in  the  United
    Kingdom long ago. This would ordinarily determine the  outcome  of  the
    Article 8 proportionality assessment in the  appellant's  favour  where
    the matters relied upon by the Secretary of State  or  Entry  Clearance
    Officer consist of solely the public interest  in  maintaining  a  firm
    immigration policy.  The Entry Clearance Officer was satisfied that the
    reasons for refusal outweighed  the  consideration  of  the  historical
    injustice.  The appellant had grown up in Nepal and  his parents  chose
    to apply for settlement visas when he was already an adult in the  full
    knowledge that he would not  automatically qualify  for  settlement  as
    well.  There was no bar to his parents returning.   Family  life  could
    continue as  it  might  have  done  and  without  interference  by  the
    decision.   Even  if  it  were  accepted  that  refusal  might  be   an
    interference with his private life, the Entry Clearance Officer was not
    satisfied that family life had been established  over  and  above  that
    between an adult child  and  parents.   In  all  the  circumstances  he
    considered that the historic injustice did not outweigh  the  need  for
    some  immigration  control  and  refused  the  application.  The  Entry
    Clearance Manager reviewed that decision and upheld it.

4.   Before us it was argued that the First-tier  Tribunal's  assessment  of
    Article 8 was inadequate.  It is set out in paragraphs 26 and 27 of the
    determination and again is a matter of record.

5.   Mr Bramble on the other hand argued, with some diffidence it seemed  to
    us, that the assessment was adequate. But there are a number of  points
    which cause us concern.  We indicated  that  we  would  revert  to  the
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.  Having set out the background
    to the application, the Entry Clearance Officer, in the third paragraph
    of the decision proper, said the following:

         "You have now lived apart from your parents for a  period  of  over
         two years and have managed to do so.  You have been  involved  with
         your studies and have all the amenities you require for  living  in
         Nepal.  You have your adult sibling who lives  with  you  whom  you
         could turn to in times of need.  It is also likely  that  you  will
         have extended family in Nepal."


6.   The fact of the matter is, as was conceded quite  properly  and  fairly
    by the Home Office  Presenting  Officer,  Mr  Bramble,  that  in  large
    measure that paragraph is in error.  It may be that it is  lifted  from
    another case but that is somewhat speculative.  What is certain is that
    it  bears  no  relationship  to  the  circumstance  of  the  appellant.
    Unfortunately  that  paragraph  is  referred  to  uncritically  in  the
    determination  at  paragraph  18  and  the  Article  8  assessment   at
    paragraphs 26 and 27 makes no mention of the obvious error,  which  may
    well  have  infected  the  decision  and  been  carried  on  into   the
    determination.  It is not the case that the parties had lived apart for
    two years.  It is not the case that the appellant had an adult  sibling
    living with him.  He did have an adult sibling but she  was  living  in
    Hong Kong.  That is an important matter which affects the consideration
    of family life to such an extent that we consider an error of  law  has
    been made in not properly dealing with it.

7.   In addition the judge, in our opinion wrongly, and  without  any  basis
    finds an  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's  own  interview  when  he
    considers the interaction  of  questions  14  and  21.   In  answer  to
    question 14, which asked what his daily routine was (at a time when  he
    and his parents were living together), he said that  he  used  to  fill
    drinking water in the morning and then cooked food. He went on  to  say
    "we have cattles here. I look after them.  I clean house.  I look after
    parents when they are not well".  In answer to question 21,  which  was
    "what do you do here in Nepal?" he said, "I am not doing  anything.   I
    sit in home only doing household work".  It is  pretty  obvious  to  us
    that the reference to household work would easily have encompassed  the
    filling of drinking water, cooking food and looking after cattle.   The
    credibility assessment made by the  judge  on  the  basis  of  what  he
    perceived was an inconsistency in his answers is flawed.  There  is  no
    inconsistency.

8.   Mr Bramble made a number of  tentative  arguments  in  support  of  the
    judge's reasoning in relation to these questions but we find  that  the
    reasoning simply cannot be supported.  In these  circumstances,  it  is
    our view that the decision has to  be  set  aside  and  we  propose  to
    reconsider the question of family life for ourselves.

9.   We take as our basis the statement  of  the  sponsor,  the  appellant's
    father, who tells us that he served in the  army  for  eighteen  years,
    that he was discharged on 4 October 1985 at the rank  of  corporal  and
    that conduct was assessed as exemplary.  He sets out when  he  and  his
    wife  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  and  the  history   of   their
    applications.  He goes on to tell us that the appellant cannot live  an
    independent life in Nepal alone because he and  his  wife  support  him
    financially and emotionally.  While there are relatives in Nepal,  they
    are all married and deal with their own independent  lives  with  their
    own families.  His sister in Hong Kong lives an independent  life  with
    her husband and cannot provide the emotional  support  which  a  parent
    could provide.  She could not provide support in times of need.

10.  The sponsor goes on to say that due to his age the appellant  was  able
    to support him and his wife just as a parent has a duty to  look  after
    the children.  In Nepalese culture a son also has a duty.  This did not
    mean that they  were  dependent  on  him  but  the  appellant  required
    emotional and financial support and they had a duty to ensure that.  He
    sent money to  Nepal  to  cover  the  appellant's  daily  expenses  and
    enclosed receipts to  confirm  that.   He  went  on  to  say  that  the
    appellant relied solely on his parents for  emotional  support  and  in
    Nepalese culture parents were responsible for their children until they
    got married no matter what age the children were.   The  appellant  was
    still not independent and was financially and emotionally dependent  on
    his parents.  He was unmarried and never  had  been  married.   It  was
    difficult for the family to live apart.  He and his  wife  communicated
    with the appellant through social media but that was difficult to do so
    given that he was in another country.

11.  There is no reason for us not to accept that evidence.   We  find  that
    there is an inter-dependency between the parties, that it  goes  beyond
    mere emotional ties and that while the appellant is now  an  adult,  we
    find family life established, having regard to the criteria set out  in
    Kugathas. So where does that take us?

12.   We have to go on now to consider what the implications of  Gurung  and
    Ghising are.  The appellant's father, the sponsor said the following in
    his statement:

         "It has always been my intention to settle in the  United  Kingdom.
         However, I was not allowed to apply for Indefinite Leave to  Remain
         until November 2009.  Ex-Gurkhas who retire after 1997 were allowed
         to apply for settlement as early as 2006.  If I had the opportunity
         to apply for settlement for myself and my son before 2006, I  would
         have applied to settle before  my  son  had  turned  18,  but  this
         opportunity was denied to me.  I was not allowed to apply to settle
         in the United Kingdom until 2009."


    We need not quote the whole of that paragraph.

13.  We have no difficulty in accepting that evidence as well.   It  follows
    that, had the sponsor been able to apply for settlement in  the  United
    Kingdom when his son was a minor he would have done so.  It seems to us
    that this brings into question quite  sharply  the  issues  which  were
    raised in Gurung and Ghising.  There was  family  life.   Applying  the
    Razgar questions we find that  the  first  four  are  answered  in  the
    affirmative.  That leaves us only with the question whether the refusal
    of leave was proportionate.  Given the findings so far the only  factor
    weighing against the granting of entry would seem to be the maintenance
    of immigration control and the age of the appellant.  We refer to  this
    because of the policy of not allowing settlement to anyone who  is  not
    over the age of 18 and under the age of 30.   We  are  not  going  into
    detail about that policy because it seems to us that it is  for  us  to
    decide whether the refusal is disproportionate or  otherwise.   We  are
    satisfied, as we have said, that there was mutual dependency.  We  look
    at the effects on the whole family.  We consider the potential  effects
    of Gurung  and  Ghising.   We  consider  the  effect  of  the  historic
    injustice.  Bearing in mind what has been said in the authorities,  and
    weighing up all the factors, including the age of the appellant, who is
    now 31, the policy covering adults between 18 and 30 and the  need  for
    immigration   control,   we   find   that   the   refusal   is   indeed
    disproportionate.  We do not consider that the fact he is 31,  whatever
    the policy says, is a significant factor or at  least  that  it  is  so
    significant as to counterbalance the strong  feature  of  the  historic
    injustice nor is the need for  immigration  control  in  that  category
    either.

Notice of Decision

14.  Having found that the refusal is disproportionate we are  of  the  view
    that this appeal must be allowed.  We should indicate that  there  were
    no immigration or other features beyond those we have  indicated  which
    would weigh in the balance  to  the  other  effect.   Accordingly,  the
    appeal is allowed.

15.  No anonymity direction is sought or made.



                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                       Date: 23 January 2017


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has been allowed and in all the circumstances  we  make  a  whole
fee award.


                                                               LORD MATTHEWS
                                          Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

                                                       Date: 21 January 2017

