
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03239/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2016                           |On 11 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                             MISS NAZIA SULTANA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Isam Khan, instructed by SEB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal on behalf of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  ('ECO')
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I shall refer  to  the
    ECO as the respondent and Miss Sultana (the appellant before the First-
    tier Tribunal) as the 'claimant' to avoid confusion.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of  Bangladesh  whose  date  of  birth  is  4
    December 1991.  She applied for admission to the United  Kingdom  under
    the provisions of the European Economic  Regulations  2006  ('the  2006
    Regulations')  as  an  extended  family  member  of  an  EEA   national
    exercising treaty rights in the UK.  The claimant's EEA  sponsor  is  a
    Belgian national.  The claimant applied for  a  family  permit  as  the
    extended family member of an EEA national.  The respondent refused  her
    application in a decision dated 12 January 2015.   The  respondent  was
    not satisfied that the claimant had been dependent on her  sponsor  and
    that they had not been living together as a family unit.  The  claimant
    appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. In a decision promulgated on 28 July 2016 First-tier Tribunal Judge,  R
    Calendar-Smith, allowed the claimant's appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal
    found  that  the  claimant  had  shown  prior  dependency  and  present
    dependency by the claimant on the  sponsor.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

 4. The respondent applied for permission to appeal against the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  decision.   On  17  November  2016  Designated   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Murray granted  the  respondent  permission  to  appeal.
    Thus the appeal came before me.

The Appeal before the Upper Tribunal

 5. At the beginning of the hearing I raised the issue as to whether or not
    the case of Sala (EFMs: Right of Appeal)  [2016]  UKUT00417  (IAC)  was
    relevant to this appeal.  In his oral submissions Mr  Jarvis  indicated
    that it was the respondent's view that the case of Sala applied in  the
    circumstances of the instant case.  He therefore submitted  that  there
    was no right of appeal against the respondent's  decision.  He  invited
    me, notwithstanding there being no right of appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to consider the grounds of appeal as submitted and to  make  a
    finding that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  law  by  allowing  the
    appeal under  the  Regulations.  He  submitted  that  the  issue  of  a
    residence card to an extended family member is at the discretion of the
    respondent and as such the matter should have been referred back to the
    respondent for reconsideration in accordance with Regulation 12(2)  and
    (3) of the 2006 Regulations.  He submitted that the respondent had  not
    proceeded  to  the  second  stage  of  deciding  whether  to   exercise
    discretion in the claimant's favour by granting her  family  a  permit.
    In order to allow the respondent to exercise this  discretion  now  the
    judge was constrained to allowing the appeal to a limited extent on the
    basis that the respondent's decision was not  in  accordance  with  the
    law.


 6. Mr Khan submitted that the case of Sala was not relevant.  He submitted
    that Sala was particular to its own facts and does not apply generally.
     He argued that there is a right of appeal.  He referred to Section  86
    of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act 2002.   In  response  to
    the respondent's grounds of  appeal  he  submitted  that  although  the
    discretion in Regulation 17(4) has not been  exercised  the  First-tier
    Tribunal had not  erred  in  law.   He  accepted  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge should not have said that the appeal must succeed but he
    argued that the judge cannot direct the Secretary of State.  He  relied
    on the case of Greenwood (No. 2)(para 398 considered) [2015] UKUT 00629
    (IAC) at paragraph 20 submitting that it is clear  from  that  decision
    that the Tribunal has no power to remit the matter to the Secretary  of
    State.  He referred to Section 86 of the 2002 Act  and  submitted  that
    the Tribunal must allow or dismiss the appeal.  However that  does  not
    mean that the discretion is no longer available to the respondent.   He
    referred to paragraph  21  of  the  decision  in  Greenwood  where  the
    Tribunal set out the structure of the legislation and at paragraphs  24
    and 25 where the Tribunal analysed the law in detail.

Discussion

 7. Having considered the case of Sala it  is  clear  that  this  has  more
    general application than to the  facts  of  the  case  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal were considering when arriving at their judgment.  As set  out
    in Sala extended family  members  do  not  have  an  entitlement  to  a
    residence card and therefore the rights of  appeal  do  not  extend  to
    appeals against a decision not to issue a residence  card  to  extended
    family members falling within Regulation 8 of the EEA Regulations 2006.



 8. The appellant had no right of appeal.  The First-tier Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction to  hear  the  appeal.   It  therefore  erred  in  law  in
    entertaining the appeal.



 9. I set aside the First-tier Tribunal decision and substitute a decision
    that there was not a valid appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.  The
    decision of the respondent stands.



Notice of Decision

The claimant does not have a right of appeal. The  First-tier  Tribunal  had
no jurisdiction to hear the appeal. The decision of the ECO stands.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 10 January 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

