
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03905/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |                   Decision & Reasons    |
|                                      |Promulgated                              |
|On 26th January 2016                  |                   On 12th February 2016 |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                                     SS
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal directed against a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Jerromes,  hereinafter  "the
    judge") promulgated on 27th July 2015.  In that decision the judge  had
    dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  an  Entry
    Clearance Officer made on 22nd January  2015,  refusing  to  grant  him
    entry clearance to come to the UK as  a  carer  of  a  British  citizen
    child.

 2. Briefly,  by  way  of  background,  the  Appellant  has  an  unedifying
    immigration history  and  all  of  that  is  set  out  in  the  judge's
    determination.   He  entered  the  UK  illegally  in  2006,   made   an
    unsuccessful asylum claim, used a false identity and subsequently  made
    false  representations  in  an  earlier  entry  clearance  application.
    However, none of that is relevant  to  the  issues  which  fall  to  be
    resolved in this appeal.  Whilst in the UK without leave, the Appellant
    met a female British citizen  whom  I  shall  refer  to  as  MK.   They
    commenced a relationship and, on 18th February 2008, MK gave birth to a
    female child who I shall refer to as J.  The Appellant is  the  father.
    In November 2008 the Appellant, MK and J travelled  to  India.   Whilst
    there, on 25th November 2008, the Appellant and  MK  married.   Shortly
    after that the Appellant made an application  for  entry  clearance  to
    come to the UK, with a view to settlement, as the spouse of  a  British
    citizen (MK).  That application was refused and on 25th January 2009 MK
    left India, presumably returning to the UK, whilst the Appellant and  J
    remained in India.  They have remained there ever since.  The Appellant
    has subsequently, and unsuccessfully, sought to come to  the  UK  as  a
    person exercising rights of access to a British child.   He  then  made
    the application which led to the refusal decision of 22nd January 2015.
     He sought to appeal that refusal on two grounds only.  The  first  was
    that his application should have succeeded on the basis of  his  having
    derived rights of residence as a "Zambrano carer".  The second was that
    the decision had infringed his rights under Article 8 of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

 3. The judge dismissed the appeal on both  grounds.   The  second  ground,
    that relating to Article 8, has not been subject to  further  challenge
    so it is not necessary for me to say anything more about it.  As to the
    first ground, it had been asserted by or on  behalf  of  the  Appellant
    that there was no-one other than him who  would  be  prepared  to  look
    after J in the UK, his claiming that MK no longer had  any  involvement
    with or interest in the child.  It  was  said  pursuant  to  this  that
    attempts to trace MK had been made but  had  been  unsuccessful  albeit
    that she had, apparently, signed for  some  letters  sent  by  recorded
    delivery as part of the tracing efforts to an  address  where  she  had
    once resided.  It was contended that, in  all  the  circumstances,  the
    "irresistible inference" was that MK simply did not wish to play a part
    in J's life.  All of this was highly relevant because on  8th  November
    2012 amendments to the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
    2006, had been made to give effect to  the  judgment  of  the  European
    Court of Justice in the case of Ruiz Zambrano (C34/09).  The amendments
    which had been made to  Regulations  11  and  15A  had  the  effect  of
    conferring rights of entry and residence upon the primary  carer  of  a
    British citizen (including a British citizen child) who is residing  in
    the United Kingdom where the denial of such a right of residence  would
    prevent the British citizen from being able to  reside  in  the  United
    Kingdom or in another EEA state.  Further, in MA and SM  (Zambrano:  EU
    children outside EU) Iran [2013] UKUT 00380 (IAC) it had been  held  by
    the Upper Tribunal that there was no  reason,  in  principle,  why  the
    decision in Zambrano itself and the amendments to the  EEA  Regulations
    could not be relied  upon  by  the  parents  of  a  minor  EU  national
    (including a British national) living outside the EU so long as it  was
    the intention of the primary carer (and here it was) to  accompany  the
    child to his or her country of nationality.

 4. The Appellant, of course, being out of the country,  was  not  able  to
    attend the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal but he did have legal
    representation.  His current partner, a female British  citizen  who  I
    shall simply refer to as K, did attend and she gave oral evidence.  The
    Respondent was not represented.

 5. The judge accepted that the Appellant is J's primary carer.   She  then
    observed that her next task was to consider whether the  Appellant  had
    shown that the decision to refuse him admission to the UK had  deprived
    J of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the rights attaching  to
    her status as a European Union citizen.  If the answer to that question
    was yes then, as a consequence of Zambrano and the amended Regulations,
    he would succeed.  However, the judge gave most  careful  consideration
    to the attempts which had been made to trace MK.   That  was  important
    because, of course, if MK was prepared to have J  live  with  her  then
    that would mean it would not be  necessary  for  the  Appellant  to  be
    admitted to the UK in order for J to have and enjoy  the  substance  of
    the rights attaching to her status as a European Union citizen.  As  to
    those tracing attempts, which had been in part conducted by  K  and  in
    part by an employee at the Appellant's  representatives  (UK  Migration
    Lawyers Limited), the judge said this;

         "49. The burden of proof rests on the Appellant.  He  says  he  has
             been unable  to  trace  [MK].   However,  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities I find that although efforts were made  to  find
             [MK] in the manner described by the Appellant,  [K]  and  [C],
             those efforts taken as a whole,  were  half-hearted  and  fall
             short of reasonable and  genuine  efforts  for  the  following
             reasons:

             49.1 There is no evidence  of  any  efforts  made  to  contact
                  [MK's] family or friends in the UK.   On  the  balance  of
                  probabilities, it is not credible that the Appellant would
                  not know any of her family or friends given that they were
                  in a relationship in the UK for over eighteen months.

             49.2 In the Divorce Certificate, it states that [MK]  went  to
                  stay with relatives in Ludhiana before  leaving  India  in
                  2009; there is no evidence of  any  efforts  made  by  the
                  Appellant to contact [MK's] family or friends in India.

             49.3 The Appellant says he tried to  contact  [MK]  after  she
                  left India in 2009 but he does not explain how he tried to
                  contact her or what contact details he used.

             49.4 The Appellant has friends and relatives in Leicester (and
                  indeed [K] lives in Leicester) and yet no-one has actually
                  been to visit either [an address where MK is said to  have
                  previously resided] or [another address where MK  is  said
                  to have previously resided] to make enquiries - surely  an
                  obvious step to take if there was a genuine  intention  to
                  trace [MK].

             49.5  Mr  Blundell  invites  me  to  draw  the   'irresistible
                  inference' that [MK] has in fact been traced but does  not
                  wish to play a part in J's life from the fact that some of
                  the letters sent by [C] were signed  for  by  someone  who
                  appears to be [MK] but she did not then respond.  However,
                  I am not prepared to draw such an  inference  as  this  by
                  itself is insufficient evidence and is undermined by [K's]
                  own evidence that [MK] could not be traced at [the  second
                  of the two above addresses] pursuant to the electoral roll
                  search (although I accept that the electoral roll  is  not
                  conclusive evidence)."

 6. By way of explanation, the person I  have  referred  to  as  C  is  the
    particular individual from the UK Migration  Lawyers  Limited  who  had
    assisted with the tracing efforts.

 7. So, essentially, the judge was saying that the Appellant had failed  to
    show that it was necessary for him to be admitted to the UK because  he
    had failed to show that MK was not prepared to have J live with her.

 8. There followed an application for permission  to  appeal,  the  grounds
    having been drafted by Mr M Blundell of Counsel who had represented the
    Appellant before the First-tier Tribunal.  The first ground  criticised
    the judge for focusing unduly upon the tracing attempts whilst  failing
    to properly address evidence which had been given to the effect that MK
    had never attempted to contact J since January 2009, evidence  said  to
    be highly relevant.  The second ground criticised the judge for  erring
    in failing to consider whether J  would  be  effectively  compelled  to
    remain outside the United Kingdom even if MK could be traced.   It  was
    suggested, in this context, that the mere presence of MK in the UK  and
    the mere possibility that she might be able to care for J could not  be
    determinative.

 9. A Judge of the Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal, commenting;

         "Arguably, the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  determination  did  not
         properly engage with the principles of Union citizenship in an  out
         of country application."

10. There was a hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me)  so  that  it
    could be considered whether or not the First-tier Tribunal had erred in
    law such that its decision ought to be  set  aside  and,  if  so,  what
    should follow  from  that.   Representation  at  that  hearing  was  as
    indicated above and I am grateful to  both  representatives  for  their
    assistance.   Mr  Khan,  essentially,  relied  upon  the   grounds   of
    application as drafted and Mrs Pettersen contended that the  judge  had
    thoroughly evaluated all matters and had reached  a  decision  she  was
    entitled to reach.

11. This is in some respects  a  quite  unusual  case.   The  determination
    produced by the judge is certainly very thorough, setting out  in  some
    detail the factual background and the previous immigration history  and
    carefully analysing and reaching a  view  about  the  tracing  attempts
    which have been made.  She clearly did not think that,  at  least  from
    the Appellant's perspective, the attempts to trace MK had been  genuine
    (see paragraph 49.4 of the  determination).   Thus  she  was,  to  that
    extent at least, making an adverse credibility finding with respect  to
    the Appellant.

12. In my judgment it was open to  the  judge  to  find  that  the  tracing
    attempts had been "half-hearted" and that the Appellant, at least,  had
    not been making or directing  genuine  attempts.   I  note  that  those
    specific  findings  have  not  been  the  subject  of  any   subsequent
    challenge.  Effectively, therefore, the  Appellant's  own  actions,  or
    perhaps inactions, have prevented there being a proper consideration as
    to whether MK is available to and is willing and able to look after  J.
    In view of that it seems to me that it was open to the  judge  to  rely
    upon what  she  found  to  be  non-genuine  attempts  to  trace  MK  in
    concluding that the Appellant had failed to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof which does lie upon him.  It is my  conclusion,  therefore,  that
    the judge did not err in law and that her decision should stand.

13. Finally, the First-tier Tribunal did make an anonymity order.  No doubt
    that was to protect the interests of J.  I have continued that order on
    the same basis.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law.  Accordingly, that decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


