
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03215/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 November 2015                  |On 9 December 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                    [eFe]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NIGERIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moksud, agent for IIAS Manchester
For the Respondent:    Miss Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, [EFE], was born on 23 May 2002 and is a  female  citizen
    of Nigeria.  She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Cruthers)
    against a decision of the respondent dated 30 January  2014  to  refuse
    her leave to enter the  United  Kingdom  as  the  child  of  a  British
    citizen, [RNE] (hereafter referred to as the sponsor)).  The First-tier
    Tribunal dismissed her appeal in a decision  dated  29  December  2014.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge found that the appellant lives with and is cared for  by  her
    mother  in  Nigeria  although  the  sponsor  is  concerned   with   her
    upbringing.  At [37] the judge wrote:

         "The import  of  paragraphs  8  to  11  of  the  sponsor's  current
         statement is that the sponsor is consulted as  regards  significant
         decisions concerning the appellant and,  perhaps,  generally  makes
         the final decision.  But, at the risk of repetition, even  at  face
         value this evidence does not establish sole responsibility.  In  my
         judgment this is a case where responsibility for the appellant  is,
         clearly, shared between the two parents (as per TD (Yemen)).  There
         is nothing to show that moving away from her mother, to a different
         country and  culture,  would  be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
         appellant."

 3. The grounds of appeal misinterpret the  passage  which  I  have  quoted
    above.  Having quoted the passage in the grounds, the appellant asserts
    that "[The judge]  erred  when  in  the  same  breath  he  rejected  it
    arbitrarily  holding  that  this  evidence  does  not  establish   sole
    responsibility" (sic). On the contrary, the judge had not  found  as  a
    fact  that,  for  example,  the  sponsor  "generally  makes  the  final
    decision."  He was, at [37], simply setting out  the  appellant's  case
    and the sponsor's evidence.  Elsewhere in the decision [35]  the  judge
    had found that the appellant had failed  to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proving that the sponsor has  sole  responsibility  for  her.   On  the
    facts, there was nothing to compel the judge, even if he were to accept
    the sponsor's most recent statement at face value, necessarily to  find
    that responsibility was not shared but rested solely with the  sponsor.
    In other words, the fact that one parent may "generally make the  final
    decision" does not, of necessity, always mean that that parent has sole
    responsibility and does not share responsibility with the other parent.
     Consequently, there was no contradiction in the  judge's  findings  as
    the grounds assert.

 4. As regards the other grounds, they  are  without  merit.   There  is  a
    complaint that the judge did not attach sufficient weight  to  evidence
    of financial payments but also to  evidence  "favouring  the  appellant
    proved her case."  There is also an allegation that the  judge  applied
    "a very high standard of proving (sic)" with absolutely no  attempt  to
    justify that assertion by reference to the  decision  itself.   All  of
    these other grounds, in my opinion, fall firmly into  the  category  of
    disagreement with findings open to the judge  on  the  evidence  before
    him.  The judge's analysis is legally sound, even-handed and  supported
    by clear and cogent reasons.  It is not legally flawed for the  reasons
    asserted in the grounds of appeal or at all.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed        Date 10 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 10 November 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

