
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/03687/2012
     OA/03685/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23 May 2013                                |On 4 July  2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY

                                   Between

                               Mrs semhar sium
                             miss delina tedros
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, CAIRO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr G Hodgetts, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr K Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1. The appellants, mother and daughter, are  citizens  of  Eritrea  who  had
travelled to Khartoum in Sudan and made an application for  entry  clearance
to  join  husband/father  Mr  Tedros  Habtesion.   Their  applications  were
refused on 19 January 2012.  The respondent did not accept  that  the  first
appellant met the English language requirement  of  paragraph  281(i)(a)(ii)
or the maintenance and  accommodation  requirements  at  paragraph  281(iv).
The  appellants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  who  in   a
determination  sent  on  3  October  2012  dismissed  their   appeal.    The
appellants were successful in obtaining permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal bringing the matter before me.

The English Language Requirement

2. The relevant provisions of paragraph  281(i)(a)(ii),  which  took  effect
from 29 November 2010 (see Cm 7944), requires an applicant:

            "to provide an original English language  test  certificate  in
         speaking and listening  from  an  English  language  test  provider
         approved by the  Secretary  of  State  for  those  purposes,  which
         clearly shows  the  applicant's  name  and  qualification  obtained
         (which must  meet  or  exceed  level  A1  of  the  Common  European
         Framework of Reference) unless:
         a) ...
         b) ...
         c) The Secretary of  State  considers  that  the  applicant  has  a
            physical or  mental  condition  which  would  prevent  him  from
            meeting the requirement; or...


3. At the date of decision the first appellant had not provided  an  English
language  test  certificate,  although  she  did  state  she  was  currently
learning English.  In the Entry Clearance Manager's Review  letter  of  July
2012 the respondent acknowledged that there were no available  test  centres
in Eritrea at the relevant time but that  there  were  in  Sudan  where  the
appellants had resided for one year.  This observation only makes  sense  as
a reference to  the  then  current  UKBA  IDIs  which  set  out  at  5.7  an
"Exceptional compassionate circumstances exemption",  which  listed  Eritrea
among the countries where no test centre was available. In addition, it  was
conceded on behalf of the respondent at the hearing  before  the  FfT  judge
that although there were test centres in Sudan they did not provide  for  A1
certification, only a general training certificate.

4. The judge's reasons for concluding that paragraph 281(i)(a)(ii)  was  not
met were expressed in paragraph 15 as follows:

    "15. This appeal is bound to fail under the immigration rules even if
    no other reason than the fact that a vital piece of information, namely
    evidence of English ability, was not provided until after the date of
    decision.  I would have been inclined to allow the exception to the
    extent of accepting an appropriate level of IELTS because I accept that
    A1 certification is not available in Sudan.  However, I would not, and
    do not allow that exception to include the late production of any such
    certificate after the date of decision."

The reference to "late production" was to the fact that the first  appellant
had obtained an IELTS certificate in March 2012, over two months  after  the
refusal decision.

5. The grounds for permission to appeal raised  several  points.  It  is  as
well to dispose of one of them at the outset.  They sought  to  raise  again
the fact that the appellant had subsequently obtained an  IELTS  certificate
in March 2012. This ground cannot succeed. By virtue of  section  85(5)  the
appellants cannot rely  on  such  post  decision  evidence.  It  was  not  a
circumstance appertaining at the date of decision.

6. The main contention advanced in the written grounds otherwise  was  that,
having accepted that it was not possible to  obtain  an  A1  certificate  in
Eritrea or  Sudan,  the  FtT  judge  had  erred  in  not  finding  that  the
exceptional circumstances requirement set  out  in  paragraph  281(i)(a)(ii)
(c) was met, especially given the way in which  it  was  elaborated  in  the
IDIs. Mr Hodgetts submitted that  the  first  appellant  had  been  able  to
demonstrate that this requirement was met because it was  specified  in  the
IDI that applicants "must be able to demonstrate that as a result  of  their
circumstances they are unable  to  access  facilities  for  learning  before
coming to  the  UK".   He  submitted  that  if  there  were  no  A1  testing
facilities in either Eritrea or Sudan "that  must  show,  ipso  facto,  that
there are exceptional compassionate  circumstances  within  the  meaning  of
paragraph 281(i)(a)(ii)(c)".

7. In a request for permission to amend the grounds,  which  I  accepted  at
the hearing, the appellant's representatives submitted that in addition  the
refusal of  the  ECO  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  (as  it  has
subsequently been declared to be in R (Alvi) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 33)  because
"at the date  of  the  decision  the  requirement  to  satisfy  the  English
language test provision was contained in an extraneous policy document  that
did not form a valid and lawful part of the Immigration Rules, ..."

Assessment
8. In relation to the first limb of the appellants' submissions,  I  do  not
consider it is made out. Both the  rule  and  the  IDI  presuppose  that  an
applicant has some ability to speak and read English. To the extent that  by
their reference to exceptional compassionate circumstances in the  rule  and
in the IDI accord a discretion, it is one which (in the words of the IDI):

           "should be exercised only in cases where there  are  exceptional
         circumstances specifically relating to the ability of the applicant
         to meet the language requirement...Consideration will be on a  case
         by case basis. The applicant must demonstrate that as a  result  of
         the situation they are unable to  access  facilities  for  learning
         English before coming to the UK...".


 9. The same IDI also specifies that an applicant must produce:

         "Evidence of an inability to attend, prior/previous  attendance  or
         attempts to access learning must be clearly provided".

10. The appellants were unable to provide any evidence of such attempts  and
there has been no suggestion that they tried.

11. I also do not accept the second (new) limb Mr Hodgetts' submissions.  In
light of the decision of the Supreme Court in Alvi, it is clear that at  the
relevant time the identification of  the  English  language  test  providers
approved by the Secretary of State was not contained in the Rules but in  an
extraneous document. The fact that the Immigration Rules  were  subsequently
amended by HC8423 with effect from 20 July 2012 to incorporate this  further
identification in paragraph 281(i)(a)(ii), might be thought to be  a  strong
indication of a recognition that Alvi  principles  were  considered  by  the
relevant parliamentary body to require their inclusion; but in any event  it
seems to me  that what was set out in the IDIs (which covered who  were  the
English language test providers  and  where  they  were  to  be  found)  was
detailed information which was material to  whether  or  not  any  applicant
could qualify. However, whilst in these respects certain  basic  information
about English language test providers was lacking, the rule as it stood  did
nevertheless make clear that any certificate had to show that  an  applicant
met or exceeded level A1 of the  Common  European  Framework  of  Reference.
This the applicant was unable to  do.  Hence  in  respect  of  the  relevant
requirement in this  case,  the  rule  was  Alvi-compliant  because  it  did
contain what was referred to by their lordships in Alvi as:

"...information the application of which will determine whether or  not  the
applicant will qualify" (see paragraphs 128 (Lord Wilson), 57  (Lord  Hope),
94 ( Lord Dyson).

 12. Accordingly, the First tier judge did not err in  concluding  that  the
first appellant failed to show she had sufficient knowledge of  the  English
language and  had  failed  to  show  she  had  a  qualification  meeting  or
exceeding level a1 of the Common European Framework of Reference.

Article 8 and the language test requirement

13. Mr Hodgetts sought to argue that the First-tier judge had also erred  in
failing to recognise that any kind of English language test is  contrary  to
Article 8 of the ECHR.  I  disagree:  this  argument  was  rejected  (as  Mr
Hodgetts acknowledged) in R (ota Bibi and Ali) [2013] EWCA Civ 322.

The Accommodation Requirement

14. Even if I had decided the Fist tier Tribunal erred in its  treatment  of
the English language requirements, it remains, however, that  it  could  not
be said to have materially erred in law - or cannot be said to have made  an
error of law necessitating that its decision  be  set  aside  -  unless  the
appellants were able to show they  met  all  the  relevant  requirements  of
paragraph  281,  including  paragraph   281(iv)   and   (v)   dealing   with
accommodation and maintenance respectively.

15. It is submitted in this  regard  that  judge  was  wrong  to  refuse  to
consider the sponsor's evidence that on 7 February 2012 the sponsor took  an
assured shorthold tenancy on a flat in Durham Avenue, Plymouth where it  was
intended he would live  with  the  appellants.  It  is  submitted  that  the
maintenance and accommodation Rules have to be read prospectively and  hence
that the judge  was  wrong  to  consider  that  there  was  no  satisfactory
evidence of accommodation.

16. Mr Hodgetts is correct to state that the accommodation  and  maintenance
rules have to be read prospectively, but that entails considering  what  was
foreseeable as at the date of decision.  At  the  date  of  decision  on  19
January 2012, there was no evidential basis for concluding that  the  Durham
Avenue accommodation would be available.

17. It is submitted  in  the  alternative  that  in  their  application  the
appellants had made clear from their answers given to  Q  145-150  that  the
address where they proposed to live was an address in  Alma  Rd,  Portsmouth
where the sponsor  lived  at  that  time.  The  respondent  had  refused  to
acknowledge this fact because the appellants had  stated  several  questions
earlier on in the form that the location at which they would  live  is  "not
applicable" (see answer to Q141).  Mr Hodgetts submitted  that  the  address
in Alma Rd was of adequate size even though only  described  as  having  one
bedroom.

18. I am prepared to accept that the respondent was wrong to place  reliance
on the "not applicable" answer given  to  Q141  as  it  is  clear  from  the
subsequent answers that the proposed address at which the  appellants  would
live was in Alma Road and a description was given of it. I am also  prepared
to assume for the purposes of this appeal  that  Mr  Hodgetts  is  right  in
stating that for a child under 12 one bedroom for parents and such  a  child
is adequate. However, it  remains,  as  the  respondent  had  noted  in  the
refusal decision that they had also not supplied satisfactory evidence  that
they would have accommodation in the UK where they could live that  will  be
occupied solely by them and their sponsor. The sponsor had  the  opportunity
at the hearing to furnish evidence as to what the position was  in  relation
to this address but chose instead to rely on the new proposed  accommodation
in Durham Avenue.

The Maintenance Requirement

19. The grounds as amplified by Mr Hodgetts submit that the FtT  also  erred
in law in failing to  make  any  assessment  of  whether  the  couple  could
maintain themselves adequately.  This  error  had  two  dimensions,  it  was
submitted, one relating to ability to satisfy the  rule  itself;  the  other
relating  to  its  impact  on  the  judge's  conduct  of   the   Article   8
proportionality assessment, as a favourable finding would have lessened  the
weight to be placed on the state's interests  in  the  Article  8  balancing
exercise.

20. As regards paragraph 281((v), I do not consider,  in  the  light  of  my
above finding on the accommodation requirement,  that  it  is  necessary  to
make a specific finding on this matter.

Article 8

21. In relation to Article 8 the judge had concluded:

    "In considering Article 8...I note that  the  sponsor  is  an  Eritrean
    national who was granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK under the
    legacy policy although  he  was  a  failed  asylum  seeker.  Under  the
    circumstances, on the face of it, there is  no  reason  why  he  cannot
    return to Eritrea although it is appreciated that there are presently a
    number of difficulties in that country and it is not currently an ideal
    place to be. Furthermore, although he is a Sudanese citizen  no  reason
    has been given as to why he would not be able to visit that county  and
    as such maintain close contact with his family there."

22. Dealing first with Mr Hodgett's point about  maintenance,  I  note  that
the judge made no finding to the effect that the appellants failed  to  meet
the maintenance requirements but, given his finding that the respondent  was
correct to find the accommodation requirement not satisfied, the refusal  of
entry clearance clearly served a legitimate aim of economic  well-being,  if
not also maintenance of  effective  immigration  control  as  an  aspect  of
prevention of disorder and crime.  The  Strasbourg  jurisprudence  has  made
very clear that in conducting the Article 8 balancing exercise the state  is
entitled to attach adverse weight to the inability  of  applicants  to  meet
socio-economic  requirements:  see  e.g.  Konstatinov  v  Netherlands,  App.
16351/03.

23. Insofar as the grounds attack the judge's reliance on the option of  the
sponsor visiting Sudan, I consider he was entitled to take this view.  There
was no evidence before him to show that  the  appellants  could  not  either
return to Eritrea (they had said they only went to Sudan  because  that  was
where they had to make their application) or continue living in  Sudan.  The
judge was entitled to  attach  significant  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
sponsor was not someone who had come to the UK out of  a  well-founded  fear
of persecution and hence his decision to leave his family  could  not  as  a
result be said to be one of necessity. As noted by Toulson  LJ  in   Musa  &
Ors v Entry Clearance Officer [2012] EWCA Civ 10 para 23:

    "The trauma of breaking up a family and thereby rupturing  family  ties
    may be significantly greater than the effect of  not  facilitating  the
    reunion of a family whose members  have  become  accustomed  to  living
    apart following a decision by part of the family to live elsewhere".

24. For the above reasons, I do not consider that the judge's  determination
was vitiated by any material error of law. Even if I had found  the  judge's
error to amount to a material error of law, it is  not  one  which  I  would
have considered to necessitate the setting aside of this decision.

25. Accordingly the decision of the First tier  Tribunal  judge  to  dismiss
the appellants' appeals must stand.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Storey

                          Approval for Promulgation


|Name of Upper Tribunal Judge       |Dr H H Storey                         |
|issuing approval:                  |                                      |
|Appellants' Names:                 |Mrs Semhar Sium and Miss Delina Tedros|
|Case Numbers:                      |OA/03687/2012 and OA/03685/2012       |

Oral determination (please indicate)


I approve the attached Determination for promulgation

Name:

Date:


Amendments that require further action by Promulgation section:

Change of address:

           Rep:                         Appellant:
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |
|                                |                                |

Other Information:
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |
|                                                                  |


