
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03795/2015
                                                             & OA/03796/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 September 2017                         |On 5 October 2017             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                             mRs Husna ara begum
                           Master MD REJAUL islam
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The first Appellant is  a  Bangladeshi  woman  who  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom to settle with  her  husband,  Mohammed
    Islam, whom she had married on 24 June 1992 and with whom she had  four
    children aged at that time 21, 20, 18 and 15. The application was  made
    together with that of a younger child born on  9  September  1999.  The
    Respondent refused their  applications  because  allegedly  false  bank
    statements had been submitted with the  previous  application  and  the
    Sponsor had claimed a suspiciously large pay rise in order to reach the
    financial requirements. There were no exceptional circumstances.

 2. The Appellants appealed and following a  hearing,  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 6 January 2017, Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  M  R
    Oliver dismissed the appeals under both the Immigration  Rules  and  on
    human rights grounds.

 3. The Appellants sought permission to  appeal  which  was  considered  by
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lambert who, in a  decision  dated  25
    July 2017 granted it. The Judge's reasons for so doing are:-

         "1.  The Appellants seek permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
             decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Oliver) who,  in  a
             decision promulgated on 6/1/17 dismissed the Appellant's (sic)
             appeal against the Secretary of State decision to refuse entry
             clearance as a spouse and dependant.

         2. The judge appears at paragraph 9 to have  found  the  particular
            allegation of false documents relied on in the  refusal  (for  a
            2011 application) not to have been made out, but went on to find
            that the Appellants had made false  representations  in  a  2007
            application. He concluded they  did  not  meet  the  suitability
            requirements of Appendix FM.

         3. The grounds argue that the suitability requirements had not been
            put in issue by the respondent; however the judge  at  paragraph
            13 pointed to the fact that 'the facts [relating to suitability]
            were all disclosed in the documents provided by  the  respondent
            and in the knowledge of the sponsor and the Appellants who  were
            required to meet  the  requirements  of  all  the  rules.'  This
            analysis by the judge contains no arguable  error  of  law.  The
            refusal had raised an issue of false documents that in principle
            could have brought into play suitability  under  paragraph  S-EC
            2.2.

         4. The remaining grounds  however  may  be  arguable  in  that  the
            wording  of  paragraph  S-EC  2.2  refers  in  terms  to   false
            information...submitted in  relation  to  the  application;  the
            application  about  which  the  judge  made  findings  of  false
            information was not the current application, but the one made in
            2007.

         5. There is therefore an arguable error of  law  disclosed  by  the
            application."

 4. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 5. At the outset Mr Bramble conceded that ground  2  in  relation  to  the
    proper construction of the Immigration Rules was made out and that  the
    appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing. Mr Karim, given the concession, submitted likewise. It  is  an
    analysis that I share.

Decision

 6. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be dealt  with  afresh
    pursuant  to  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the   Tribunals,   Courts   and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice 7.(b), before any  Judge  aside  from
    Judge M R Oliver.


No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 4 October 2017.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard










