
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/03499/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 January 2014                               |On 23 January 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Javeria Tariq
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel, instructed by Axiom Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Javeria Tariq, was born on 13 November  1987  and  is  a
    citizen of Pakistan.  The appellant  had  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge  Obhi)  against  a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer, Islamabad to refuse her  application  for  settlement  in  the
    United Kingdom as the spouse of Naser Pasha (hereafter referred  to  as
    the sponsor).  The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that this appeal should be allowed.  The only  issue  raised  by
    the ECO related to the ability of the couple to maintain themselves  in
    the United Kingdom without recourse to public funds  (paragraph  281(v)
    of HC 395).  The judge (perhaps because he was dealing with the  appeal
    on the papers and heard no live submissions) incorrectly  assumed  that
    the application fell to be considered  under  the  current  Immigration
    Rules; in fact, the application predated the coming into force  of  the
    amendment to the Rules and, therefore, the "old" paragraph 281 applied.
     The judge's error is such that I set aside the determination and  have
    remade the decision.  Mr Diwnycz, for the respondent, did  not  dispute
    that the figures of income set out at [9]  of  Ms  Patel's  grounds  of
    appeal were other than accurate.  It is clear from those  figures  that
    the sponsor has a sufficient income (both from work and from disability
    benefit) to support  himself  and  the  appellant  without  the  couple
    needing to have recourse to any public  funds.   It  follows  that  the
    appellant is able to satisfy each of the requirements of paragraph  281
    and her appeal in respect of the Immigration Rules is allowed.

DECISION

 3. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    18 October 2013 is set aside.  I have remade the decision.  This appeal
    in respect of the Immigration Rules is allowed.






Signed                              Date 16 January 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

