
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/03438/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 20 July 2014                      |On 28 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          VINUBHAI SHANABHAI PATEL
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Blake (counsel), Instructed by Gulbenkian
                    Andonian, solicitors.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.     The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  brings  this  appeal
but in order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were  in
the First-tier Tribunal. This  is  an  appeal  by  the  Secretary  of  State
against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Zahed,  promulgated  on  28
January 2015 which allowed the Appellant's appeal.

Background

3.    The appellant was born on 5 September 1936. He is an Indian  national.
On 17 February 2014, the respondent refused the appellant's application  for
entry clearance as an adult dependent relative under Paragraph EC-DR.1.1  of
Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

The Judge's Decision

4.    The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal  Judge  Zahed  ("the  judge")  allowed  the  appeal   against   the
respondent's decision under the Immigration Rules. The judge found that  the
appellant's witnesses were credible and found that  the  appellant  requires
long term personal care to perform the ordinary activities of  daily  living
and so found that the requirements of Immigration Rules EC-DR.2.4 were  met.


5.    Grounds of appeal were lodged by the respondent and on 10 March  2015,
designated First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Murray  gave  permission  to  appeal,
finding that there was inadequate evidence to allow the judge to  reach  the
conclusions that he did and that "...there is no evidence  that  it  is  not
possible to get the required level of care in India..."

The Hearing

6.    Mr Tufan for the respondent submitted that the issue in this case  was
whether Paragraph EC-DR of the Immigration Rules was  satisfied.  He  argued
that EC-DR.2.4 and 2.5 have conjunctive requirements, both of which must  be
satisfied by the appellant.  He  said  that  the  respondent's  position  is
simple; the question was whether or not the judge was entitled to reach  the
conclusions reached in the determination promulgated on 28 January  2015  on
the evidence provided. Mr Tufan said that a high test is set  by  EC-DR  and
that the conclusion reached by the judge "...is almost perverse".

7.    Mr Blake for the appellant adopted the terms of the  9  page  skeleton
argument and referred to the evidence set out  in  the  appellant's  bundle,
which was available to the judge at first  instance.  After  discussing  the
evidence, he relied on the cases of Mukarkar v SSHD [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045,
Edwards v Beirstow [1956] AC 14, Osman  v  ECO  (Appeal  No.  OA/18244/2012,
promulgated on 15 November 2013) and Nixon (Permission to  Appeal:  Grounds)
[2014] UKUT 00368 (IAC). He argued that the challenge is one of  rationality
and that findings of credibility were properly open to  the  judge  to  make
and that the evidence before the judge supported the conclusions made.





Analysis

8.    The relevant provisions of Appendix FM are  E-ECDR2.4  and  E-ECDR2.5.
Under  E-ECDR2.4  the  applicant  must  as  a  result  of  age,  illness  or
disability require long term personal care to perform everyday tasks.

9.    Under E-ECDR2.5 the applicant must be unable, even with the  practical
and financial help of the Sponsor, to obtain the required level of  care  in
the country where they are living because

    (a)    it is not available and there is no person in that  country  who
    could not reasonably provide it; or

    (b)    it is not affordable.

10.   The grounds of appeal  argue  that  there  was  insufficient  evidence
before the First Tier Tribunal for the judge  to  reach  a  conclusion  that
residential care facilities were not available to  the  appellant  in  India
nor that there was sufficient evidence to  allow  the  judge  to  reach  the
conclusion that as a result of age or  disability,  the  appellant  requires
long term personal care to perform everyday tasks.

11.    The  evidence  which  was  before  the  judge  is  contained  in  the
appellant's bundle and the Home Office PF1 bundle.  The  appellant's  bundle
contains  witness  statements  from  the  appellant's  wife  and   daughter,
together with witness statements from the  appellant's  granddaughters.  The
judge records at paragraph 4 of his determination  that  he  heard  evidence
from  the  appellant's  wife,  two  daughters  and  one  granddaughter.   At
paragraph 9, he finds that each of those  witnesses  were  credible,  honest
and reliable.

12.   Between documents 78  and  142  of  the  appellant's  bundle,  medical
documentation is produced. Amongst those documents, there are  letters  from
two hospitals confirming diagnosis of diabetes and  hypertension.  There  is
also  sufficient  documentary  evidence  to  establish  that  the  appellant
suffers  from  depression  and  that  his  condition  is  treated  by   oral
medication. There is unchallenged documentary evidence  that  the  appellant
lives alone. At [9],  [10],  [11]  and  [12]  of  the  decision,  the  judge
summarises that evidence and placing reliance on that evidence,  finds  that
the appellant suffers from depression, hypertension and  anxiety;  that  the
appellant is struggling to  cope  with  the  ordinary  activities  of  daily
living; that the appellant is not able to wash, dress or cook himself;  that
he is no longer able to pursue an independent life and  the  level  of  care
that he requires is not available to him.

13.   At [13], the judge makes  a  specific  finding  that  the  appellant's
disabling conditions leave the  appellant  in  need  (because  of  his  age,
illness and disability) of long  term  personal  care  to  perform  everyday
tasks. At [14], the judge finds that the appellant is unable, even with  the
practical and financial help of the sponsor, to obtain  the  required  level
of care in the country in which he lives.

14.   In reaching those findings at [13] and [14],  the  judge  demonstrably
applies the correct legal test.

15.   The real challenge in this case is to the quality  of  evidence  which
drew the judge to his conclusions. At [7] and [8], the judge clearly  places
reliance on the documentary  evidence  concerning  the  appellant's  medical
condition and the treatments that he receives. Between  [9]  and  [11],  the
judge clearly placed reliance on the oral evidence and found  the  witnesses
to be credible and reliable. The questions of the weight to be  afforded  of
such evidence are classically questions for the judge at first instance.

16.   Disagreement with a Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the
evidence or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not
give rise to an error of law. Rationality is a very  high  threshold  and  a
conclusion is not irrational just because some alternative  explanation  has
been rejected or can be said to be possible.

17.   At [13] and [14] of the decision, the judge applies the correct  legal
test.

18.   I therefore find that as the weight to be afforded is a  question  for
the judge at first instance and as the correct legal test has been  applied,
there is no error of  law.  The  respondent  might  view  the  determination
promulgated on  28  January  2015  as  a  generous  decision,  but  such  an
expression of dissatisfaction of the decision does not amount to a  material
error of law.

CONCLUSION

19.   I therefore find that no errors of law have been established and  that
the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

20.   The appeal is dismissed.



Signed      Date 25 July 2015

                                        Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


