
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/03409/2013
                                                               OA/03411/2013
                                                               OA/03413/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court Birmingham               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 23rd June 2014                               |On 15th July 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                            J B (first appellant)
                           R R (second appellant)
                            A R (third appellant)
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - Islamabad

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mrs S Rupra of Hasan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellants appeal against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Graham promulgated on 21st February 2014.

 2. The Appellants are female nationals of Pakistan, born 1st January 1978,
    20th September 2002, and 9th February  2001  respectively.   The  first
    Appellant is the mother of the second and third Appellants.

 3. The Appellants applied for entry clearance to join the Sponsor, MR, who
    is a British  citizen.   The  Sponsor  is  the  husband  of  the  first
    Appellant, and the father of the second and third Appellants.

 4. The applications were refused on 21st November  2012.   The  Respondent
    was not satisfied that adequate maintenance and accommodation would  be
    available for the Appellants, and was  not  satisfied  that  the  first
    Appellant  satisfied  the  English  language  requirement  set  out  in
    paragraph 281  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the second  and  third  Appellants  were  the  Sponsor's
    daughters.

 5. The Appellants appealed against refusal of entry clearance,  and  their
    appeals were heard together by Judge Graham (the judge) on 4th February
    2014.  The judge was satisfied that the second and third Appellants are
    the children of the Sponsor,  and  was  also  satisfied  that  adequate
    maintenance and accommodation would be available for the Appellants.

 6. The judge was not satisfied that  the  first  Appellant  satisfied  the
    English language requirement set  out  in  paragraph  281.   The  judge
    accepted  that  the  first  Appellant  had  an  English  language  test
    certificate that showed that the first Appellant met or exceeded  level
    A1 of the Common European Framework of Reference (CEFR) which pre-dated
    the date of refusal of entry clearance which was  21st  November  2012.
    However the certificate had not been submitted to the  Respondent,  and
    the judge therefore found that the Respondent did not have confirmation
    that  the  first  Appellant  had   satisfied   the   English   language
    requirement, which meant that the Respondent's decision to refuse entry
    clearance on that ground was in accordance with  the  law.   The  judge
    dismissed the first Appellant's appeal on that basis, and  because  the
    first Appellant's appeal was dismissed, the appeals of the  second  and
    third Appellants were  also  dismissed.   The  Appellants  applied  for
    permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  grounds  are
    summarised in the grant  of  permission  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Easterman which is set out below;


         "1.   The  applicants,  a  mother  and  her  two  daughters,   seek
             permission to appeal, the decisions of Judge of the First-tier
             Tribunal  Graham,  sitting  at  Birmingham,  dismissing  their
             appeals against the decisions of the Entry  Clearance  Officer
             (ECO), refusing their applications for settlement with MR, the
             first applicant's husband and father to the second and third.
         2.   The grounds seek to argue that the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
             Tribunal made an error  of  law  when  failing  to  take  into
             account an English language test certificate, issued prior  to
             the date of decision, which was not sent to the ECO,  but  was
             sent subsequently to  Entry  Clearance  Manager  but  was  not
             considered further due  'to  lack  of  staff'.   The  argument
             simply put is that the certificate pertains to the date of the
             decision and at that time the first applicant had the required
             qualification and certificate.
         3.   The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal found in the  applicants'
             favour on a number of points and the appeal failed  solely  on
             the above issue.  The judge was not impressed with the reasons
             given for not getting the certificate to the ECO but does  not
             appear to have dealt with the suggestion that she was bound to
             consider it, and that with it the applicants met the  Rule  at
             the date of decision.  This was not  a  points-based  decision
             and there was no bar on considering evidence that had not been
             before the Secretary of State.  The Rule from 6th  April  2012
             was as follows:
             (ii) the applicant provides an original English language  test
                  certificate in speaking  and  listening  from  an  English
                  language test provider approved by the Secretary of  State
                  for these purposes, which clearly  shows  the  applicant's
                  name and the qualification obtained (which  must  meet  or
                  exceed level  A1  of  the  Common  European  Framework  of
                  Reference):
             It is in my view an arguable error of law for the judge not to
             have considered it, notwithstanding that the  certificate  was
             not before the ECO, as it was in existence  from  13th  August
             2012 and the decision was not made until November 2012."

 7. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to Rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 in the following terms;

         "The Respondent does not oppose  the  Appellants'  application  for
         permission to appeal as it  appears  that  the  judge  should  have
         considered  the  English  language  certificate,  applying  Section
         85A(2).  Had he done so, it is clear that he would have allowed the
         appeals before him."

 8. Following the grant  of  permission  to  appeal,  the  Tribunal  issued
    directions that there should  be  an  oral  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in  law
    such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. Mr Smart conceded that the judge had  materially  erred  in  law.   The
    original English language test certificate was produced.  Mr Smart  was
    satisfied that the appeals should be allowed.

My Conclusions and Reasons

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The judge  erred
    materially in not considering the English  language  certificate  which
    proved that the first Appellant had  achieved  the  required  standard.
    This certificate had been obtained prior to  the  Respondent's  refusal
    and therefore was admissible in evidence.

11. As conceded on behalf  of  the  Respondent,  the  first  Appellant  had
    achieved the required standard in English, and that was the only  issue
    which caused the appeals to be  dismissed.   I  therefore  re-make  the
    decisions and the appeals are allowed.

Decision

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.

I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeals are allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction.  I  make  an  anonymity
order pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008, because the second and third Appellants are minors.



Signed                              Date 4th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Because the appeals are allowed I have considered  whether  to  make  a  fee
award.   It  was  accepted  by  the  Sponsor  that  the   English   language
certificate was not submitted to the Respondent by the  time  the  decisions
to  refuse  entry  clearance  were  made.   I  therefore  do  not  find   it
appropriate to make a fee award as there was insufficient evidence to  prove
that the Appellants satisfied the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  at
the date of the Respondent's decision.



Signed                              Date 4th July 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall

