
[pic]


Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/04093/2014



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Birmingham Employment       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Tribunal                             |                                     |
|On 22 January 2016                   |On 26 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (ISLAMABAD)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                              MRS SEHRISH MALIK
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Mc Veety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Massih, counsel instructed by Kausers
Solicitors



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judges Chohan and Coaster, promulgated on  26  November  2014,
    allowing an appeal against a decision to refuse the respondent leave to
    enter the United Kingdom as a partner.

Background

 2. The respondent's application was refused  on  24  February  2014  under
    paragraph S-EC 2.2 (a) of Appendix FM.  The  reasons  given  were  that
    there were  discrepancies  between  HMRC  records  and  the  employment
    information provided by the sponsor; HMRC had no tax  records  for  the
    sponsor and  when  asked  to  provide  further  information  about  the
    sponsor's employment, the respondent had not done so. It was considered
    that the sponsor had misrepresented his income in order  to  facilitate
    the visa application.

 3. In appealing the ECO's decision, it  was  argued  on  the  respondent's
    behalf that no evidence of discrepancies had  been  produced;  the  ECO
    failed to thoroughly consider  the  evidence  of  employment  and  that
    additional information had been provided. The grounds further  referred
    to the ECO's failure to have any regard to  the  rights  of  a  British
    child affected by the decision.

 4. An Entry Clearance Manager (ECM) did not review the decision to  refuse
    entry owing to staff shortages.

 5. At the hearing before the FTTJ, there was discussion as to the lack  of
    any consideration of any other aspect of Appendix FM;  the  absence  of
    any HMRC evidence and  the  paucity  of  information  in  the  document
    verification report. The sponsor spoke only to rely on the contents  of
    his  witness  statement.  The  panel  allowed  the  appeal  under   the
    Immigration  Rules.  They  declined  to  attach  any  weight   to   the
    verification report; they accepted that the sponsor had sent additional
    employment documentation and that he was employed as claimed.

Error of law

 6. The grounds of application argue, firstly,  that  the  panel  erred  in
    considering new  evidence  relied  upon  by  the  sponsor  rather  than
    remitting the matter to the ECO to verify. Secondly, the panel erred in
    assuming that ECO was satisfied that the requirements of the Rules were
    met.

 7. FTTJ O'Garro granted permission to appeal; stating the decision of  the
    panel raised an arguable point of law as to whether an appeal could  be
    allowed under the Rules in these  circumstances.  She  found  that  the
    panel gave clear and valid legal  reasons  as  to  why  no  weight  was
    attached to the verification report, however permission was not refused
    on this ground.

 8. The respondent's Rule 24 response referred to a letter from UKVI to the
    respondent, which advised her that her application fell to  be  refused
    "solely" because she did not meet the income threshold. The  panel  had
    not assumed the ECO was satisfied regarding the  Rules,  but  satisfied
    themselves that the requirements were met. It was said to be unfair for
    the case to be remitted to the ECO owing to the delay thus far.

 9. At the hearing before me, Mr McVeety indicated that he was  content  to
    rely on the grounds as  drafted.  He  admitted  that  he  was  in  some
    difficulties in arguing that the panel ought to have considered all the
    requirements of Appendix FM when the ECO had clearly  stated  that  the
    sole issue is was one of maintenance.

10. Mrs Massih relied upon her skeleton argument and rule 24 response.  She
    asked me to note that the judge granting permission had concluded  that
    the panel's findings on the verification report were sound and were not
    the basis on which permission was granted. There were no  other  issues
    before the Tribunal. She invited me to uphold the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.  In response to my query regarding a  matter  raised  in
    the second paragraph of the grounds,  Mrs  Massih  explained  that  the
    additional evidence relied upon by the respondent went  to  the  issues
    raised in the document verification report and not to Appendix  FM.  At
    that juncture, Mr McVeety interjected to indicate that  this  was  also
    his understanding.

11. At the end of the hearing, I announced  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    panel made no error of law and upheld their decision. My reasons are as
    follows.

12. Mr/Ms M Partridge, the Head of Section, UKVI, wrote to  the  respondent
    on 8 January 2014, clearly stating that  her  application  fell  to  be
    refused solely on the basis of not meeting the maintenance requirement.
    That position was  maintained  in  the  notice  of  decision  dated  24
    February 2014.  On the day of the hearing, the ECO's representative, Ms
    Knight, did not raise any other issue before the  panel,  as  noted  at
    [16] of the decision and reasons.  Mr McVeety rightly accepted that the
    panel made no  error  in  focusing  on  the  sole  issue  before  them.
    Furthermore, the panel cannot be criticised  for  commenting  that  all
    other requirements of the Rules were met.

13. It was said in  the  grounds  that  the  panel  admitted  documentation
    provided by the sponsor at the hearing. However,  both  representatives
    were in agreement that the sponsor's evidence did not go to  the  issue
    of whether the minimum income threshold was met but to that of  whether
    he had misrepresented his income as  the  ECO  had  alleged.  In  these
    circumstances, in order for there to be a fair hearing,  the  sponsor's
    evidence to challenge the ECO's assertions  had  to  be  assessed.  The
    panel did so at [14] of the decision; found it to be reliable  evidence
    and accepted that the sponsor was employed as claimed. They did not err
    in reaching these findings.

14. I accordingly dismiss the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal.

Decision

 1) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law
 2) The decision of the FTTJ is upheld, with all findings preserved.

    No application for anonymity was made and I could see no reason to make
    such a direction.




    Signed Date: 24 January 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara
