
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04442/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 May 2015                                 |On 11 May 2015                |
|Prepared 5 May 2015                           |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY



                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIJING

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                miss han lin

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss S Lloyd, Counsel, instructed by MNS Solicitors


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The Entry Clearance Officer, Beijing, appeals with permission,  against
    a decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Aberese  who,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 26 January 2015,  allowed  the  appeal  of
    Miss Han Lin against the decision of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
    refuse to grant entry clearance  under the provisions  of  HC  395  (as
    amended).

2.   Although the  Entry Clearance Officer is  the  appellant  before  me  I
    will for ease of reference refer to him as the respondent as he was the
    respondent in the First-tier Tribunal.  Similarly I will refer to  Miss
    Han Lin as the appellant as she was the appellant in the First-tier.

3.   The appellant is a citizen of China, born on 23 May 1998,  who  applied
    for entry clearance under the provisions of paragraph 297 of the  Rules
    to join her parents in Britain.  Her father Minglong Lin is now British
    and her mother has discretionary leave  to  remain.   Her  mother,  who
    arrived in Britain in December 2011 without leave, is not  entitled  to
    settlement in Britain as  she  has  not  passed  the  relevant  English
    language test.  She was granted an extension  of  stay  in  March  2014
    which will expire on 9 March 2016.  The appellant has  a   brother  who
    was born in Britain and is a British citizen, as is her sister who  was
    born in China but was granted leave to enter  Britain.   The  appellant
    lives with her grandmother who was born on 19 September 1929.

4.   The notice of refusal stated that the appellant was refused  under  the
    provisions of paragraph 297(i) (a) - (f) the Immigration Rules.

5.   The judge noticed the evidence which was that  the  appellant's  mother
    had not come to Britain legally and he made  clear  findings  that  the
    appellant's mother was not settled and that her  father  did  not  have
    sole responsibility for her. He therefore   found  that  the  appellant
    could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

6.     However, at the end of paragraph 7 of  the  determination  the  judge
    Who twice incorrectly refers to  the  appellant's  grandmother  as  her
    mother) stated:

         "The Tribunal  also  considered  whether  or  not  there  were  any
         compelling or compassionate circumstances which have been  provided
         by the appellant in this appeal and the  Tribunal  finds  that  the
         appellant's situation in China is that she is looked after  by  her
         mother and that even though her mother is elderly that she  is  and
         has been able to look after her.  The Tribunal is not persuaded  by
         the evidence that the appellant's grandmother is  no  longer  in  a
         position to look after the appellant."

7.   In the following paragraph the judge  refered  to  the  rights  of  the
    appellant under Article 8 of  the  ECHR  before  stating  that  it  was
    accepted that the appellant had two siblings  in  Britain.   The  judge
    then wrote:

         "The Tribunal considered  that  in  light  of  Section  55  of  the
         Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 which requires the UK
         Border agency to carry out existing functions in a way  that  takes
         into account the need to safeguard and to promote  the  welfare  of
         children in the UK.  The Tribunal finds that it  would  be  in  the
         best interests of the siblings in the UK for them  to  reside  with
         the appellant in this country alongside with their  parents  so  as
         the whole family is united and residing together."

8.   The judge then made a brief  reference  to  the  determination  of  the
    Tribunal in Mundeba (Section 55 and paragraph  297(i)(f))  [2013]  UKUT
    000 (IAC) and said that  in that case the Tribunal had  formed  a  view
    that the statutory duty under Section 55 of the  UK  Borders  Act  2009
    only  applied  to  children  within  the  UK  but   that   the   family
    considerations required an evaluation of a  child's  welfare  including
    emotional needs, and the focus needed to be on the circumstances of the
    child  in  the  light  of  his  or  her  age,  social  background   and
    developmental history and would involve enquiries as to  whether  there
    is evidence of neglect or abuse, whether their unmet  needs  should  be
    catered for and whether there are stable  arrangements  for  a  child's
    physical care.  The Tribunal had also gone on  to  say  that  the  best
    interests of a child were usually best served by being with both or  at
    least one of their parents.  Continuity of residence was another factor
    and that a change in the place of residence where a child had grown  up
    for a number of years when socially aware was important.

9.   The judge stated that on balance it was in the best  interests  of  the
    children that leave to enter  was  granted  so  as  to  allow  all  the
    children to reside with both parents.  The appeal was therefore allowed
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

10.  The Entry Clearance Officer's grounds of appeal stated that  the  judge
    had failed to engage with the relevant balancing exercise and  had  not
    taken into account the public interest in immigration control, the fact
    that the appellant failed under the Immigration Rules, the role of  the
    appellant's grandmother and the fact that her mother only  had  limited
    leave in  Britain,  all  of  which  were  relevant  in  the  Article  8
    assessment.

11.  It was on that basis that the  respondent  was  granted  permission  to
    appeal.

12.  Miss Lloyd had prepared a Rule 24 response which argued that the  judge
    had been correct to rely on the determination in Mundeba and that there
    was only an error of law when the judge had erred  in  considering  the
    maternal grandmother's health rather than  the  welfare  and  the  best
    interests of the appellant.  She argued that the lack of  consideration
    of the public interest test in this case was immaterial as if there had
    been a proper assessment of the provisions of paragraph  297(i)(f)  the
    judge would not have been required to consider the public interest.

Discussion

13.  I consider that there are material errors of law in  the  determination
    of the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal.   While  he  was  correct  to
    dismiss the appeal under paragraph 297 he makes no proper assessment of
    the rights of the appellant under Article 8 of the ECHR.   The  reality
    is that while Rule 297(i)(f) refers to serious and  compelling  and  or
    family or other considerations which make the exclusion  of  the  child
    undesirable, those circumstances are not identified and it  would  only
    be in identifying those circumstances that the judge  would  have  been
    able to go on to find that there were circumstances which mean that the
    appellant should be granted entry clearance.  The reality is that  this
    appellant has lived in China all  her  life  and  has  lived  with  her
    grandmother for many years.  Under the provisions in Mundeba the  judge
    should have taken into account  that  continuity  of  residence  was  a
    factor and that change in the place of  residence  where  a  child  had
    grown up for a number of years whilst  socially  aware  was  important.
    Continuity of residence would mean that  the  appellant  should  remain
    with her  grandmother.   Moreover  the  judge  completely  ignores  the
    requirements of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  as
    amended which places weight on the maintenance of effective immigration
    control - that is clearly a reference to the issue of whether or not an
    applicant can succeed within the Rules and  furthermore  the  issue  of
    whether or not the appellant would be  a  burden  on  the  British  tax
    payers.  The judge makes no reference to whether or not the appellant's
    father would be able to support her without recourse to public funds.

14.  The judge quite simply does not set out any  reasons  as  to  why  this
    appellant should be granted  leave  to  enter  outside  the  Rules  but
    appears to have only considered the application of Section  55  of  the
    2009 Act, although it was unclear whether or not he is stating  whether
    or not the provisions in that case refer to the  appellant  or  to  her
    siblings, certainly one of whom has never met the appellant.

15.  The judge has simply  not  engaged  with  the  relevant  issues  in  an
    Article 8 assessment.

16.  I am fortified in my opinion when I consider the judgment of the  Court
    of Appeal in SS (Congo) and  Others  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387  where,  at
    paragraph 40, Richards LJ emphasises that the Secretary of State has  a
    greater margin of appreciation in entry clearance cases.

17.  This is simply a case where a case has not been  made  out  that  there
    are such exceptional and compelling reasons for entry clearance  to  be
    granted.

18.  I would add that I also place particular weight on the fact that  there
    is nothing to indicate that the appellant's mother  would  qualify  for
    indefinite leave to remain.  If it were the case that her mother  could
    so qualify then the appellant would have two parents settled in Britain
    and her situation would  obviously  be  different  as  she  would  then
    qualify under  the  provisions  of  paragraph  297(i)(a)  provided,  of
    course, that the accommodation  and  maintenance  requirements  of  the
    Rules were met.

19.  In these circumstances I find that there are material errors of law  in
    the determination of the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  I  set
    aside his decision.  I direct that the appeal now proceeds to a further
    hearing, afresh, in the First-tier as I consider that the  requirements
    of the Senior President's Practice Directions are met.


Decision

20.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is set aside.

Directions.

21.  This appeal will proceed to a  hearing  afresh  in  the  First-tier  at
    Taylor House with a Mandarin interpreter.  Time estimate 2 hours.




Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy



