
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/04988/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|On 7th January 2015                           |On 12th January 2015         |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                               LABINOT TAHIRI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KOSOVO
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr E MacKay, of McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Kosovo.   He  appeals  against   a
    determination by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Watters,  dismissing  his
    appeal against refusal of entry clearance as a  spouse.   His  wife  is
    originally from Kosovo but now  a  British  citizen,  as  are  the  two
    children of the marriage.  The appellant conceded  that  he  could  not
    meet the financial requirements of the Immigration  Rules.   The  judge
    found no good reason to look beyond the requirements of the Rules.

 2. The grounds of appeal are that the judge:

         ... left out of account  that  these  British  children  cannot  be
         denied the benefits of their citizenship of the European Union  and
         ... there were the same obstacles to family life continuing outwith
         the UK that are identified at paragraphs 106-113 of Ogundimu [2013]
         UKUT 00060.

 3. The appellant's "bundle 2" in the First-tier Tribunal comprised  copies
    of nine cases dealing with the interaction of the Immigration Rules and
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  It does not appear that the  judge's  attention
    was drawn to any particular case or passage.  Ogundimu is  not  one  of
    the nine cases.

 4. Mr MacKay opened his submission by producing a  copy  of  Ogundimu  and
    referring to paragraphs 106 to 113:


          106.  We finally, therefore, turn to the requirements of paragraph
          399(b)(ii) of the rule; whether there are insurmountable obstacles
          to family life with JD continuing outside the United Kingdom.


          107.    In her refusal letter the Secretary of State fails to  pay
          any regard to the circumstances of TS when considering this issue.
          TS is a nine year old British citizen (and therefore a citizen  of
          the European Union). She is the daughter of JD. The fact that  her
          mother, JD, is her primary carer  is  corroborated  by  Ms  Best's
          statement, and we accept that this is so.


          108.    In Sanade  and  others  (British  children  -  Zambrano  -
          Dereci) [2012] UKUT 48 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal [Blake P  and  UTJ
          Jordan] asked the following question of  the  Secretary  of  State
          (recorded at paragraph 93 of the decision):


          "Does the respondent agree that in a  case  where  a  non-national
          parent is being removed and claims  it  is  a  violation  of  that
          person's human rights to be separated from a child  with  whom  he
          presently  enjoys  family  life  as  an  engaged  parent,  that  a
          consequence of the CJEU's judgment is that it is not open  to  the
          respondent to submit that an interference can be  avoided  because
          it is reasonable to expect the child  (and  presumably  any  other
          parent/carer who is not facing deportation/removal)  to  join  the
          appellant in the country of origin?  If not why not?"


          109.  Mr Devereux, at that time the Assistant  Director  UKBA  and
          Head of European Operation Policy, responded as follows:


          "We do accept, however, that in  a  case  where  a  third  country
          national is unable to claim a right to reside on the basis set out
          above it will  not  logically  be  possible,  when  assessing  the
          compatibility of their removal or deportation  with  the  ECHR  to
          argue that any interference with Article 8 rights could be avoided
          by the family unit moving to a country which  is  outside  of  the
          EU".


          110.    Having considered the Secretary of  State's  response  the
          Tribunal concluded (paragraph 95):


          "This means that where the child or indeed the remaining spouse is
          a British citizen and therefore a citizen of the  European  Union,
          it is not possible to require them  to  relocate  outside  of  the
          European Union or to submit that it would be reasonable  for  them
          to do so..."


          111.    The  Tribunal  further  clarified,  when  looking  at  the
          particulars facts of the case before it, that:


          "...as British citizens, Mrs Sanade and her children are  citizens
          of the European Union and as such entitled to reside in the Union.
          The respondent properly accepts that they cannot  be  required  to
          leave the Union as a matter of law..."


          112.    In the case of Izuazu [2013] UKUT 45 (IAC)  the  Secretary
          of State has confirmed  that  the  response  continues  to  apply,
          subject to a clarification that it only  extends  to  the  British
          citizen spouse or partner where there is  in  addition  a  British
          citizen  child.  This  approach  is  consistent  with  the  recent
          decisions of the Court of Appeal in DH (Jamaica) [2012]  EWCA  Civ
          1736, and of the CJEU in O, S -v- Maahanmuuttovirasto  [C  -356/11
          and 357/11: 6 December 2012].


          113.    Thus, in this appeal, TS cannot be required to  leave  the
          European Union to join the appellant  in  Africa.  She  needs  her
          mother in order to exercise her residence rights in the Union.  To
          require her mother to join the appellant  in  Nigeria  (a  country
          with which she has no ties of any sort and has never  visited)  is
          either to require the child to leave the European  Union,  or  the
          mother to leave the child. In the latter eventuality there  is  no
          evidence of anyone else able to adequately care for the child  and
          so  the  first  issue  would  be  reopened.    It   is   certainly
          unreasonable to expect either TS or JD to relocate to Nigeria.  In
          our judgment the obstacles to the mother relocating when  she  has
          to  look  after  her  young  child  in  the  United  Kingdom   are
          insurmountable, whatever the term means.

 5. Mr MacKay submitted further as follows.  The judge firstly  went  wrong
    by considering at paragraph 8 whether the appellant might qualify under
    Section EX of the Rules on the basis  of  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family life continuing outside the UK.  That provision does  not  apply
    to an out of country  appeal.   As  a  result,  the  judge  misdirected
    himself that he did not require to undertake  a  Razgar  analysis.   He
    should have gone on to a full consideration  outside  the  Rules.   The
    error was material and the decision should be remade.  On the authority
    of Ogundimu,  it  was  not  open  to  the  Tribunal  to  conclude  that
    interference with family life could be avoided by relocation to Kosovo.
     It was not necessary to consider whether that was a reasonable option.
     The children could simply not be denied of their rights as citizens of
    the EU and of the UK.  Even if there were a criterion of reasonability,
    there was nothing to justify depriving the children of the benefits  of
    their citizenship.  A decision should  be  substituted  in  favour  the
    appellant.

 6. Mrs O'Brien replied along the following lines.  Paragraph EX is  not  a
    freestanding provision and does not apply  to  applications  made  from
    outside the UK, so the judge misdirected himself in that  respect.   It
    is not clear what submissions the judge had on either side on the point
    in the First-tier Tribunal, at a time it may  not  have  been  so  well
    understood.  However, the appellant's essential complaint was about the
    judge's conclusion  that  there  were  no  arguably  good  grounds  for
    granting leave to remain outside the Rules.  To  succeed  an  appellant
    had to put forward something of substance.  His only point recorded  in
    the determination was that the application by its date was a near  miss
    in relation to the major amendments to the Rules in 2012.  It is  well-
    established that a near miss is no good reason for allowing  an  appeal
    under Article 8.  In- and out- of country applications are governed  by
    different Rules and principles. Ogundimu was an in-country  case.   The
    family unit in this instance has never lived  together,  always  apart.
    The wife although a UK citizen is also  originally  from  Kosovo.   The
    couple met when she was living  and  working  there.   She  elected  to
    return to the UK when pregnant with their first  child.   She  and  the
    appellant chose to develop their family life by  way  of  her  and  the
    children residing here and the appellant in Kosovo,  with  visits  each
    way,  since  2010.   The  application  fell  short  of  the   financial
    requirements by a significant margin.  There had  been  no  significant
    submissions by which the judge would have been entitled  to  allow  the
    appeal outwith the Rules.  The appellant was wrong now to  assert  that
    the Rules fall away wherever there are UK citizen children.  On a step-
    by-step proportionality analysis the outcome would be the same.

 7. Mr MacKay in response said that the appellant's  case  had  been  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR only.  There had been sufficient material for the
    judge to be satisfied that it required a full Razgar  analysis.   As  a
    matter of EU law the children  could  not  be  required  to  leave  the
    jurisdiction.  It is axiomatic that it is  in  the  best  interests  of
    children to reside with both parents.  The issue  could  be  reconciled
    only by allowing the appellant entry to the  UK.   If  that  implied  a
    wholesale exception to the Rules, so be it.  The weight to be given  to
    the citizen rights of the children was so heavy as  to  outweigh  other
    considerations.  The appellant speaks good English, had a good  job  in
    Kosovo and would have good economic prospects  here.   That  diminished
    the public interest in enforcing the  Rules.   If  the  appellant  were
    here, the public interest as now set out in part 5A  of  the  2002  Act
    would not require his removal.

 8. On that last and again novel  point,  Mrs  O'Brien  made  the  counter-
    observation that part  5A  at  section  117B(3)  sets  out  the  public
    interest in the financial independence of persons seeking to  enter  or
    remain in the UK, and that matter is quantified by the Rules.

 9. Both representatives advised that so far as they are aware there is  no
    reported decision of  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  of  any  Court  dealing
    specifically with the  scope  of  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  to  permit
    admission of a parent to the UK where citizen children are resident and
    where the provisions of the Immigration Rules cannot be met.

10. I reserved my determination.

11. Mr MacKay's primary submission was that a parent of a UK citizen  child
    must be permitted entry to the UK.  That would be an easy principle  to
    state and to apply.  If that is the law, it should by  now  be  readily
    identifiable in statute, the Rules or the case law.  There is  no  such
    authority.  I think the proposition goes much too far.

12. The first case in the appellant's bundle of authorities in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was MM [2013] EWHC 1900 (Admin), which was reversed after
    the date of the hearing in the First-tier  Tribunal:  [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    985.   The  Court  of  Appeal  held  that  the  financial  requirements
    governing entry of non-EEA  citizen  spouses  to  the  UK  were  not  a
    disproportionate  interference  with  Article  8  rights.   The   Court
    recognised that the financial requirements did constitute a significant
    interference with Article 8 rights, but found that the Rules  struck  a
    fair balance with which the Court was not entitled to interfere.

13. Ogundimu was a different case, and involved the removal of one  of  the
    parents of a British citizen child.  There is no question in this  case
    of the appellant's wife and children being required to leave the UK  or
    the EU.  The practical effect of the adverse decision  is  that  family
    life may either continue as it has been to date, split between the  two
    countries, or may be carried on in  Kosovo,  by  way  of  election  not
    compulsion.

14. If the question were one of insurmountable obstacles, broadly construed
    as the reasonability of relocation, there is nothing  to  suggest  that
    the family could not readily live in Kosovo.  The appellant's wife  has
    lived and worked there before. There is no evidence to suggest that the
    best interests of the children would be  significantly  compromised  by
    their parents bringing them up in  Kosovo,  notwithstanding  that  they
    would lose advantages deriving from their citizenship.   (Although  not
    mentioned, it seems likely they are also of Kosovan  nationality.)   As
    to the reasonability of relocating, this family is at the  end  of  the
    spectrum where there is no significant difficulty.

15. I do not think that any realistic challenge was or could be made to the
    ECO's decision on the basis of  the  particular  circumstances  of  the
    case.  The only scope lay in the wider proposition that the Rule itself
    is inherently disproportionate.  That challenge was  not  addressed  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

16. As the Presenting Officer pointed out, the shortfall in  the  financial
    requirements is significant.  Wife and children depend entirely  on  UK
    state benefits.  The Rules for entry of spouses contemplate cases which
    also involve children, in which respect specific  additional  financial
    requirements apply.  Rather than being a case which calls for attention
    outside the Rules,  or  which  exhibits  compelling  circumstances  not
    sufficiently recognised under the Rules, this case is  exactly  of  the
    type which the Rules seek to govern.

17. The appellant made no coherent case  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    success outside the Rules, or for the  Rules  to  be  set  aside.   His
    grounds of appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  show  nothing  which  would
    entitle or require the Upper Tribunal to set the decision  aside.   The
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



[pic]


8 January 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
