
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04422/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 January 2017                            |On 25 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                             mrs sharmin sultana
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Rahman, Legal Representative, Jalalabad Law
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr P Armstrong, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh aged 27.  She appealed against
    the decision of the respondent  dated  20  January  2015  refusing  her
    application for leave to enter the  UK  as  the  partner  of  a  person
    present and settled in  the  UK  under  Appendix  FM.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 July 2016, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal G A Black
    dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the
    grounds that the judge's findings in respect  of  the  question  as  to
    whether the appellant's relationship with her  sponsor  was  subsisting
    were "very inadequate".  It was argued that the judge made no  findings
    about the regular remittance money  slips  and  that  there  was  other
    evidence that showed that there were regular communications between the
    parties and that the judge did not give any weight  to  this  evidence.
    It was submitted that the judge failed to  make  adequate  findings  in
    relation to the most recent visit by the sponsor to see  the  appellant
    in March 2016  which  was  supported  by  the  sponsor's  passport  and
    photographs.  Permission was granted on the basis that the grounds were
    arguable, particularly as the decision consisted of "only  three  pages
    in just two paragraphs of findings".

 3. Mr Rahman provided the Tribunal  with  a  skeleton  argument  and  with
    copies of the starred case of GA ("subsisting" marriage) Ghana*  [2006]
    UKAIT 00046 and Naz (subsisting marriage - standard of proof)  Pakistan
    [2012] UKUT 00040.

 4. The sole issue of dispute in the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal
    was whether the appellant and the sponsor had demonstrated  that  their
    marriage was subsisting.  The judge was not satisfied that they had.

 5. I share the respondent's conclusion that the  grounds  merely  disagree
    with the decision and seek to reargue the  case.   The  issue  in  this
    appeal was whether the relationship was subsisting, the marriage having
    been accepted.  Although the judge's reasoning is brief  and  succinct,
    it cannot be characterised as inadequate.  Mr Rahman conceded that  the
    fact that a decision is brief in itself does not mean that it fell into
    error.

 6. It was Mr Rahman's submission that the judge erred in  drawing  adverse
    inference from the fact that reference had been  made  to  the  parties
    maintaining contact by mobile, Skype and Viber, whereas in the  grounds
    of appeal it was confirmed that contact had only  been  through  mobile
    phone.  It was argued in the grounds for permission that the judge  did
    not raise the concern at the oral hearing  in  relation  to  Skype  and
    Viber.  In the grounds for permission it was indicated that the sponsor
    in his witness statement said that:-

         "I did not realise that I have  to  keep  all  phone  call  history
         records from the beginning of our relationship, nor did I know that
         the phone company is unable to produce  their  phone  call  records
         beyond three months back".

    However, that is a different issue from the Skype and  Viber  question.
    In the refusal of entry clearance dated 20 January 2015 the  respondent
    noted that the appellant stated that she maintained  contact  with  the
    sponsor by "mobile, Skype and Viber", but it was noted that she had not
    provided any evidence of contact by Skype or Viber as  stated,  despite
    having claimed to have been in a relationship since 5 November 2011.

 7. However, in the grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  was
    stated:-

         "That, the appellant have regular contact over mobile  phone  only,
         wrongly mentioned Viber & Skpee (sic), in  the  appendix-2  without
         asking appellant by computer provider therefore appellant extremely
         sorry for this unwanted mistake."

 8. The appellant was on notice in the refusal of entry clearance that  the
    respondent was not satisfied that there was any evidence  of  Skype  or
    Viber contact.  Therefore  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  draw  the
    conclusion that she did that it  was  of  concern  that  the  appellant
    clearly stated in her visa application, at question 1.8 that  she  kept
    in contact with her sponsor by 'mobile, skype,  viber,  etc'  but  then
    confirmed that it was only through mobile phone.   The  judge  was  not
    satisfied that there had been  an adequate explanation as  to  why  the
    other forms of contact had been mentioned, when in fact  it  was  clear
    that there had been no contact maintained through those social  medium.
    Given that the explanation in the grounds of appeal refers to  "without
    asking appellant by computer  provider  therefore  appellant  extremely
    sorry for this unwanted mistake" and that in the grounds of  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal at paragraph 2 the  grounds  refer  to  a  different
    explanation that the sponsor did not realise he had to keep  all  phone
    call history records,  an  adequate  explanation  has  still  not  been
    provided on this issue.   It  was  open  to  the  judge  to  reach  the
    conclusion she did on this  issue.   The  sponsor's  witness  statement
    dated 30 June 2016 is also silent on the issue of Skype and Viber  when
    the sponsor was aware of the respondent's concerns.

 9. Whilst the grounds for permission to appeal, the skeleton argument  and
    Mr Rahman before me, attempted to reargue the appeal including  stating
    that  "there  were  numerous  evidential  factors  pointing  towards  a
    relationship  being  genuine  and  subsisting",  the  judge  has  given
    adequate reasons for the findings that  she  reached.   The  fact  that
    those findings were succinctly confined to two paragraphs (and  I  note
    that the  paragraphs  run  to  almost  three-quarters  of  a  page  and
    therefore take up a large part of the decision which, as noted, was  on
    a single issue) is not an error, material or otherwise.

10. It was argued that the  judge  fell  into  error  in  failing  to  make
    findings in relation  to  the  financial  remittances.   It  was  again
    accepted by Mr Rahman that it is not an error to fail to make a finding
    on each and every piece of evidence.  The judge set out  at  [11]  that
    the appellant produced  a  bundle  which  included  itemised  telephone
    bills, payslips and bank statements.    Although  there  were  no  bank
    statements in the bundle  before  me  which  consisted  of  a  skeleton
    argument, sponsor's statement, proof of the sponsor's recent visit, the
    sponsor's photographs during recent visit and remittance slips (and the
    judge referred again at [11] to the bundle including photographs  taken
    of the appellant and the sponsor in Bangladesh on  a  recent  visit  in
    March 2016) it would  appear  that  the  judge  was  referring  to  the
    remittance slips when she indicated "bank statements".   Any  error  is
    not material.  The judge found at [12] that the evidence of the sponsor
    was "mainly truthful" but some  aspects  were  unreliable.   The  judge
    found that the parties entered into a lawful marriage and that they had
    met once in February 2013 and then again in March 2016 and  that  there
    were photographs showing the marriage and showing the  visit  in  2016,
    "However, other than that there is no other evidence to show  that  the
    parties lived together in Bangladesh".

11. The judge made findings that the "main evidence  consists  of  itemised
    telephone bills from October 2014  for  a  period  of  two  months  and
    further up-to-date bills have been produced showing  contact  with  the
    number ending 6462".  The weight the judge placed on the evidence was a
    matter for her and the fact that she did not consider the  evidence  of
    remittances to be "the main evidence" does not mean  that  it  was  not
    considered.  The judge's concerns in relation to the reliability of the
    evidence in relation to the subsistence of the marriage on a balance of
    probabilities outweighed the evidence of contact such that it was.

12. In addition to listing her concerns in  relation  to  only  two  visits
    during the period, the judge, as noted above, set out her  concerns  in
    relation to the discrepancies about the  mode  of  contact  (Skype  and
    Viber).  The judge also noted that the sponsor stated  he  was  unaware
    that he would be required to produce evidence of contact with his  wife
    and that he was unaware he would not be able  to  access  bills  dating
    back a number of years.  It was open to the judge, at [13] to not  find
    this evidence reliable and in  reaching  this  finding  she  took  into
    account  the  practical  difficulties  obtaining  such  evidence,   but
    nevertheless was of the view  that  the  appellant  had  been  able  to
    produce telephone bills for a period, but it was of only two months  in
    2014 and none since the end of that period until 5 May  2016.   It  was
    open to the judge to find that this was insufficient to show a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship given  the  lack  of  evidence  of  ongoing
    contact and continuity of a subsisting relationship.   The  judge  also
    took into consideration that there had been a considerable  passage  of
    time of five years during which the parties had only seen each other on
    two occasions.

13. Mr Rahman's argument was essentially a  disagreement  with  the  weight
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge attached to the evidence before her,
    which was adequately considered by her. It was open  to  the  judge  to
    find that there was an inadequacy of evidence and not to  be  satisfied
    that the evidence was reliable in light of that  inadequacy,  including
    the lack of adequate and reliable evidence of a subsisting relationship
    over the relevant period.

14. Mr Rahman relied heavily on GA and Naz (above).   However  the  judge's
    decision and reasons disclose that she had in mind that the requirement
    for a marriage to be subsisting is not limited to considering whether a
    marriage  is  valid  and  requires  an  assessment   of   the   current
    relationship between the parties and a decision as to  whether  in  the
    broader sense marriage is subsisting, and that post decision visits are
    admissible.  The judge took all of the evidence into account including,
    contrary to Mr Rahman's submission, the sponsor's 2016 visit (which the
    judge referred to at [11], [12] and [13] of her decision).  However the
    judge was not satisfied on the balance of probabilities that there  was
    a subsisting relationship.

15. Looking at the judge's decision as a whole, it cannot be said that  her
    conclusion is irrational, albeit  that  another  judge  may  well  have
    reached a different decision.  Irrationality is  a  high  threshold  to
    overcome and is not reached in this case.  Equally for the reasons  set
    out I reject the appellant's submission that the judge failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for the conclusions she reached.

 Notice of Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  does  not  disclose  an
    error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal and  is  to
    remain standing.

No application for an anonymity direction was sought or is made.


Signed                                  Date 25/01/2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
