
[pic]
st

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04749/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At  Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 18th September 2015               |On 3rd December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                     UA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

            THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER FOR JAMAICA AT KINGSTOWN
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S. Jegarajah, Counsel, instructed by PN Legal
Services.
For the Respondent:    Mr. T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 1. I refer to the parties as they were in the First tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Jamaica, born on 12  November  1997.  On
    the 17th November 2013 he applied for entry clearance for settlement as
    a dependent of his mother, NA. She is originally from Jamaica  and  now
    holds British nationality through her husband ZA.

 3. The online application form VAF4A at question 10 asks 'Do you hold,  or
    have you ever held, any  other  nationality  or  nationalities?'.   The
    appellant replied  'No'.   Under  the  heading  'Passport  information'
    question 18 asks 'Is this your first passport?' to which  the  response
    is 'No'.  The next question, 19, then states 'You answered 'No' to  the
    question 'Is this your first  passport?'.   Where  the  information  is
    available, please provide full details of all  passports  held  of  the
    last 10 years, including where they are now'.  The reply was: 'C1127535
    - expired passport'.  The appellant signed a declaration which included
    the  statement  'I  am  also  aware  that  my   application   will   be
    automatically refused and I may be banned from going to the UK  for  10
    years if I use a false document, lie or withhold relevant information'.

 4. The application was refused on 27 February 2014.  The  application  was
    refused under paragraph 320(7A). The refusal notice states:

         'In your application, you failed to disclose the  following  facts:
         Home Office records show that you  submitted  a  false  citizenship
         claim to US authorities and fraudulently  obtained  a  US  passport
         based on a falsified  relation  to  US  citizen  JMJ.  A  falsified
         Jamaican birth certificate was presented to  US  authorities  which
         showed that your parents were JMJ and ZA. I note that  your  stated
         father's name used in the fraudulent US application is the same  as
         that of your step-father in this application. In the absence of any
         evidence to the  contrary  I  am  satisfied  that  this  fraudulent
         application was submitted with the support of your step-father. You
         were not related as claimed to JMJ and therefore  did  not  qualify
         for US citizenship. I am satisfied that these facts  were  material
         to the application because it seriously undermines your credibility
         as a genuine applicant and seriously undermines the credibility  of
         both of your sponsors.'

 5. The entry clearance officer went on to consider the  application  under
    paragraph 297 of the immigration rules and found that 297(i) (e),  sole
    responsibility, was not satisfied.  No  other  serious  and  compelling
    family or other considerations were identified  which  would  make  his
    exclusion undesirable (Para 297(i) (f)). The  entry  clearance  officer
    stated that in making the decision regard was had to section 55 of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 as well as Article  8  of
    the UNHRC.

 6. The appellant's appeal in the First tier took place on the 2nd December
    2014.  Following a hearing on 27t h May 2015 I set that decision  aside
    and directed that the appeal be heard afresh by me at a later date.

The relevant immigration rules.

 7. Para 297 sets out the requirements  to  be  met  by  a  person  seeking
    indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of  a  parent
    present and settled. Para 297(i) (e) and (f) provide that he:

         (i)  is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent ... in
         one of the following circumstances:

             ...

             (e)  one parent is present and settled in the  United  Kingdom
             ...  and  has  had  sole  responsibility   for   the   child's
             upbringing; or

             (f)  one parent ... is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
             Kingdom ... and there are serious  and  compelling  family  or
             other  considerations  which  make  exclusion  of  the   child
             undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made  for  the
             child's care ...

 8. Paragraph 320(7A)  of  the  immigration  rules  is  under  the  heading
    `Grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter the United  Kingdom
    is to be refused'. It is as follows:

         (7A) where false representations have been made or false  documents
         or information have been submitted (whether or not material to  the
         application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to  the
         application, or in order to obtain documents from the Secretary  of
         State or a third party required in support of the application.

At the hearing.

 9. The appellant gave evidence by way  of  video  link.  This  followed  a
    request from Ms S. Jegarajah, Counsel, so that  he  could  express  his
    views. He indicated he wanted to be with his mother and  stepfather  in
    the United Kingdom and was frustrated that this had  not  occurred  and
    said his schoolwork was suffering because he could not concentrate.

10. The appellant's mother, whom I shall  refer  to  as  his  sponsor  gave
    evidence as did her husband, ZA, both adopting their statements.

The background.

11. The sponsor and her husband set out  a  chronology.  There  is  limited
    corroborative evidence and having considered all matters my  conclusion
    is that their evidence must be treated with  considerable  caution.   I
    accept the following part of their account:

          a) The sponsor was born in Jamaica on 5 February 1979. Her father
             was a WE. Shortly after her birth the appellant's mother  went
             to live in the United Kingdom and did  not  maintain  contact.
             The sponsor was cared for by her grandparents and later  by  a
             church organisation.

          b) When the appellant was 18 she fell pregnant. She gave birth to
             the appellant on 12 November 1997. His father was a RS.

          c) ZA is a British national who was  on  holiday  in  Jamaica  in
             February  2002.  He  met  the  sponsor  and  the  relationship
             developed.

          d) The sponsor came to the United Kingdom on 17  May  2002  on  a
             visit visa. The purpose behind the visit was  to  re-establish
             links with her mother and to make contact with ZA.   When  she
             came to the United Kingdom she left the appellant in the  care
             of her father and his then partner, JG.

          e) The sponsor cohabited with ZA.  She obtained  a  student  visa
             valid until 27 July 2003.

          f) On 26 April 2003, the sponsor married ZA. On the basis of  her
             marriage she was granted leave to remain until 6 January  2006
             and indefinite leave to remain on the 7 February 2006.

          g) In 2003 the sponsor made an unsuccessful application for entry
             clearance for the appellant.

          h) Subsequently, he boarded.

          i) On 21 July 2005 by deed poll in Jamaica  the  sponsor  changed
             the appellant's surname from S to A.

          j) On 17 December 2005 the sponsor gave birth to her first  child
             by her husband, Rm.

          k) In 2006 a second unsuccessful  application  was  made  by  the
             sponsor for the appellant to join her.

          l) On 29 March 2007 the sponsor travelled to the United States of
             America with her son  Rm  and  the  appellant.  The  appellant
             travelled on a visit visa. There, they met the former  partner
             of her father, now known as JMJ. She had been living in the US
             and had obtained US citizenship through marriage. On  7  April
             2007 the sponsor and Rm return to the United Kingdom,  leaving
             the appellant behind in the care of JMJ.

          m) An authentic American passport was obtained for the  appellant
             by  deception.  Premised  on  a   falsified   Jamaican   birth
             certificate showing his natural parents to be JMJ  and  ZA  he
             had managed to obtain US citizenship.

          n) In late 2008 he travelled to  the  United  Kingdom  using  his
             American passport and stayed with the sponsor, her husband and
             his half brother. He then returned to America in 2009.

          o) On 15 January 2009 the sponsor gave birth to her second  child
             by her husband, Rz.

          p) In late 2009 the sponsor, along with her two children  by  her
             husband, travelled to America  where  they  met  up  with  the
             appellant.  In  December  2009  they  travelled   to   Jamaica
             accompanied by the appellant and JMJ. Subsequently an  attempt
             was made to have the visa for Jamaica  on  the  appellants  US
             passport  extended.  This  led  to  the  Jamaican  authorities
             questioning his entitlement to US citizenship resulting in the
             confiscation of his US passport  which  was  returned  to  the
             American authorities. The sponsor and her two  other  children
             remained in Jamaica until December 2012 when they returned  to
             the United Kingdom.

Consideration.

12. The sponsor and her  husband  claim  ignorance  of  the  fraud  on  the
    American authorities. They claim that when the appellant was left  with
    JMJ in America the intention was that she would seek to  adopt  him  so
    that he could remain in America. However, this was not  to  be  a  true
    adoption and they  would  retain  parental  control.  They  claim  they
    believed a  legal  adoption  did  take  place  and  they  were  unaware
    falsified documents were used. They blame dishonest lawyers engaged  in
    arranging the adoption. I do  not  believe  this.  I  do  not  find  it
    credible that an adoption could have taken place inter-country  without
    checks being made upon the parents.

13. The refusal letter indicates the adoption claim is a figment.  American
    citizenship and a passport was obtained on the basis the appellant  was
    the natural child of JMJ evidenced by a birth certificate from Jamaica.
    There is no direct evidence from the American  authorities  about  what
    took place but I  believe  the  refusal  letter  contains  an  accurate
    summary.

14. The sponsor and her husband claim that  after  the  deception  came  to
    light they sought advice from an American lawyer named as Gary  Wright.
    He advised them that an option was to reapplying for entry clearance to
    the United Kingdom but not to disclose what had happened.  The  sponsor
    claims they then approached lawyers in the United Kingdom to  make  the
    application on their behalf and did not advise them of the full  facts.
    I do not accept her claim that a lawyer told them not  to  declare  the
    true situation. They were aware in the completion of the form that they
    were  misrepresenting  the  situation  and  were  failing  to  disclose
    material facts. I also note that question 48 of the application it  was
    stated the appellant had not travelled to the  United  Kingdom  in  the
    last 10 years. This was untrue as he had been in the United Kingdom  at
    the end of 2009.  I also note in the sponsors statement  she  indicated
    he was only here over  Christmas  but  in  her  oral  evidence  it  was
    indicated he had been enrolled in a school here.

15.  The  decision  of  Ahmed  (general  grounds  of  refusal  -   material
    nondisclosure) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 351 (IAC) referred to the need  for
    a dishonest intent on the part of the applicant or  someone  acting  on
    their behalf. I find this established.  I  find  that  the  application
    falls for refusal under the terms of paragraph  320(7A).  I  find  that
    false representations were made in the application in relation  to  the
    appellant's history and material facts were not disclosed.  These  were
    deliberate omissions of material known to be  relevant.  The  fact  the
    form was completed on behalf of the appellant does not  save  him  from
    the consequences of paragraph 320(7A). The application was made on  his
    behalf and he was a potential beneficiary.

16. I also am not satisfied that the sponsor has  had  sole  responsibility
    for his upbringing. In reaching this conclusion I am conscious that the
    sponsor's credibility has been seriously damaged  by  her  actions  and
    consequently her evidence must  be  treated  with  caution.  The  early
    applications of 2004 and 2007 were  refused  on  the  basis  that  sole
    responsibility was not established. There is  no  evidence  of  regular
    contact between the sponsor  and  the  appellant  from  when  she  left
    Jamaica in 2002. The evidence produced of contact and financial support
    does not commence until 2011. I am  not  satisfied  that  it  has  been
    established the appellant's natural father has had  no  involvement  in
    his life. For similar reasons, principally the damaged  credibility  of
    the sponsor, I do not find established there are serious and compelling
    considerations which make the appellant's  exclusion  undesirable.  The
    evidence would indicate that the appellant has been attending a private
    school and has boarded with families in Jamaica.

17. In considering the appeal I have borne in mind the spirit of section 55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 which requires the
    decision maker to be properly informed  of  the  position  of  a  child
    affected by the decision. There is an obligation to  promote  the  best
    interests of the child, irrespective of their nationality.

18. In tandem with this it is the Article 8 assessment. The  welfare  of  a
    child is a primary but not a paramount consideration. A decision  maker
    is required to consider the family as a whole. Any health  issues  have
    to be taken into account. In Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules  -  correct
    approach) [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal said  only if  there
    are arguably good grounds for granting  leave  to  remain  outside  the
    rules is it necessary for Article 8  purposes  to  go  on  to  consider
    whether there are compelling circumstances not sufficiently  recognised
    under them: R (on the application of) Nagre v Secretary  of  State  for
    the Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin).

         "The rules provide a mechanism for access to the United Kingdom  to
         be with a parent. Here, the requirements are not met and I  see  no
         compelling features which would require a  freestanding  Article  8
         consideration. If I am wrong and the matter  does  require  further
         consideration then any family life is weak. The appellant has lived
         all his life in Jamaica, save for a short period in America and the
         Christmas holiday in the United Kingdom.  He  has  been  away  from
         direct contact with his mother from 2002 until she met up with  him
         in 2007. They subsequently had time together in Jamaica from August
         2009 until his mother returned to the United Kingdom  at  Christmas
         2012.  He  has  had  limited  contact  with  his   stepfather   and
         stepbrothers. The  appellant  is  approaching  adulthood.  The  new
         section 117B  Article  8  provides  the  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration controls is in the public interest. If the  final  limb
         of the Razgar test could be reached then I  find  the  respondent's
         decision is proportionate."

19. I do not see anything about his medical condition which would result in
    a different conclusion. The fact the letter from a psychiatrist can  be
    produced would indicate there  are  medical  services  in  Jamaica.  No
    evidence has been produced to indicate he could not receive  treatment.
    The  actions  of  his  sponsor  and  stepfather  in  relation  to   the
    immigration authorities  in  America  must  call  into  question  their
    suitability. In MK (section 55 - Tribunal options) Sierra Leone  [2015]
    UKUT 223 (IAC) it was held that the onus rests on the appellant and the
    civil standard of the balance of  probabilities  applies  where  it  is
    contended that the duties enshrined  in  section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 have been breached.  There  is  no
    onus on the Secretary of State.

Decision

The appeal under the immigration rules is dismissed.

No breach of Article 8 occurs.


Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

