
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04387/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 15th November 2013                           |On 4th December 2013       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                                noreen caesar
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                    immigration officer - gatwick airport
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr G Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a female citizen of Dominica born on  3rd  June  1962.
    She arrived at Gatwick Airport  on  16th  January  2013  when  she  was
    refused leave to enter as a visitor.  It is not true to say, as  stated
    elsewhere, that she arrived in possession of an entry  clearance.   The
    Appellant returned to Dominica and from there appealed the decision  of
    the Immigration Officer.  That appeal was heard by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Thanki (the Judge) sitting at Hatton Cross on 12th August
    2013.  He decided to dismiss the appeal for the reasons  given  in  his
    Determination dated 21st August 2013.  The Appellant  sought  leave  to
    appeal that decision, and on  8th  October  2013  such  permission  was
    granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. The Judge in dismissing the  appeal  considered  only  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 ECHR rights.  This was because the Appellant had the right of
    appeal only on, in this case, human  rights  grounds  by  operation  of
    Section 89 Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   The  Judge
    dismissed the appeal because he found that the Appellant had no  family
    or private life in the UK.

 4. At the hearing, the Sponsor, the Appellant's daughter Shaminer  Julien,
    appeared unrepresented.  She indicated  that  she  was  happy  for  the
    appeal hearing to proceed, and argued that the Judge had erred in  law.
    She referred to the grounds of application  and  said  that  the  Judge
    should have considered whether the Appellant was a genuine  visitor  or
    not.

 5. In response, Mr Saunders submitted that there was no such error of law.
     The only issue before the Judge was the Appellant's Article 8  rights,
    and he had dealt with those by way of a finding that the Appellant  had
    no family or private life in the UK.  This was a sustainable decision.

 6. I found no error of law in the decision of the Judge so that it  should
    be set aside.  My reasons for that conclusion are as  follows.   As  Mr
    Saunders argued, the only issue before the Judge  was  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 rights.  The Judge found that the Appellant had no family  or
    private life in the UK for the reasons he gave at paragraph 15  of  the
    Determination.  That was a decision open to the judge on  the  evidence
    before him and which he adequately explained.  As the Judge  had  found
    that the Appellant had no family or private life in the UK he  was  not
    obliged to consider proportionality.

Decision

 7. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

 8. I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

 9. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and  I
    also see no reason to do so.

Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
