

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal nos: oa 04545, 47-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   23.05.2014|
|on    23.05.2014                              |sent out:    on 28.05.2014   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                            Rahgda karo & another
                                                                  appellants
                                     and

                                    BEIRUT
                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Mr A Haq, solicitor, Haq Solicitors, Huddersfield
For the respondent: Mrs R Patterson

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Guy Robson), sitting at Bradford on 29  November  2013,
    to  a wife's appeal by a citizen of Syria, born 17 December  1988,  and
    her dependent son,  born  10  August  2012.  The  sponsor,  the  (main)
    appellant's husband, also from Syria, has been recognized as a  refugee
    in this country, and granted indefinite leave to remain in  the  course
    of 2013.

 2. The respondent refused the appellant a visa for four different reasons:

     a) the sponsor wasn't settled in this country: the grant of indefinite
        leave to remain meant that this was no longer in issue  before  the
        judge;

     b) their marriage was not genuine or subsisting:  on  this  the  judge
        found in their favour, and so this is no longer in issue either;

     c) there was no evidence to show the necessary funds: here  the  judge
        found against them, and this was not challenged before me;

     d) there was no English-language test certificate for the appellant.

 3. The only one of the original reasons which remains of interest is  (d):
    however it is not the judge's dismissal of the appeal under  the  Rules
    which is challenged, but what he said about article 8. The question was
    whether, as the presenting officer suggested,  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor could carry on their relationship without him going  to  Syria,
    from which country he had been given asylum. This  is  what  the  judge
    said about that:

    35. ... That I find is not necessarily a bar to the parties resuming or
        undertaking or continuing a relationship ...

    36. It was said that as the couple now have a child together and travel
        outside Syria was very difficult [sci. it would be  impossible  for
        them to meet, for example, in Jordan  or  the  Lebanon]  I  do  not
        accept the situation to travel outside Syria is totally impossible,
        a state of affairs which  has  been  recognised  and  recorded  and
        indeed the media.

 4. There are two clear errors of law in paragraph  36:  first,  the  judge
    needed to give some indication, however brief, of what media reports he
    had relied on in reaching that decision, without which his reasons were
    incomplete; second,  'totally  impossible',  without  more  reasons  to
    justify that test, does not seem to  be  the  right  one  for  deciding
    whether the inability of two parents and their young child to  meet  on
    neutral safe ground amounted  to  such  'exceptional'  or  'compelling'
    features in the case (see Gulshan (Article 8  -  new  Rules  -  correct
    approach)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT  640  (IAC),  and  Shahzad  (Art   8:
    legitimate aim) Pakistan [2014] UKUT 85  (IAC))  as  to  require  free-
    standing consideration of article 8.

 5. On that basis, it was agreed that this appeal should  be  allowed,  and
    the decision re-made. There was no time to do that myself, and so there
    will be a fresh hearing, solely on the appellant's article 8 appeal (in
    the light of Gulshan , Shahzad  and other  recent  authorities)  before
    another judge at Bradford. While that judge will  have  to  make  their
    decision in this out-of-country appeal on the somewhat artificial basis
    of the state of affairs at the date of the decision under appeal,  they
    will also be able to take into account anything they think  would  have
    been reasonably foreseeable at that time.

 6. Here it is worth noting that, though at the date of the decision  under
    appeal Syria was not on the list of countries whose  citizens  did  not
    need to produce an English-language test certificate when applying  for
    a spouse visa, it has been on the list since November 2013. Even if the
    fresh judge could take the present situation into account,  that  would
    still not result in the appellant's having an arguable case  under  the
    Rules, because of the  funding  difficulty;  but  it  may  be  of  some
    relevance on the article 8 appeal.

Home Office appeal
Article 8 decision to be re-made on fresh hearing before  another  judge  at
    Bradford
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)

