
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/04938/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 25 March 2013                              |On 2 April 2014              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                              JEFFAR NOOR KARUKU
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Ms J Ang, of Brown & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

No anonymity order requested or made

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1) This is an  appeal  against  a  determination  by  Judge  Debra  Clapham,
   promulgated on  17  December  2013,  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
   against refusal of entry clearance to join his mother and brother in  the
   UK.  It was conceded that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements
   of the Immigration Rules.  His case was argued only under  Article  8  of
   the ECHR, outwith the Rules.

2) Before the Upper Tribunal Ms Ang relied firstly upon the  "revised  legal
   argument for  the  appellant"  in  the  appellant's  third  inventory  of
   productions in the First-tier Tribunal,  Item  AA,  paragraphs  23-55  at
   pages 298 to 307.  This sets out case law subsequent to the  introduction
   of the "new Rules" in July 2012, and argues as follows.  This case is one
   in which these Rules do not adequately reflect  Strasbourg  jurisprudence
   or previous UK case law on Article 8.  Whether family life exists between
   an adult child and a parent is a fact-sensitive issue.  The appellant  is
   single, has not established a family life  of  his  own  and  is  "wholly
   financially and emotionally dependant  on  his  mother  and  brother  for
   support", as evidenced by text messages.  His mother  and  brother  visit
   him in Kenya when they are able, but are restricted in their  ability  to
   do so for financial reasons.  The  appellant  is  aged  24.   His  mother
   believes that he suffers from undiagnosed mental illness as a consequence
   of traumatic experiences.  He has no other surviving relatives  in  Kenya
   or in the UK.  The present decision constitutes an interference with  his
   enjoyment  of  family  life  with  his  mother  and  brother.    In   the
   proportionality assessment, the best interests of his younger brother are
   to be taken into account in accordance with the respondent's  obligations
   under section 55 of the 2009 Act - that is to say, the best interests  of
   the child are to be treated as a primary consideration.  "Greater  weight
   should be given to the significance of  the  relationship  of  the  older
   brother to the younger in light of the separation of their family and the
   fact that they have never known their father."  The respondent's decision
   is disproportionate for a number of reasons, "... taking into account the
   specific circumstances of the appellant and his family, but a failure  to
   consider the best interests of the appellant's younger brother  is  among
   those reasons."

3) Ms Ang next relied upon the grounds of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
   These set out the judge's finding that there were no strong  elements  of
   dependency, but rather the appellant did not appear to be in any kind  of
   distress and was leading his own life in Kenya.  As to the needs  of  his
   brother, the judge found that the relationship could continue from abroad
   by the usual means of communication, and that the family had visited  the
   appellant in Kenya and might continue to do so.   The  grounds  criticise
   this for failure to conduct each element of the Razgar tests, and because
   the case law test is not "strong elements of dependency" but  "additional
   elements of dependence ... or more than normal emotional  ties".   It  is
   argued that application of the correct legal standards might have led  to
   a materially different outcome.

4) The grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was on the  basis
   of arguable failure adequately to consider the Razgar  guidance  and  the
   human rights of the appellant's younger brother.

5) Mr Mullen submitted thus. The judge dealt properly with the  question  of
   the best interests of the appellant's younger brother.  To make good  the
   appellant's case for that reason, something would have to be shown  which
   would operate in his brother's best interests so as to take the case  out
   of the ordinary.  The main evidence about relations between the  brothers
   was  text  messages,  large  parts  of  which  were  missing.   It  might
   understandably be the wish of the  younger  brother  to  have  the  older
   residing  with  him  in  the  UK,  but  there  was  nothing  which   went
   significantly to show an effect on the best interests of the child.  Some
   incomplete texts and evidence of ordinary affection did not go that  far.
   An older brother at the age of 25 years might well in the ordinary course
   of events have left the family home in any case.  There was no  error  of
   law, and the determination should stand.

6) Ms Ang in reply submitted that the Article 8 case had been based  on  the
   relationship not only between the brothers but between  mother  and  son.
   The grounds and the grant of permission were sufficient to disclose error
   in both aspects.  As well as the texts exchanged, there was  evidence  of
   the mother and brother visiting  Kenya,  and  letters  from  the  younger
   brother.  The appellant was separated from his  mother  at  age  13,  and
   reunited at age 19.  The case had been clearly made out of the  existence
   of family life between an adult child and a parent, and between siblings.
    Strong levels of dependency were shown, even although that was  not  the
   test.  The judge thought that relations could continue as they were,  but
   that was not the  relevant  question.   The  issue  was  whether  it  was
   proportionate on a proper Article 8 analysis to refuse to facilitate  the
   reunion of this family in the UK.  The determination should be remade  in
   favour of the appellant.

7) I reserved my determination.

8) Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules - correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640  (IAC)
   reviewed the case law to date and  put  the  test  in  this  way.   After
   applying the requirements of the Rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably
   good grounds for granting leave to remain outside them  is  it  necessary
   for Article 8 purposes to go on to consider whether there are  compelling
   circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them.

9) The Rules establish a scheme under which  family  reunion  is  permitted.
   There was little, if anything, requiring this  case  to  go  beyond  that
   scheme.

10) Whether family life exists between an adult and  a  parent,  or  between
   siblings, is a mixed question of fact and law, but primarily of fact, for
   a judge to resolve.  The judge was entitled to find on  the  evidence  in
   this case that family life for Article 8 purposes was not constituted.

11) The same circumstances were of course relevant to Article  8  in  regard
   to private life, but it would take a very unusual case for such interests
   to require admission of an adult family member to the UK.

12) The judge was required to treat the best interests  of  the  child,  the
   younger brother, as a primary consideration; but  there  was  nothing  in
   this case, in practical rather than theoretical terms, bearing  on  those
   best interests.  As the Presenting Officer observed, his ideal  might  be
   to have his brother with him in the UK, but there was no evidence to show
   that his best interests would be significantly affected one  way  or  the
   other, particularly as he is nearing adulthood, with only a brief part of
   his childhood remaining.

13)  The  appellant  insists  that  circumstances  not  recognised  by   the
   Immigration Rules require the Secretary  of  State,  under  reference  to
   Article 8 and the best interests of the child, to permit his entry to the
   UK.  Under the circumstances, that was  a  weak  case.   The  conclusions
   reached by the First-tier Tribunal were properly  open  to  it.   Nothing
   turned on setting out the 5 steps of Razgar, on  any  nuance  of  how  to
   approach Article 8 outside the Rules, or on the  substance  of  the  best
   interests of the child.  The judge needed to say no more than she did.

14) The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.





                               [pic]
                                31 March 2014
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal

