

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04582/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|13 May 2015                          |On 21 May 2015                       |
|On papers                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                    The Entry Clearance Officer, Istanbul
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Seda Tasdogan
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. This is the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer.

    2. Mrs Seda Tasdogan, a citizen of Turkey, appealed against the decision
       of the Entry Clearance Officer refusing  her  application  for  entry
       clearance as the spouse of a  person  with  leave  under  the  Ankara
       agreement.  Her appeal came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Majid  who
       allowed it on an unspecified basis.

    3. The Entry Clearance Officer was granted permission to appeal  to  the
       Upper Tribunal by  a  decision  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Nicholson on 24 February 2015.  It was the Entry Clearance  Officer's
       appeal in the Upper Tribunal.  However, by a letter  dated  13  April
       2015,  Mrs  Tasdogan's  representative,  Oakfield   Solicitors   LLP,
       confirmed Mrs Tasdogan wished to withdraw  her  appeal,  namely,  her
       appeal to the Tribunal.  She is not in a position to do this  because
       the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is  entitled  to  pursue  his  appeal
       challenging the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  seeking  a
       decision of the Upper Tribunal in which an error on a point of law is
       found and for  an  order  setting  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal aside and substituting a decision dismissing Mrs  Tasdogan's
       appeal on all grounds advanced.

    4. However, the clear intention of Mrs Tasdogan is that  she  no  longer
       seeks to resist the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  challenge  to  Judge
       Majid's determination.  In these circumstances, I allow the appeal of
       the Entry Clearance Officer and set aside the decision of the  First-
       tier Tribunal and substitute a determination dismissing the appeal of
       Mrs Tasdogan on all the grounds advanced.

    5. There is no prejudice to Mrs Tasdogan  because  the  Entry  Clearance
       Officer in Istanbul has written to the Tribunal informing it that  on
       17 April 2015, Mrs Tasdogan made  a  further  application  which  was
       granted.  The Entry Clearance Officer, however, needs  to  close  the
       file and whilst this appeal remains in state of limbo,  this  is  not
       possible.  The  disposal  of  the  appeal  along  the  lines  I  have
       indicated  draws  a  line  under  these  unfortunate   and   wasteful
       proceedings.

    6. As I have made this decision on  the  papers  without  informing  the
       parties of my intention to do so, I  give  both  parties  liberty  to
       apply to set aside this determination provided they apply  to  do  so
       within 14 days of receipt of this determination and give reasons  why
       I should not make the decision as I intend.

DECISION

The Judge made an error on a point of law and I substitute  a  determination
allowing the appeal of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  set  aside  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  re-make  the  decision,  dismissing
the appeal of Mrs Tasdogan on all the grounds advanced.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                                 13 May 2015
