
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04730/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 December 2015                  |On 5 January 2016                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     HJ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIJING
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K. McCarthy of Counsel, instructed by Gilman-
                    Smith Lee Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Sreeraman, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Robinson promulgated  on  24  April  2015  in  which  he
    refused the Appellant's appeal against the decision of  the  Respondent
    to refuse her application for entry clearance as the dependent  of  her
    mother under paragraph 297 of the immigration rules.

 2. Given the sensitivity of these proceedings, I have  made  an  anonymity
    direction.

 3.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  as  it  was  arguable  that  the
    Appellant's Chinese passport was  a  "valid  national  passport"  which
    satisfactorily established her identity.  The issue of the  Appellant's
    nationality was superficially addressed.  It was a case  in  which  the
    Respondent appeared to accept the Appellant's claimed identity.  It was
    arguable that even if paragraph 320(3) could not be  met,  this  was  a
    suitable case to consider outside the rules under Article 8, which  was
    an obvious point that should have been raised by the judge, if  it  had
    not been raised by the Appellant's representatives.

 4. Further, it was arguable that the judge had failed to  give  sufficient
    reasoning for rejecting the evidence from the Sponsor and  her  husband
    that she was solely responsible for the Appellant.  It was an  arguable
    error of law for the judge to have required sole responsibility  to  be
    corroborated by documentary evidence in such a  case.   The  judge  had
    arguably given insufficient reasoning for rejecting the credibility  of
    the Sponsor's claims regarding sole responsibility.

 5. It was  also  arguable  that,  in  reaching  findings  in  relation  to
    paragraph 297(i)(f) and otherwise, the judge had failed  to  take  into
    account a relevant consideration, which was the particular difficulties
    faced by the family in the context of their escape from North Korea and
    residence in China.

 6. The Sponsor, her husband and a friend attended the  hearing.   I  heard
    submissions from both representatives.  I have taken into  account  the
    documents contained in the  Respondent's  bundle  and  the  Appellant's
    bundle (118 pages).  At the end of the hearing I reserved  my  decision
    which I set out below with my reasons.

Submissions

 7. Ms McCarthy relied on the grounds of appeal.  She had  represented  the
    Appellant at the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal and submitted  that
    Article 8 had been raised at that hearing.

 8. In relation to paragraph 320(3) she submitted that the requirement  was
    that the document "satisfactorily establish" nationality which was less
    than a requirement  to  "prove"  nationality.   What  was  satisfactory
    depended on the circumstances of the case.  The Appellant has a Chinese
    passport but this was obtained by the Sponsor giving false  information
    to the Chinese authorities stating that the Appellant had been born  in
    Jilin rather than in North Korea.  She submitted that the Appellant had
    satisfactorily established that she was North Korean but that she  held
    a Chinese passport which was accepted by  the  Chinese  authorities  as
    being a valid passport.  The  only  people  who  could  invalidate  the
    passport were the Chinese authorities.

 9. She submitted that the Appellant's  nationality  should  be  considered
    against the backdrop of the difficulties encountered by people  leaving
    North Korea.  There was a real risk of refoulement from China to  North
    Korea.  The Appellant's aunt had been  refouled  to  North  Korea  from
    China and has not been heard from since.  She referred to  the  updated
    evidence from the UNHCR regarding refoulement, and the fears  for  nine
    North Korean citizens who were due to be refouled.  There  was  a  real
    risk of people with North Korean nationality being returned  to  China,
    and the question of what was satisfactory had to be established against
    that  backdrop.   The  passport  was  not  an  invalid  document.   She
    submitted that it was an error of law to refuse the  application  under
    paragraph 320(3) and it was to misread the  clear  flexibility  allowed
    for by this paragraph.

10. In relation to sole responsibility,  numerous  witness  statements  had
    been provided explaining with whom the Appellant had lived, in addition
    to the oral evidence.  She submitted that  the  Sponsor  was  the  sole
    carer for the Appellant.  The Sponsor had explained in whose  care  she
    had left the Appellant and for what period of time.  She had  paid  the
    carers.  Schooling decisions were taken by the Sponsor.  The  Appellant
    continued to need the support of her mother rather than  her  temporary
    carers, none of whom were related to her.  She had not been in the care
    of one person since her mother left China  but  had  several  temporary
    carers.  The finding that the Sponsor did not have sole  responsibility
    for the Appellant went against all of the evidence.

11. In relation to paragraph 297(i)(f), there  had  been  no  consideration
    given to the compassionate circumstances of the case.  The  Appellant's
    mother had no right to go to China.  The Appellant had a strong  desire
    to be reunited with her mother.  She had no contact with her biological
    father and no biological relatives in China.  There was no stability in
    her temporary care arrangements.  Unless  the  Appellant  came  to  the
    United Kingdom, there were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life
    continuing with her mother.  She submitted that  the  judge  had  given
    short shrift to paragraph 297(i)(f) and  had  failed  to  consider  the
    circumstances in North Korea.  Even if paragraph 320(3) was applicable,
    the extent to which the Appellant met paragraph  297  was  relevant  to
    consideration of the Appellant's case under Article 8  outside  of  the
    immigration rules.

12. Ms Sreeraman relied on the Rule 24 response.   The  judge  had  applied
    paragraph 320(3) correctly.   Adequate  reasons  had  been  given  from
    paragraphs [30] to [38].  The  Appellant  was  not  Chinese  and  false
    information had been  used  in  order  to  obtain  her  passport.   She
    submitted that having found that paragraph 320(3)  applied,  the  judge
    could have stopped there, but he had continued  to  consider  paragraph
    297(i)(e) and (f) as a belt and braces approach.  Adequate reasons  had
    been given as to why the Sponsor did not have sole  responsibility  for
    the Appellant [40] to [45].  In relation to paragraph  297(i)(f),  this
    was a high threshold and the judge had looked at the  core  components.
    There was no evidence to  suggest  that  the  Appellant's  welfare  and
    health have been negatively impacted.  There were no  material  errors.
    Even had the judge proceeded to consider Article 8  outside  the  rules
    the outcome would have been the same.

Error of Law

13. In relation to paragraph 320(3), this provides that an application will
    be refused where there is a "failure by the person seeking entry to the
    United Kingdom to produce to the Immigration Officer a  valid  national
    passport or other document satisfactorily establishing his identity and
    nationality".  In paragraph [33] of the decision the judge sets out the
    evidence of the Sponsor from her witness statement.  The Appellant  has
    a Chinese passport which  the  Sponsor  obtained  by  giving  incorrect
    information to the authorities when she said  that  the  Appellant  had
    been born in Jilin in China rather than in North Korea.

14. In paragraph [38] of the decision the judge states:

         "It follows from this finding that the application must be  refused
         under paragraph 320(3), which is a mandatory  ground  for  refusal.
         Not only could the Respondent not determine the nationality of  the
         Appellant from her Chinese passport, he was unable to establish her
         place or country of birth.  Consequently the appeal must be refused
         on this basis."

15. I find that the Appellant must produce "a valid  national  passport  or
    other   document   satisfactorily   establishing   his   identity   and
    nationality".  The Appellant has provided a  valid  national  passport,
    albeit one obtained using incorrect information.  The issue is  whether
    it can be  said  to  satisfactorily  establish  her  nationality.   The
    Sponsor has been open about the fact that the  Appellant  was  born  in
    North  Korea  and  not  in  China.   The  Chinese   national   passport
    establishes her nationality as Chinese, but the  Sponsor  has  admitted
    that she was born in North Korea, and it was only by  saying  that  the
    Appellant was born in China that she  was  able  to  obtain  a  Chinese
    passport for her.  Given this, it cannot  be  said  that  the  passport
    provided satisfactorily establishes the Appellant's nationality as,  on
    the Sponsor's own admission, the Appellant was born in North Korea, and
    therefore not entitled to  Chinese  citizenship.   While  the  passport
    states that she is a national of China, the truth  is  that  she  is  a
    national of North Korea.  I find therefore  that  the  judge  correctly
    applied paragraph 320(3).

16. Having found that the Appellant could not meet the requirements of  the
    immigration rules owing to this mandatory refusal, the judge went on to
    consider those requirements  of  paragraph  297  which  the  Respondent
    considered had not been met by  the  Appellant,  namely  297(i)(e)  and
    297(i)(f).  Having done this, he did not proceed to consider Article  8
    outside the immigration rules.  It was submitted  that  Article  8  had
    been raised by the Appellant's representative at  the  hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Even if it had not been, given the  circumstances
    of the Appellant and Sponsor, the failure  of  the  judge  to  consider
    Article 8 outside the immigration rules amounts to an error of law.  It
    is an obvious point which he should  have  addressed.   The  extent  to
    which the Appellant met the requirements of paragraph 297  is  relevant
    to any consideration of Article 8 outside the rules.

17. The judge's findings in relation to paragraph 297(i)(e) are set out  in
    paragraphs [40] to [45].  In paragraph [42] the judge states "I am  not
    satisfied that the Sponsor has shown that she has an active involvement
    in two key areas of her daughter's upbringing namely her education  and
    healthcare.   The  Sponsor  claims  that  she  used  to  speak  to  her
    daughter's teacher by telephone but no written  confirmation  has  been
    provided from the Appellant's schools giving details of her attendance,
    progress or academic achievements."  Evidence was before him  from  the
    Sponsor, her husband,  the  Appellant  and  the  three  carers  of  the
    Appellant, but he has placed no weight on that  evidence,  and  he  has
    failed to give reasons  for  why  he  has  placed  no  weight  on  this
    evidence.  I find that inadequate reasons have been given  for  failing
    to give weight to the evidence before him, and instead  he  has  placed
    weight  on  the  fact  that  there  was  no  corroborative  documentary
    evidence.

18. Further, I find that the judge did not give adequate  consideration  to
    the Appellant's circumstances, in particular in relation  to  paragraph
    297(i)(f).  The judge  has  not  considered  the  implications  of  the
    Appellant's and Sponsor's nationalities.   While  he  might  have  been
    correct  in  his  application  of  paragraph  320(3),   there   is   no
    consideration of the effect of the Sponsor's North  Korean  nationality
    and the Appellant's Chinese passport.  There is no consideration of the
    very real  difficulties  faced  by  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor.   His
    assessment of paragraph 297(i)(f) amounts to only one paragraph,  [46],
    which cannot be said to be a satisfactory  consideration  of  the  very
    significant difficulties faced by the Appellant and  Sponsor  owing  to
    their history of escape from  North  Korea.   I  find  that  inadequate
    reasons have been given  for  why  the  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f).

19. Given the failure of  the  judge  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
    findings under paragraph 297(i)(e) and (f), and his failure to  proceed
    to  consider  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8  outside  the
    immigration rules, I find that the decision involves the making  of  an
    error of law on a material matter, and I  set  aside  the  decision  in
    relation to the findings under paragraph 297.

Remaking

20. I have found above that paragraph 320(3) was correctly applied but that
    there was a failure by the judge fully to consider the Appellant's  and
    Sponsor's rights under Article 8 outside the immigration rules.   As  I
    have set out above,  the  extent  to  which  the  Appellant  meets  the
    requirements of the immigration rules, especially given the reason  why
    her application falls to be refused under paragraph 320(3), is relevant
    to any consideration under Article 8.

21. The circumstances  in  which  the  Appellant's  Chinese  passport  were
    obtained have been explained by the Sponsor.  She  has  been  open  and
    honest about the fact  that  she  gave  incorrect  information  to  the
    Chinese  authorities  in  order  to  obtain  the  passport.  Given  the
    circumstances, the reasons why the Sponsor gave  incorrect  information
    are entirely plausible and understandable, and I find that her  actions
    do not damage her credibility in any way.

Paragraph 297(i)(e)

22. In her witness statement the Sponsor states that the Appellant has been
    in the care of three different people since  the  Sponsor  left  China.
    She states that she has been sending money for her daughter's care  and
    living expenses [12].  She states  that  she  has  sole  responsibility
    including making all major decisions for example  "choice  of  schools,
    which clinic to go to if she  is  sick,  what  subjects  to  choose  in
    school, how much pocket money she should have, to  buy  or  change  her
    mobile phone etc" [12].  She states that when the  teachers  wanted  to
    speak to a parent about concerns about her daughter, they informed  the
    carers who called the Sponsor, who then called the school.  The Sponsor
    states that she financially  and  emotionally  supports  the  Appellant
    [16e].  She states she is "consulted and involved  in  her  upbringing,
    education, medical needs and what school she attends".  She states that
    they communicate at least twice a week via Skype.

23. At page 95 of the bundle is a letter from the  Appellant.   She  states
    that her mother takes  care  of  her  financially.   Whenever  she  has
    difficulties or worries she talks to her mother who  comforts  her  and
    provides help.  She has been moving from one family to another and  has
    no biological connection with any of the people who have taken care  of
    her.  On page 97 of the bundle is  a  letter  from  SJ  with  whom  the
    Appellant lived from 2002 to 2005.   SJ  states  that  the  Appellant's
    living costs, hospital fees and pocket money was sent by  the  Sponsor.
    SJ states that the Appellant and Sponsor spoke to  each  other  on  the
    phone very  often.   She  states  that  the  Sponsor  always  made  the
    decisions for the Appellant "such as HJ's  health,  anything  that  was
    related to her school, from the smallest day to day  decisions  to  the
    biggest concerns for HJ's future".

24. On page 101 of the bundle is a letter from CJ.  She  states  that  when
    she looked after the Appellant "all these years everything  related  to
    HJ had to be agreed by her mother and her mother made decision on  it".
    On page 105 is a letter from YN with whom the Appellant lives now.  She
    states "HJ has no father so  everything  related  to  her  has  to  get
    consent from her mother".

25. The Sponsor provided evidence from the three different people with whom
    the Appellant has lived, all of whom the state that it was the  Sponsor
    who took responsibility for the main decisions in the Appellant's life.
     They also refer to  the  provision  of  financial  assistance  by  the
    Sponsor for  the  Appellant.   The  Appellant  herself  refers  to  how
    frequently she speaks to her mother, and how she talks  to  her  mother
    when she has difficulties or worries.

26. In relation to the lack of documents the judge found  that  no  medical
    documents had been  provided  as  the  Sponsor  had  claimed  that  the
    Appellant had not required medical treatment  in  the  last  10  years.
    This is perfectly plausible.  In relation to the lack of documents from
    school, from the date of the application to the date  of  the  decision
    was a period of some 16 months, as the Respondent  withdrew  the  first
    decision and remade it.  The period from the date of application to the
    date of the hearing was some two and a half years.  Therefore,  as  set
    out at paragraph [29] of the grounds of appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    by the time of the hearing the Appellant was no longer at school.   The
    Sponsor provided evidence from the three people who had cared  for  the
    Appellant all of them stating that  the  Sponsor  had  dealt  with  the
    Appellant's  education.    Given  that  the  Appellant  was  no  longer
    attending school at the time of the appeal hearing, I do  not  find  it
    casts  doubt  on  the  evidence  that  the  Sponsor  did  not   provide
    corroborative evidence from the Appellant's  school,  especially  given
    the other evidence before him.

27. I find that the Appellant's biological father has had no involvement in
    her life since she left North Korea with her  mother  when  she  was  a
    young child.  Evidence of remittances from the Sponsor was provided and
    I find on the balance of probabilities that  the  financial  assistance
    provided by the Sponsor was and is for the Appellant's  care.   All  of
    the evidence before me is that the Sponsor has had sole  responsibility
    for the major decisions in the Appellant's life, and continues to  have
    sole responsibility.  I find on the balance of probabilities  that  the
    Appellant meets the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(e).

Paragraph 297(i)(f)

28. In any event, even if I am wrong in this, I  find  that  the  Appellant
    meets the  requirements  of  paragraph  297(i)(f),  an  alternative  to
    paragraph 297(i)(e).  This paragraph applies where there  are  "serious
    and compelling family or other considerations which make  exclusion  of
    the child undesirable", and I find that there are  such  considerations
    in the Appellant's case.

29. The Appellant and  her  mother  fled  North  Korea  in  2001  when  the
    Appellant was four years  old.   They  fled  because  of  the  domestic
    violence that the Sponsor was suffering  from  her  husband,  and  also
    because she and the Appellant were "dying of hunger".  They  fled  with
    the Sponsor's sister.  In June 2005 the Sponsor's sister was caught  by
    the Chinese authorities and sent back to North Korea from  China.   She
    has not been heard from since.  The Sponsor left China  in  June  2005.
    She now has British citizenship.  She is not  allowed  to  visit  China
    because she was previously a North Korean national.  She tried to apply
    for a Chinese visa in October 2014  to  visit  the  Appellant  but  her
    application was refused (paragraph [17] of her witness statement).  The
    Sponsor cannot even visit China, let alone live there.

30. The Appellant has  no  biological  relatives  in  China.   The  Sponsor
    explained why the Appellant described her carers as she did  (paragraph
    [15a] of her witness statement), and I find her explanation  plausible.
    The Appellant has lived with three different people  since  her  mother
    left China in 2005.  I find that none of these people  are  related  to
    her.  She has not had a permanent or stable home since her mother  left
    China in 2005, and she did not have a permanent or stable home prior to
    that.

31. This is not a situation where the Sponsor  can  simply  return  to  her
    country of origin to be with the Appellant.  There can be no suggestion
    that it is possible for the Appellant and Sponsor to  return  to  North
    Korea to continue their family life.  The Sponsor's sister was refouled
    to North Korea by China and has not been heard from since.   There  are
    ongoing concerns for North Koreans being refouled to China.  At page 31
    is a press briefing note from the UNHCR relating to the  fate  of  nine
    North Korean nationals who were forcibly repatriated  to  North  Korea.
    On page 33 is an article from the Guardian entitled  "Fears  for  North
    Korean refugees who may "face death" if returned by China".

32. The Sponsor cannot return to China, the country of which  her  daughter
    has nationality, and where her daughter is now living.  She cannot even
    obtain a visit visa to China owing to the fact that she used  to  be  a
    North Korean national.

33. I find that if the Appellant is excluded from the United  Kingdom,  she
    will be prevented from having any family life  with  her  mother.   The
    Appellant and her mother have already endured escape from  North  Korea
    and separation  from  each  other  for  a  period  of  10  years.   The
    Respondent's own delay in making a  decision  has  contributed  to  the
    length of this separation.  Given the extremely  unusual  circumstances
    of the Appellant's case, which  are  inextricably  bound  up  with  her
    escape from her country of origin and  her  nationality,  I  find  that
    exclusion of the Appellant from the United  Kingdom  would  effectively
    put an end to the Sponsor and the Appellant being  able  to  enjoy  any
    meaningful form of family life together anywhere.  I find that that her
    circumstances  amount  to  "serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations" which  make  her  exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom
    undesirable.

34. However, given my find that paragraph 320(3) applies, although  I  find
    that the Appellant meets the substantive requirements of paragraph 297,
    the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the immigration rules.

Article 8

35. I have considered the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 outside of the
    immigration rules in accordance with the steps set out in Razgar [2004]
    UKHL 27.  I find that the Appellant and  Sponsor  have  a  family  life
    sufficient to engage the operation of  Article  8.   I  find  that  the
    decision constitutes an interference in that family life.

36. Continuing the steps set out  in  Razgar,  I  find  that  the  proposed
    interference would be in accordance with the law, as  being  a  regular
    immigration decision taken by UKBA in accordance with  the  immigration
    rules.  In terms of proportionality, the Tribunal has to strike a  fair
    balance between the rights of the individual and the interests  of  the
    community.  The public interest in this case  is  the  preservation  of
    orderly and fair immigration control in the interests of all  citizens.
    Maintaining the integrity of the immigration rules is self-evidently  a
    very important public interest.  In practice, this will  usually  trump
    the  qualified  rights  of  the  individual,  unless   the   level   of
    interference is very significant.  I find that in this case, the  level
    of  interference  would  be  significant  and  that  it  would  not  be
    proportionate.

37. In carrying out the  proportionality  assessment,  I  have  taken  into
    account the factors set out in section 117B of the 2002 Act insofar  as
    they are relevant to the Appellant.  Section 117B(1) provides that  the
    maintenance  of  effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the   public
    interest.   There  is  no  English-language  requirement  for  a  child
    applying under paragraph 297 (section 117B(2)).  The Respondent did not
    refuse the application  because  the  Sponsor  was  unable  to  provide
    financially for the Appellant (117B(3)).  Sections 117B(4) to  (6)  are
    not relevant.

38. In coming to my decision I have  taken  into  account  my  findings  in
    relation to paragraph 297(i)(e) and  (f)  above,  in  particular  those
    findings relating to the serious and compelling  circumstances  in  the
    Appellant's case [28]-[33], and I do not intend to repeat them here.

39. I have found  above  that  the  Appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297.  The only  reason  that  the  application  falls  to  be
    refused under the immigration rules is  owing  to  the  highly  unusual
    circumstances surrounding the Appellant's passport.   The  Respondent's
    representative before the First-tier Tribunal  acknowledged  that  "the
    Sponsor's motives in providing false  information/false  documents  may
    not have been bad" [21].  Far from not being bad, I find that they were
    entirely understandable given  the  family  circumstances  as  set  out
    above, [29]-[32].

40.  Given  the  difficulties   and   complexities   of   the   Appellant's
    circumstances, the fact that the Sponsor  cannot  return  to  China  to
    enjoy family life with the Appellant, the fact that they cannot  return
    to North Korea, their country of origin, to enjoy family life together,
    the fact that the Appellant meets the substantive requirements  of  the
    immigration rules, and the fact that  the  Sponsor  is  now  a  British
    citizen who is able to provide financially for the  Appellant,  on  the
    balance of probabilities, in carrying out  the  balancing  exercise,  I
    find that the balance weighs in favour of  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor
    being able to enjoy family life together in the United Kingdom.  I find
    that  the  interference  in  their  right  to  family  life  would   be
    disproportionate.  I find on the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    decision is a breach of the  Appellant's  and  Sponsor's  rights  to  a
    family life under Article 8 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law, and is set aside.

I remake the decision allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 20 December 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

