
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/04034/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On: 12th January 2017                     |On: 13th January 2017            |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                               Mrs Shabnam Bi
                        (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Karnik, Counsel instructed by R&A Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan  date  of  birth  8th  February
    1979.


 2. On the 3rd June 2016 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Chambers) dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse to grant her  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom.   The case  before  the  Tribunal  had
    been that the Appellant is the mother and primary carer  to  a  British
    citizen child who is living with  her  in  Pakistan.  Pursuant  to  the
    decision in MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside of  the  EU)  Iran
    [2013] UKUT 00380 (IAC) the Appellant asserted that she should be given
    entry clearance in order to facilitate her  daughter's  access  to  the
    rights that are  her  entitlement  as  a  national  of  the  EU/British
    citizen. The Tribunal did not accept  that  the  ratio  of  MA  and  SM
    applied here. I need not set out why, since in response to this  appeal
    the Secretary of State accepts that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in
    law in its interpretation of that authority and that  the  decision  in
    the appeal should be remade.

 3. Before me Mr Bates agreed the following facts.  The  Appellant  is  the
    mother of a seven year old girl and they are both living  in  Pakistan.
    The child is both British, and an EU  national.  Although  the  child's
    father lives in the United Kingdom (as far as anyone is aware)  he  has
    never taken any part in  her  upbringing.  The  evidence  before  Judge
    Chambers was that he had in fact contrived to ensure that  both  mother
    and child were 'stranded' in Pakistan. The child does have  a  maternal
    uncle living in the United Kingdom who has undertaken to  support  both
    her and the Appellant financially, but the Secretary of State does  not
    seek to persuade  the  Tribunal  that  the  child  could  exercise  her
    Zambrano rights by living with this relative.   Her mother  has  always
    been her primary carer, and for the foreseeable future will continue to
    fulfil that role.   Mr Bates invited me to re-make the decision in  the
    appeal with reference to those facts, the guidance in MA and SM and the
    Secretary of State's own guidance. In respect of the latter he conceded
    that there were no countervailing factors to  be  weighed  against  the
    Appellant. There is no criminality involved and following the  findings
    of Judge Chambers, no attempt to circumvent immigration control.    She
    has in the past always complied with the  conditions  attached  to  her
    leave and there is no reason to believe that she would not do so in the
    future.

 4. The relevant headnote finding of MA and SM is as follows:

         "In EU law terms there is no reason why the  decision  in  Zambrano
         could not in principle be relied  upon  by  the  parent,  or  other
         primary carer, of a minor EU national living outside the EU as long
         as it is  the  intention  of  the  parent,  or  primary  carer,  to
         accompany the EU national child to his/her country of  nationality,
         in the instant appeals that being the United Kingdom.  To  conclude
         otherwise would deny access,  without  justification,  to  a  whole
         class of EU citizens to rights they are entitled to  by  virtue  of
         their citizenship."

 5. I am satisfied  that  the  child  in  question  requires  her  mother's
    presence in the United Kingdom in order to exercise the rights that are
    hers by virtue of her nationality. Mr Bates conceded for instance, that
    at her age she should be attending school in  the  United  Kingdom.  At
    present she is unable to exercise that right because her mother  cannot
    bring her here from Pakistan.  I am satisfied that there are  no  other
    adults in the United Kingdom who could be expected to  look  after  the
    child, and in common with the Tribunal in MA and SM I am  not  prepared
    to find that her rights could be exercised by her surrendering  herself
    to the care of social services.   Applying the ratio of that decision I
    am satisfied that the Appellant has  established  that  she  should  be
    given Zambrano rights of residence derived from that of her daughter.


 6. I further allow the appeal with reference to Article 8 ECHR.  As in  MA
    and SM I accept that the Article 8 is engaged, albeit  that  this  case
    concerns entry rather than removal. If it is accepted  that  the  child
    must be given a right to enter the United Kingdom, it must logically be
    accepted that there would be an interference with her family life  with
    her mother should her mother be left behind in Pakistan.  Although  the
    control of entry is plainly a matter lawfully within the power  of  the
    ECO, I do not find that the  decision  would  be  one  necessary  in  a
    democratic society or a proportionate response to the legitimate aim of
    protecting the economy. If this was a child in the  United  Kingdom  it
    would not be  reasonable  to  expect  her  to  leave,  and  nor,  as  a
    consequence of s117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act
    2002, would it be in the public interest of her mother to leave without
    her: this is the effect of the Secretary of State's own  guidance,  set
    out at paragraph 11.2.3 of the Immigration Directorates'  Instructions,
    Family Migration Appendix FM Section 1.0 at 11.2.3. The  relevant  part
    reads:


         "Where a decision to refuse the application would require a  parent
         or primary carer to return to a country outside the  EU,  the  case
         must always be assessed on the basis that it would be  unreasonable
         to expect a British citizen child to leave the EU with that  parent
         or primary carer".


 7. For these reasons, as well as those set out in MA and SM, the appeal is
    allowed.




      Decisions


 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    such that it is set aside by consent.


 9. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows:


    "The appeal is allowed with  reference  to  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds"


10. There is no order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                   12th
                                January 2017
