
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/04391/2015
                                                               OA/04390/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 July 2016                               |On 4 August 2016              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                         MISS k G (FIRST appellant)
                         MISS i G (SECOND appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr A Moran, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. These are appeals by the Appellants against the separate  decisions  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas, both promulgated on 17 June  2015,  in
    which he dismissed their appeals against the Respondent's  refusals  of
    entry clearance made on 2 and 1 February 2015.  The first Appellant  is
    the aunt of the second.  The United Kingdom-based sponsor is the  uncle
    of the first Appellant and the grandfather  of  the  second.   All  are
    Syrian nationals. The sponsor is a recognised refugee in this country.

 2. The Appellants have at all material times been living in Egypt.  It was
    the Appellants' case that a large number of their  family  members  had
    had to flee Syria due to the  horrendous  ongoing  civil  war  in  that
    country.  Members of the family were dispersed to different  countries,
    some coming to the United Kingdom, some residing in Lebanon and  others
    finding themselves in Egypt.




The judge's decisions

 3. The hearing of the appeals occurred on 29 May 2015.  The Respondent was
    not represented before the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge's  decisions
    are brief.

 4. It is noted that Mr Moran conceded that neither of the Appellants could
    satisfy the Immigration Rules and that  the  cases  were  founded  upon
    Article 8 outside of the Rules.  To a large  extent  the  two  separate
    decisions are identical in their  wording.   I  shall  begin  with  the
    decision relating to the first Appellant.

 5. It is said in paragraph 29 that there was "no evidence" that the  first
    Appellant was living in the same household as the sponsor prior to  the
    family leaving Syria and moving to Egypt.  The judge went  on  to  find
    that there was again "no evidence" of dependence.  At paragraph 30  the
    judge states that the first Appellant is now an adult in  her  mid  30s
    and that she has other siblings who live  in  Syria  and  Lebanon.   At
    paragraph 31 the judge states that, "it is not explained -  other  than
    simple choice - why this state has or should  have  responsibility  for
    granting  entry  clearance  for  settlement  to  this  Appellant".   At
    paragraph 32 the judge says:

         "It is accepted that conditions for this Appellant or indeed  other
         Syrian refugees in Egypt may not be perfect or indeed  may  be  far
         from ideal.  However, there is no principle or legal basis for  the
         assertion that  adult  Syrian  refugees  should  be  granted  entry
         clearance to the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  that  they  have
         relatives in this country.  This is not after all an  asylum  claim
         and the Appellant is an adult".

 6. Finally in paragraph 33 the judge states  that,  "...  the  purpose  of
    Article 8 is not to facilitate a right of choice of national  residence
    nor to sidestep the requirements of the Immigration Rules".

 7. Turning to the second Appellant's appeal, at  paragraph  29  the  judge
    asserts that, "no evidence has been submitted in this  appeal  to  show
    that the parents of this Appellant are indeed missing".   At  paragraph
    30 the judge states that, "there is no evidence to show either that no-
    one else is responsible for the Appellant or that indeed the sponsor or
    his family are responsible for  her".   At  paragraph  31  there  is  a
    reference again to the issue of choice of residence.  In  paragraph  32
    the judge notes that the only evidence that the second Appellant is  or
    was reliant or dependent upon the sponsor  emanates  from  the  sponsor
    himself  and  his  own  son.   It  is  said  that  this  evidence   was
    insufficient to lay "any foundation for the assertion that Article 8 of
    ECHR is activated by this claim".  At paragraph  33  the  judge  states
    that, "it is for the Appellant or those on  her  behalf  to  show  that
    there is - in effect - no other option available to her  than  to  join
    her grandparents in the United Kingdom".  Finally in paragraph  34  the
    judge states that, "aside from the wishes of the Sponsor  there  is  no
    evidence at all submitted in this appeal to show that Article 8  is  or
    can be engaged by this claim".




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 8. Grounds for appeal  were  lodged  first  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Permission  was  refused.   The  grounds  were  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  These grounds consisted of challenges to the failure of  the
    judge to have  regard  to  evidence  contained  in  witness  statements
    particularly of the sponsor, a lack of findings made by the judge,  and
    an assertion that the judge  was  in  effect  requiring  corroboration.
    Permission to appeal was initially refused by the Upper Tribunal  in  a
    rather lengthy  decision  dated  7  January  2016.   Following  this  a
    judicial review claim was lodged by those representing the  Appellants.
    By a decision dated 14 March 2016 Mr Justice Males  granted  permission
    in respect of both Appellants.  It is noted by the judge that  contrary
    to the First-tier Judge's view, there was in fact evidence  in  support
    of the various assertions made in the  Appellants'  claims.   Following
    the decision of Mr Justice Males, permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted by Vice President Ockelton on  22  June  2016  and
    thus the two appeals came before me.




The hearing

 9. Mr Moran relied on his grounds of  appeal.   Ms  Ahmed  submitted  that
    there were no material errors of law but in fairness to  her,  she  did
    acknowledge that there were problems with the judge's decisions.




Decision on error of law

10. Having carefully considered  the  judge's  decisions,  the  grounds  of
    appeal, the decisions of Mr Justice Males, and the position of the  two
    representatives before me, I find  that  there  are  numerous  material
    errors of law in the judge's decisions.

11. In respect of the first Appellant's  decision,  contrary  to  what  the
    judge has said there was in fact evidence before him in respect of  the
    make up of the household prior to her arriving in Egypt.  This evidence
    was that of the sponsor, evidence contained within  witness  statements
    is evidence and has to be treated as  such.   It  does  not  of  course
    follow that such evidence has to be accepted, but it must be dealt with
    and, if it is to be rejected, reasons  for  this  must  be  given.   It
    appears to me as though the judge in this case  has  either  overlooked
    this evidence or disregarded it entirely.  Either way he has materially
    erred.

12. In addition, in my view the judge has simply  failed  to  carry  out  a
    careful consideration of this case.  There are  very  few  findings  of
    fact as to the movements of the family and the  first  Appellant's  own
    particular circumstances in Egypt as at the date of decision  including
    her position as an unmarried woman living in a country of which she was
    not a national. There is no  methodical  consideration  of  the  Razgar
    questions and it is entirely unclear to me, having regard to paragraphs
    33 and 34, as to whether he was accepting that there was family life as
    between the first Appellant and the sponsor, or whether if  there  was,
    there was no interference caused by the Respondent's decisions,  or  if
    there was, whether ultimately the  decisions  were  proportionate.   On
    this basis the decision of the judge in respect of the first  Appellant
    cannot stand and I set it aside.

13. In respect of the  second  Appellant,  who  was  at  the  date  of  the
    Respondent's decisions a baby, there are numerous  material  errors  of
    law.  The judge was wrong in paragraphs 29 and 30  to  have  said  that
    there was no evidence in respect of relevant matters.  Again, there was
    evidence, as contained in the witness statement of the  sponsor.   Once
    again the  judge  appears  to  have  overlooked  this  or  ignored  it.
    Alternatively, and having regard to paragraph 32, the judge appears  to
    have been requiring corroborative evidence: such a requirement is wrong
    in law.

14. The judge has made very few, if  any,  findings  of  fact  on  material
    issues. There is nothing whatsoever as to the  best  interests  of  the
    second Appellant and, as with the first  Appellant's  decision,  it  is
    unclear to me as to how the judge has in fact approached the Article  8
    assessment: again, I am unclear as to whether the judge  was  accepting
    family  life  and/or  interference,  and/or  whether  the  refusal  was
    proportionate.  The judge's  references  to  the  issue  of  choice  in
    respect of  both  Appellants  is  correct  in  one  sense:  prospective
    immigrants do not have a choice  as  to  where  they  reside  as  such.
    However in Article 8 cases the issue is whether there  is  a  protected
    right, and if  there  is,  whether  that  right  has  been  justifiably
    interfered with or not as the case may be.

15. Having regard to the above I set aside the judge's decision in  respect
    of the second Appellant as well.




Disposal

16. Both appeals must in my view be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a complete rehearing.  Neither representative sought to  argue  to  the
    contrary.  There is a distinct lack of findings in both appeals and  it
    is not appropriate in my view for these cases to be retained within the
    Upper Tribunal.  I will issue directions to the  parties  and  for  the
    Tribunal's administration below.



Anonymity

17. I make a direction in these appeals. The second appeal is a minor,  and
    both are in vulnerable positions.



Notice of Decisions

    The Appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal are allowed.

    The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal contain  materials  errors  of
    law and they are set aside.

    I remit both appeals to the First-tier Tribunal



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal and the parties:

       1.     These appeals shall be reheard afresh. There are no preserved
          findings;

       2.    It is conceded by the Appellants that  they  cannot  meet  the
          Immigration Rules as these relate to Article 8  ECHR.  Therefore,
          consideration shall be given to Article 8 outside of the Rules;

       3.   The parties shall comply with any further directions issued  by
          the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to listings:

         1. Both appeals are to remain linked;

         2. These appeals are to be listed at the  Taylor  House  or  Hatton
            Cross hearing centres,  whichever  can  accommodate  an  earlier
            hearing date;

         3. These appeals shall not be reheard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
            Lucas;

         4. There is a 2 hour time-estimate for the remitted hearing;

         5. An Arabic (middle Eastern) interpreter is required.





Signed                                  Date: 2 August 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
