
IAC-TH-WYL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/04791/2014
                                                               OA/04794/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower (Birmingham)      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th March 2015                           |On 15th April 2015            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                     desmond ngwefuni - first appellant
                     protus ngwefuni - second appellant
                         (anonymity ORDER not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                           on behalf of eco accra
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Miss H Masih instructed by Kausers Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  Appellants  are  citizens  of  the  Republic  of  Cameroon,  born
    respectively on 20th March 2001 and 12th August 1999.  They appeal with
    permission against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Crawford
    to dismiss their appeals against refusal  of  entry  clearance  as  the
    brothers of the Sponsor, Goodlove Pekichu Ngwefuni. He is living in the
    United Kingdom with refugee status.  The  Appellants  are  respectively
    the Sponsor's half brother and brother.

 2. The judge at first instance found that the Appellants  could  not  meet
    the requirements of paragraph 352D of the  Immigration  Rules  as  they
    were not the Sponsor's children. A guardianship document which had been
    produced, dated October 2013, postdated the  grant  of  asylum  to  the
    Sponsor in July of 2013.  He also dismissed the appeals with regard  to
    Article 8 ECHR.  The Appellants were not represented  at  the  original
    hearing although they had the assistance of a  Mr  Forbes,  a  Mckenzie
    friend.  Mr Forbes is noted as the Appellants'  representative  in  the
    application for permission to appeal to  this  Tribunal,  although  the
    Appellants now have professional representation.

 3. It is contended in the grounds that the judge appeared to accept at the
    hearing that  the  Appellants  formed  part  of  the  Sponsor's  family
    household in Cameroon but this was not reflected in the  determination.
    It was also stated that the judge failed to refer to information in the
    Sponsor's substantive asylum interview, which  was  before  him,  which
    indicated that the Appellants  lived  with  the  Sponsor  in  Cameroon.
    Permission was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford  on  19th
    January 2015.  She commented that she could see  no  reference  in  the
    Record of Proceedings to an acceptance on the part of the judge  as  to
    what was said to be in a screening interview but it was the  case  that
    he had  not  referred  to  the  extract  from  the  substantive  asylum
    interview and it was arguable that this evidence had  been  overlooked.
    The Respondent filed a brief response under  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure
    Rule 24 asserting that the findings made were sustainable.

 4. At the hearing before me the Appellants were  represented  by  Counsel,
    Miss Masih, who handed in a skeleton argument.  I also  had  before  me
    the original documents, including the Respondent's core  bundle  and  a
    bundle   of   documents   submitted   by   the   Appellants'    current
    representatives.  Miss Masih said there appeared to have been doubt  as
    to what had actually been before the judge at first instance and I  was
    able to confirm that the notes of  the  substantive  asylum  interview,
    questions 12 to 16 and replies,  and  the  guardianship  documents  had
    indeed been before the Tribunal at the time of the first hearing.   She
    relied upon her detailed skeleton argument.

 5. Briefly in that skeleton she sought to rely upon  Article  8  ECHR,  in
    addition to the grounds as pleaded, submitting that the grounds  should
    be interpreted liberally and that in any event the Article 8 issue  was
    "Robinson obvious" (R v SSHD ex parte Robinson [1998] QB 929).  She did
    not now seek to rely upon one paragraph in her skeleton argument  which
    referred to the lack of reference in the decision under  appeal  as  to
    what documents had been before the judge; she accepted, now having seen
    a copy of the screening interview, that the living arrangements for the
    Appellants  were  not  mentioned.   Those  arrangements  were   however
    mentioned in the substantive interview  to  which  the  judge  had  not
    referred.  He appeared to have attached no weight to the fact  that  he
    had accepted that the Appellants had been living with  the  Sponsor  in
    Cameroon.  The judge had failed to have proper regard  to  or  properly
    reflect the Sponsor's oral evidence on relevant factors and  there  had
    been only a passing reference to the guardianship  documents.   It  was
    arguable that there was  a  de  facto  adoption.   The  fact  that  the
    guardianship documents post-dated the grant of refugee status  was  not
    relevant to the Article 8  element  of  the  claim,  which  was  to  be
    assessed as at the date of decision.  It was said that  the  judge  had
    not followed a structured approach to the Article 8  considerations  in
    accordance with the Razgar steps and had not considered the welfare and
    best interests of the Appellants,  given  that  he  accepted  that  the
    Sponsor  and  the  Appellants  had  lived  together  in  the  Cameroon.
    Finally, it was said  that  the  hearing,  which  took  place  on  15th
    September 2014, post-dated the introduction of Sections 117A-C  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and the judge's failure to
    apply the provisions of that Section amounted to a  material  error  of
    law.  She continued that the original  Grounds  of  Appeal  had  raised
    Article 8, albeit obliquely.

 6. Mr Smart for the Respondent opposed the widening of the appeal  now  to
    include Article 8 ECHR.  He referred  to  the  decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal  in  Ved  and  Another   (Appealable   decisions;   permission
    applications; Basnet) [2014] UKUT 150 (IAC) and to the judgment of  the
    Court of Appeal in Sarkar v SSHD [2014] EWCA  Civ  195.   He  submitted
    that Article 8 in this case was not a Robinson obvious matter.  It  had
    not been obvious to the judge who had granted permission and he said it
    was not obvious to him.  The challenge before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge appeared to be to  a  finding  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances.  The witness statement now provided contended  that  the
    judge had not dealt properly with the evidence, implying that the judge
    had mischaracterised the evidence.  At this point I read out the Record
    of Proceedings which was on the Tribunal file and  Mr  Smart  submitted
    that paragraph 6 of the decision was a fair record  of  what  had  been
    said.   Matters  of  weight  were  for  the  judge.   In  reality   his
    consideration of the documents had been correct.  Mr Smart said it  was
    difficult to see how an Article 8 claim could succeed.  The Sponsor had
    come to the United Kingdom in June of 2013.  By the date of decision he
    had been here for over twelve months and the  Appellants,  his  brother
    and half brother, were being cared for by someone else.  He was not  in
    a position to maintain them in this country.

 7. Finally in reply Miss Masih said that there was evidence of a de  facto
    adoption in the documents, which the judge had not properly considered.
     The  guardianship  documents  were  issued  by  a  legally  recognised
    authority.  She continued to rely upon paragraph 352D, in  addition  to
    Article 8.  Mr Smart commented that the Supreme Court had  indicated  a
    strict approach to de facto adoptions in  AA  (Somalia)  v  ECO  (Addis
    Ababa) [2013] UKSC 81.

 8. I will deal first with the appeal as  regards  paragraph  352D  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The judge set out this paragraph in  his  decision.
    He found that the Appellants could not meet  the  requirements  of  the
    paragraph as they were not the Sponsor's children (see paragraph 11  of
    the decision).  At the hearing Miss Masih for Appellants sought to rely
    upon the concept of de facto adoption.  I find that the  point  has  no
    substance having regard to the judgment of  the  Supreme  Court  in  AA
    (Somalia).  As is pointed  out  in  that  judgment  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 352D relating to de facto adoptions  have  to  be  considered
    having regard to paragraph 309A (see paragraph  15  of  the  judgment).
    The current Appellants were  not  able  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 309A as they had not lived with the Sponsor for the period of
    twelve months immediately preceding their applications, he having  been
    in the United Kingdom since May of 2013 and the applications being made
    in December of that year.  The appeals therefore could not  potentially
    have succeeded under the provisions of the Immigration Rules as  relied
    upon. There was no material error on the part of the judge.

 9. I turn now to the matter of Article 8.  Miss Masih sought to rely  upon
    this; Mr Smart contended that as it had not been an expressed  part  of
    the application for permission to appeal, and had not been mentioned in
    the grant of permission, it should not be entertained.  I note that the
    initial refusal did not  refer  expressly  to  Article  8  but  it  was
    mentioned in the Entry Clearance Manager's review.  In the  Grounds  of
    Appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  (which  had  been  drafted  by  the
    Sponsor in person) Article 8 was  again  not  expressly  mentioned  but
    there are references to the Appellants forming part  of  the  Sponsor's
    family unit.  Article 8 was addressed by the judge at  first  instance.
    Mr Smart referred me to various authorities.  In Sarkar the reality was
    that the Appellant was regarded  as  having  abandoned  the  Article  8
    element of the appeal. That is a position distinct  from  that  of  the
    current appeal where there has been no expressed abandonment.

10. In Sarkar the Upper Tribunal had refused to  grant  permission  on  the
    Article 8 ground.  That again is not the case here.  Lord Justice Moore-
    Bick stated (at paragraph 17 of his judgment):

         "... I also accept that in an appropriate  case  the  Tribunal  has
         jurisdiction to consider new points that had not been  included  in
         an appellant's original grounds  of  appeal  -  see  DL-H  v  Devon
         Partnership NHS Trust [2010] UKUT 102 (AAC) at paragraph  3  -  but
         that is not the same as saying that  the  Tribunal  can  re-open  a
         decision refusing permission to appeal on a particular ground ..."

    My view is that the judgment in Sarkar does not  preclude  me  at  this
    stage from hearing submissions  in  respect  of  Article  8.   This  is
    consistent with the overriding objective as expressed at Rule 2 of  the
    Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules to avoid unnecessary formality and  seek
    flexibility in the proceedings.  This is particularly relevant  in  the
    case of  minor  Appellants,  the  more  so  when  they  have  not  been
    professionally represented.  Mr Smart also relied upon the judgment  in
    Virk.  The core of that judgment  was  whether  jurisdiction  could  be
    conferred by agreement.  In that case the  deciding  judge  found  that
    there was no right of appeal but the point was not put to the Appellant
    and there was procedural irregularity.  The current appeals  are  quite
    distinct in their issues.  The third case he referred to  was  Ved  but
    that case concerns validity of appeals.  In  all  the  circumstances  I
    find that it is appropriate for me in these appeals to have  regard  to
    the issues arising under Article 8 on the basis outlined by Miss Masih.

11. To decide whether there was an error of law in  respect  to  the  above
    matters it is necessary again to look at  the  judge's  decision.   The
    judge noted at paragraph 10 of his decision that the Sponsor's evidence
    was that the Appellants had been part of a family unit in Cameroon.  He
    accepted that the Sponsor had mentioned at the screening interview that
    he lived with the Appellants. In the following paragraph he noted  that
    the guardianship document, dated October 2013, postdated the  grant  of
    asylum. In fact the screening  interview  (which  was  not  before  the
    judge) makes no mention of the Appellants living with the  Sponsor  but
    the extract from the substantive interview (which the judge  did  have)
    did state this. The concept that the Appellants lived with the  Sponsor
    was clearly appreciated by the judge, even if he did not refer  to  the
    correct documentary evidence.

12. The judge accepted (at paragraph 13) that the Appellants did live  with
    the Sponsor in Cameroon and went on to state that they now  had  family
    and private life with their mother, uncle and elder brother  and  their
    sisters were also living there.  I have to consider whether, bearing in
    mind the points now made on behalf of the Appellants, the  judge  could
    arguably have come to a different conclusion.  At  the  hearing  I  did
    read through the Record of Proceedings.  I found there was  nothing  to
    persuade me that the judge had  mischaracterised  the  evidence  and  I
    agree with Mr Smart that the judge had adequately summarised it.  There
    was no statement or other commentary from Mr Forbes to contradict  this
    view.

13.  In order for Article 8 to be engaged it was necessary  for  it  to  be
    established that there was family life, of a magnitude  to  engage  the
    Article, or a breach of private life  of  sufficient  gravity.   As  to
    family life on the evidence before the judge the Sponsor had not  lived
    with the Appellants since at least May of 2013.  The Sponsor was living
    on benefits and had not been in a position to send any  remittances  to
    the Appellants.  They were living with other members of the  family  in
    Cameroon.  However the judge  approached  Article  8,  those  were  the
    circumstances he was faced with.

14. Although there are guardianship documents dated October 2013 those were
    clearly not in place whilst the Sponsor was living in Cameroon  and  it
    is noticeable that in the application forms  the  Appellants  described
    the Sponsor as their brother,  not  as  their  father,  and  they  gave
    details of a legal guardian in Cameroon, Gladys Pekwefah Ngwana.   None
    of this is indicative of the Appellants having continuing  family  life
    with the Sponsor now  that  he  is  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  his
    immediate family.  So far as private life is concerned there  would  be
    no interference with private life that  is  currently  enjoyed  by  the
    decisions under appeal.  On the evidence before him the judge at  first
    instance could well have found that Article 8 was not in fact engaged.

15. If the matter of proportionality was in  issue  he  did  make  findings
    which were open to him on the evidence that the Appellants were  living
    with other family in Cameroon and were not in exceptional circumstances
    of poverty or hardship.  It is correct that he  did  not  make  express
    findings  as  to  their  welfare  and  best  interests  but  given  the
    requirements of paragraph 117B of the Immigration  Rules,  notably  the
    importance of immigration control and of parties being  self-supporting
    and the Sponsor's accepted lack of means whereby he and his family  are
    currently living on benefits, there was no realistic  prospect  of  the
    Appellants succeeding under Article 8.

16. In these circumstances I  find  that  although  the  judge  could  with
    advantage have expressed things more fully  and  approached  Article  8
    differently nonetheless there was no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decisions he reached.  Accordingly those decisions stand.

17. There was no request for an anonymity order and I make none.

Decision

18. There was no material error of law in the original decisions  at  first
    instance and those decisions, that the appeals be dismissed both  under
    the Immigration Rules and with respect to  Article  8  ECHR,  therefore
    stand.



Signed        Date  09 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

