
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04407/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 September 2013                          |On 11 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                           wondimu wakewoya umtea

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Fenney of Duncan Moghal Solicitors & Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia who was  born  on  12  September
    1971.  On 6 February 2012, the appellant made an application for  entry
    clearance to join his spouse in the United Kingdom,  Meskerem  Mengistu
    Feyssa, who is also an Ethiopian citizen and who has been recognised as
    a refugee in the UK.  The appellant and sponsor married  on  27  August
    2011 in Kenya.  The sponsor has limited leave to remain in  the  United
    Kingdom until  25  February  2014.   On  15  February  2012  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in Nairobi refused the appellant's application  under
    para 319L of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 2. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It  was  common
    ground before the judge that the only requirement under para 319L  that
    was in issue was the English language requirement in  para  319L(i)(b).
    That provides as follows:

         "The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter  the
         United Kingdom as the spouse or civil  partner  of  a  person  with
         limited leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom as a refugee
         or beneficiary of humanitarian protection, are that:

         (i)(a)   .....

              (b) The applicant provides an original English  language  test
             certificate in speaking and listening from an English language
             test provider approved by the Secretary  of  State  for  these
             purposes, which clearly shows the  applicant's  name  and  the
             qualification obtained (which must meet or exceed level A1  of
             the Common European Framework of Reference) ..."


 3.  Paragraph  319L(i)(b)  sets  out  a  number  of  exceptions  to   that
    requirement but none are relevant in this appeal.

 4. The appellant relied upon the International  English  Language  Testing
    System (IELTS) and a certificate  provided  by  Cambridge  ESOL.   That
    certificate set out the following:

         "Listening 3.5

         Reading [illegible]

         Writing [possibly] 5

         Speaking 6.0

         Overall band score 4.5"

 5. I take that extract from para 15 of Judge Hart's determination.

 6. The difficulty for  the  appellant  was  that  there  was  no  official
    equivalence of an IELTS score on the CEFR.  That was clearly set out in
    a letter dated 11 July 2012 from  the  UKBA  addressed  to  Mr  C  M  G
    Ockelton, Vice President of the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and  Asylum
    Chamber) which is set out at para 24 of the  judge's  determination  as
    follows:

         "A does not meet the requirements because an IELTS score below  4.0
         is not a test from an approved  provider  which  meets  or  exceeds
         level A1.  The IELTS has indicated to  UKBA  (and  confirmed  again
         recently that they are not in a position to score tests  below  4.0
         for UKBA and although there is  a  wealth  of  information  on  the
         website which attempts to align IELTS scores below 4.0 to  a  score
         on the Common European Framework of Reference, a score below 4.0 is
         not equivalent to any scale on the  Common  European  Framework  of
         Reference."

 7. The judge rejected the argument made on behalf of  the  appellant  that
    his mark of 3.5 in the "listening" part of the test was sufficient.  At
    para 44, Judge Hart noted that the  Secretary  of  State  had  provided
    Guidance  (although  he  does  not  set  it  out)  which   accepted   a
    qualification under the IELTS scheme but only provided  an  equivalence
    on the CEFR scale for a score of 4.0 on the IELTS test  at  CEFR  level
    B1.  Noting that a number of websites  relied  upon  by  the  appellant
    provided differing views in comparing IELTS scores to CEFR levels,  the
    judge was not satisfied that the score of 3.5 on the IELTS test was the
    equivalent of level A1 on the CEFR.

 8. Ms Fenney, who represented the appellant, acknowledged that she was  in
    some difficulty in challenging Judge Hart's decision in  the  light  of
    the Upper Tribunal's decision in Akhtar (CEFR; UKBA Guidance and IELTS)
    [2013] UKUT 00306 (IAC).  In that case, the Upper Tribunal (Mr  C  M  G
    Ockelton, Vice President, and UTJ Grubb) concluded  that  an  applicant
    who relied upon an IELTS test score awarded by Cambridge  ESOL  had  to
    rely upon the UKBA's Guidance in order to establish an equivalence with
    CEFR levels.  The italic words of Akhtar are as follows:

         "1.  Where, under the Immigration Rules, it was required  that,  as
         an English language  requirement,  an  individual  must  achieve  a
         certain  level  by  reference  to  the  Common  European  Framework
         Reference (CEFR) (i.e. A1, B1, B2 etc) and the individual relies on
         an International English Language Test System (IELTS)  test  result
         awarded by Cambridge ESOL, that  individual must  necessarily  rely
         on the relevant UKBA's Guidance to succeed because the Rules do not
         state an equivalence between the IELTS test results and the  levels
         of the CEFR.

         2.   The UKBA's Guidance does not  attribute  any  mark  less  than
         level B1 to any IELTS score and so, in practical terms, equivalence
         to at least B1 must be established  even  where  the  level  to  be
         achieved is A1.

         3.   In order to achieve a particular CEFR level, it is not  enough
         simply to look at the individual's  overall  score:   The  Guidance
         requires that at least each of the individual modules in 'speaking'
         and 'listening' has been assessed at the level required."


 9. On the face of it, therefore, this appellant's appeal must fail as  the
    score in "listening" of 3.5 has no equivalence  on  the  CEFR  and,  in
    order to succeed, the appellant must obtain a score equivalent to level
    B1, namely 4.0 in both "listening" and "speaking".  It is only  in  the
    latter element of the test that he has acquired a  score  at  at  least
    level B1.

10. Nevertheless, Ms Fenney (who also represented the appellant in  Akhtar)
    sought to argue that the appellant should succeed.  First,  she  relied
    upon the decision of the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  R(Alvi)  v
    SSHD  [2012] UKSC 33 in which it was held that the Secretary of State's
    Guidance could not impose a requirement, the effect of which  was  that
    an individual could not succeed under the Rules.  Any such  requirement
    was a "rule", and as such had to be included in the Immigration  Rules.



11. The difficulty with this submission is that without the  Guidance  this
    appellant cannot hope to succeed.  There is no stated  equivalence  for
    level A1 of the CEFR apart from the Secretary of State's Guidance.   In
    any event, as the letter referred to in paragraph 5 above makes  plain,
    the Guidance merely reflects the position of the IELTS that their  test
    does not provide a score which can be equated directly to level  A1  of
    the CEFR.  It is not the Secretary of State's Guidance which  sets  the
    limit on the value of the IELTS score when assessed against  the  CEFR,
    rather it is the IELTS itself.  Thus, I am unable to accept Ms Fenney's
    submission that the Guidance is unlawful  and  that  the  appellant  is
    entitled to succeed despite its terms.

12. Secondly, Ms Fenney relied upon an email dated 10  February  2011  from
    the Public Enquiries Customer Services, Visa  Services  Directorate  of
    the UKBA.  That email states as follows:

         "Thank you for the follow on enquiry.

         An IELTS test score of 3.5  is  equivalent  to  a  B1  level  which
         exceeds the basic A1 level of English  required  for  a  settlement
         visa application.  Your spouse may therefore lodge her  IELTS  test
         score as evidence of her English language competence."



13. Ms Fenney accepted that this email was not  generated  in  relation  to
    this appellant.  She indicated that she had received  it  from  another
    immigration lawyer and that it related to a different  individual  from
    the appellant.

14. There are a number of difficulties in the appellant seeking to rely  on
    this email.  First, as Mr Richards pointed out in his submissions, this
    email was not before the First-tier Tribunal and  could  not  therefore
    demonstrate that the judge had erred in law in reaching  his  decision.
    That, in my judgment, is entirely correct.

15. Secondly, in any event, the email is not directed to the appellant  and
    has  never  been,  until  the  hearing  before  me,  any  part  of  the
    appellant's  case.   It  both  contradicts  the  Secretary  of  State's
    Guidance and also the position of IELTS on its  own  test.   The  email
    states that the score of "3.5" is  the  equivalent  of  level  B1.   Ms
    Fenney, of course, seeks to argue that a score of 3.5 is the equivalent
    of level A1.  IELTS itself does set an equivalent for level B1 and that
    is a score of 4.  It is difficult, therefore, to understand  upon  what
    basis the writer of this email asserts that  a  score  of  3.5  is  the
    equivalent to level B1.  As I have said, this email was  not  addressed
    to the appellant or his representatives and can give rise to  no  legal
    basis or expectation that an IELTS score of 3.5 will be accepted as the
    equivalent of level A1, let alone (as it appears to claim) level B1.

16. Finally, I would simply add that the various websites  to  which  Judge
    Hart was referred cannot assist to establish an equivalence between  an
    IELTS score and the CEFR which is not recognised  by  IELTS  itself  as
    reflected in the Guidance.  As Judge Hart noted at para 40, the various
    websites contain "differing material" but even  if  it  did  not,  that
    material could not remove  the  lacuna  deliberately  inserted  in  the
    equivalence scales set by IELTS itself.

17. For these reasons,  and  applying  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in
    Akhtar, the judge did not err in law in finding that the appellant  had
    failed to meet the English  language  requirement  in  para  319L(i)(b)
    because he could not establish that his IELTS score in  "listening"  of
    3.5 was the equivalent of at least level A1 of the CEFR.

18. Ms Fenney additionally submitted that the judge had  erred  in  law  in
    also dismissing the appeal under Art 8.

19. Ms Fenney submitted that the judge's decision was tainted by  his  view
    that the ECO had not been satisfied of the  remaining  requirements  of
    para 319L, in particular that the appellant's marriage  was  a  genuine
    one.  Ms Fenney submitted that the judge  should  have  approached  the
    appellant's Art 8 claim on the basis that the only requirement of  para
    319L which was not met  was  the  English  language  requirement.   She
    submitted that as the point was not directly taken, the ECO  must  have
    accepted the genuineness and subsistence of the  marriage.   Ms  Fenney
    reminded me that the sponsor was a refugee and would be unable to  live
    with the appellant in Ethiopia.

20. Judge Hart dealt with the appellant's claim under Art 8 at paras  49-59
    of his determination.

21. First, at para 49 he set out the submission made by Ms Fenney on behalf
    of the appellant as to the basis on which the appellant should  succeed
    under Art 8 on the basis that he had "failed by a  narrow  whisker"  to
    succeed under the Rules:

         "49. Ms Fenney therefore seeks to argue that, having  failed  by  a
             narrow whisker and on a technical point  to  meet  the  strict
             requirement of the Rules, he  should  nonetheless  be  allowed
             entry clearance though  discretionary  leave  to  enter  under
             Article 8.   A  practical  result,  of  course,  is  that  any
             discretionary leave which might be granted to him ought not to
             be longer than the period for which he would have been granted
             leave under the Rules, namely the equivalent period granted to
             the sponsor."

22. The judge dealt with the nature of the  appellant's  relationship  with
    the sponsor at paras 50-53 as follows.

         "50. Evidentially, I have difficulty in reaching an  assessment  of
             Article 8.  Firstly there is no witness statement as such from
             the  appellant  or  sponsor  about   the   nature   of   their
             relationship.  Secondly the respondent has apparently  reached
             no  decision  on  whether  the  marriage  is  subsisting   and
             therefore there exists a family life.

         51.  The sponsor's travel document shows a  re-entry  stamp  as  21
             September 2011, the date of entry into Kenya  is  unclear  but
             was in July.  The entries  in  the  appellant's  passport  for
             Kenya suggest that he entered on 16 August 2011 and left on 21
             September.  The marriage took place on 27 August 2011.   There
             is no indication before me that the appellant and sponsor have
             met  again  following  the  marriage.   The  sponsor's  travel
             document was issued  in  February  2009  but,  describing  the
             appellant as her long-term boyfriend, neither she nor  he  had
             made arrangements for the marriage until May 2011.

         52.  It is therefore not possible to assess the strength  of  their
             relationship.

         53.  The visit surmises that the sponsor can travel again to  Kenya
             to meet the appellant and spend time there with him."


23. Mr Richards submitted that the judge had accepted that the  appellant's
    marriage was a genuine one but had merely gone on, on the basis of  the
    limited evidence before him, to comment that it  was  not  possible  to
    assess the "strength" of the relationship.  In  my  judgment,  that  is
    correct.  I do not accept Ms Fenney's submission that the judge doubted
    the genuineness of the relationship.  At para 50, he refers to the fact
    that the respondent had apparently not made any decision on the  nature
    of their relationship but, it  is  clear,  that  thereafter  the  judge
    accepted that it was a genuine  marriage  but,  in  the  absence  of  a
    witness statement from the appellant or sponsor, it was not possible to
    assess the strength of their relationship.  At paras 54-56, the  judge,
    having made that latter finding, went on to conclude that  the  refusal
    was not a "serious interference" with their family life as follows:

         "54. If the issue is whether or not the respondent's refusal  is  a
             serious interference with the supposed  family  life,  I  find
             that it would not be a serious interference.  They have  lived
             their  separate  lives  for  many  years  and  delayed   their
             marriage.

         55.  As I pointed out at the hearing, it is open to  the  appellant
             to make a fresh application based  upon  either  a  qualifying
             IELTS certificate, with a better score for  the  two  required
             aspects, or that he takes the CEFR equivalent examination  and
             achieves success.  It was briefly  mentioned  at  the  hearing
             that he has already taken another examination but  the  result
             was not known.  In any event my decision must  be  based  upon
             the circumstances at the date of the decision and a subsequent
             successful  result  would  not  assist  the  appellant.    The
             downside is, of course, that since  July  more  stringent  and
             realistic levels of maintenance have  been  set  and  (without
             knowing the details) the appellant may be in some difficulties
             in meeting that requirement.

         56.  Nonetheless, I would find that the refusal of entry  clearance
             by the respondent on the one basis set  out  in  the  decision
             does not represent a serious interference with the family life
             of the appellant and the sponsor.  It is plainly in accordance
             with the law and the Immigration  Rules,  as  they  have  been
             interpreted."

24. Then, having set out the Court of Appeal's  decision  in  SSHD  v  Miah
    [2010] EWCA Civ 261 that there was no "near-miss" principle, the  judge
    continued at para 58 as follows:

         "58. With that and other decisions on Article 8  in  mind,  notably
             those of Huang and the stepped approach  in  Razgar,  which  I
             have applied, I find that the respondent's decision is not  in
             breach of the appellant's and sponsor's right to  private  and
             family life under Article 8.  It is clear that  the  appellant
             has nearly missed reaching the  required  qualification  under
             the Immigration Rules for proficiency in English.  It is  open
             to him, as he may have already done, to resit the  examination
             and therefore qualify.   It  is  yet  to  be  shown  that  the
             appellant meets the  other  requirements  of  the  Immigration
             Rule.  It would be entirely wrong to allow  the  appeal  under
             Article 8, thereby not only excusing the appellant from strict
             compliance with the Immigration Rule by possibly affording him
             a grant of discretionary leave without  meeting  many  of  the
             requirements of the Immigration Rule and  in  particular  that
             with  regard  to  the  length  of  the  leave.   Although  the
             appellant fails in this appeal on a small technical point,  he
             nonetheless fails but has the opportunity to  make  good  that
             failure by resitting the examination  or  taking  the  correct
             test.  It cannot be the purpose of Article 8  to  relieve  the
             appellant of the  duty  of  meeting  the  now  more  stringent
             requirements of the amended Rules relating to entry  clearance
             by family members."




25. Consequently, the judge found in para 59 that the respondent's decision
    did not breach Art 8.

26. As I have already pointed out, Ms Fenney's principal submission  (which
    is the basis for the challenge to the judge's decision under Art 8  set
    out in paras 3-4 of the grounds) was  that  the  judge  approached  the
    appeal on the erroneous basis that it had not been established that the
    appellant met the requirements of para 319L with the exception  of  the
    English language requirement.  It  is  clear  on  reading  the  judge's
    reasons that he did not fall  into  that  error.   Although  the  judge
    stated in para 58 of his determination that the appellant has  not  yet
    shown that he meets the other requirements of the Immigration Rules, he
    nevertheless clearly approached the appellant's  appeal  on  the  basis
    that he was married as claimed; it was a genuine but one which, on  the
    basis of the limited evidence, he was not able to assess  the  strength
    of that relationship.  In the absence of statements from the  appellant
    and sponsor or oral evidence  from  the  sponsor  that  was  a  finding
    properly open to the judge.  He took into account  that  the  appellant
    did not presently meet the English language requirement of  the  Rules.
    The appellant had the option of resitting the test, and the judge noted
    at para 55, that the appellant had already taken another exam  but  the
    result was not known.  Ms Fenney was unable to confirm  what,  if  any,
    result had been obtained.

27. In my judgment, the judge gave adequate reasons for  his  finding  that
    the respondent's decision did not breach Art 8.  The basis  upon  which
    that decision is now challenged is, for the reasons I have given above,
    rejected.  I see no other basis upon which it could be argued that  the
    judge erred in law in reaching his decision to dismiss the appeal under
    Art 8.  It was a conclusion properly open to him on the evidence.

Decision

28. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal under the  Immigration  Rules  and  Art  8  did  not
    involve the making of an error of law.  Those decisions stand.

29. This appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
