
IAC-FH-aR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04615/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2015                              |On 9 April 2015               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                   ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NAIROBI, KENYA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SARA KESTE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr N Stevens, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors (Harrow
office)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer I will  refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Eritrea, currently resident in  Ethiopia,
    who was refused entry clearance to join her older  brother  in  the  UK
    (the sponsor).  The sponsor is an Eritrean citizen who  was  recognised
    as a refugee in the UK in 2009, and obtained indefinite leave to remain
     in 2014.  The appellant is an orphan, and dependent on the sponsor and
    his wife, who joined the sponsor in the UK in 2013.

3.   The appeal was allowed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  Aziz,  in  a
    decision promulgated on 21 November 2014.   The appeal was  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds only.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McDade
    on 13 January 2015.  The  grounds  seeking  permission  to  appeal  had
    complained that the judge had not properly applied  paragraph  319X  of
    the Immigration Rules; and that there  had  been  failures  to  resolve
    material conflicts in the evidence.  The judge granting  permission  to
    appeal considered the point about the application of paragraph 319X  to
    be arguable, but did not mention the other two grounds.

Submissions

5.   At the start of the hearing it was agreed between the parties that  all
    three grounds could be argued.  This agreement  flowed  from  the  fact
    that, although they had  not  been  mentioned,  the  second  and  third
    grounds had not been refused permission.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller, for the
    Entry Clearance Officer, indicated  at  the  start  that  she  was  not
    relying on the first ground.  Both the person who drafted the  grounds,
    and the judge granting permission, appear  to  have  misunderstood  the
    nature of paragraph 319X of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as  amended).
    The misunderstanding was  understandable,  given  the  drafting,  which
    refers to "the child of a relative".  This was taken as meaning that an
    applicant had to be the  biological  child  of  a  relative  acting  as
    sponsor.  In fact, as is clear from paragraph 319X(iii), the Rule  only
    covers children where the sponsoring relative is not the parent of  the
    child.  In reality, therefore, the Rule is concerned with children  who
    are applying to join relatives who are refugees  in  the  UK,  but  not
    children seeking to join their parents.

6.   The  submissions  were  therefore  concerned  with  the  remaining  two
    grounds.  An issue arose, in the course of discussion, as to whether Mr
    Stevens, for the appellant, accepted the  judge's  decision  dismissing
    the appeal under the Immigration Rules. This aspect  of  the   decision
    turned on the issue of whether a certificate showing that the applicant
    was free from TB could be considered as relevant to  the  circumstances
    at the date of decision.  Mr Stevens indicated that a cross-appeal  had
    been given consideration, but had not been pursued on  the  basis  that
    there would be no difference  between  success  under  the  Immigration
    Rules, and under Article 8.

7.   In support of  the  second  and  third  grounds,  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller
    submitted that there was a conflict in the judge's decision between the
    finding that the sponsor had been credible in  some  respects  but  not
    others.  The judge had not  engaged  with  the  negative  aspects  when
    assessing the credibility of other aspects, and there were insufficient
    reasons for the positive findings made in view of the judge's  findings
    that  the  sponsor  had  not  been  candid  about  the  nature  of  his
    relationship with the appellant in view of the DNA  test  results.   In
    addition, those results were not properly considered  when  looking  at
    the previous decision, referred to at  paragraph  85  of  the  decision
    under appeal.   As to ground 3 there was a lack of reasoned findings as
    to the actual parentage of the appellant.  There had been  failings  in
    the assessment of the position of Article 8 outside the  Rules,  and  a
    failure  to  consider  the  important  public  interest  point  of  the
    protection of the public from TB.

8.   Mr Stevens submitted that the second ground in reality boiled  down  to
    a complaint that the judge should have made a clear finding as  to  the
    parentage of the appellant, but in his submission this would have  been
    pure speculation, and the judge would have fallen into error  for  that
    reason.   The findings in the decision at paragraphs 85 and 98 amounted
    to factual findings that the appellant had been part of  the  sponsor's
    family  unit  pre-flight,  and  that   he   had   taken   on   parental
    responsibility for her.  Judges were used to making  mixed  credibility
    findings.   There  was   sufficient   evidence   of   the   appellant's
    circumstances in Ethiopia.  Maintenance had been accepted by the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.  As to the third ground, it was submitted that  this
    would only be a significant  adverse  public  interest  factor  if  the
    appellant actually had TB, and the certificate showed that this was not
    the case.  At paragraph 103 of the decision the judge was  entitled  to
    look at the damaging consequences for the appellant of insisting  on  a
    further entry clearance application  being  made,  with  the  resultant
    delay.

9.   Ms Brocklesby-Weller,  in  response,  submitted  that  the  process  of
    looking  forwards  to  the  consequences  of   insisting   on   another
    application did not fit comfortably with Article 8's focus on the  date
    of decision; that there could be no near miss; that Article 8 was not a
    general  dispensing  power;  and  that  a  fresh  application  remained
    possible.

Decision

10.  I have decided that the two remaining grounds have not been  made  out,
    and it has not been established that there was a material error of  law
    in the judge's decision.

11.  The second ground  was  concerned  with  two  issues.   The  first  was
    whether the judge's reasons for the positive findings were adequate  in
    view of the negative credibility  findings  about  the  nature  of  the
    relationship.   On this point I accept, in broad terms, the  submission
    made by Mr Stevens.  It will often be the case that judges will  accept
    part of the evidence being put forward by or on behalf of an appellant,
    but will have reasons to  reject other parts of the evidence.  That  is
    the judge's task, and this aspect of the second ground appears to me in
    reality to amount to a  complaint  about  a  matter  of  weight.   This
    properly falls within the factual realm.   It appears reasonably  clear
    to me that it was open to the judge to  make  both  the   positive  and
    negative findings, and it is not arguable that the  reasoning  for  the
    positive findings was inadequate.  The  complaint  is  that  the  judge
    should have given greater weight to  the  negative  aspects,  and  this
    should have led to  the  judge  rejecting  a  greater  portion  of  the
    evidence, but that was  a matter for the judge to decide on all of  the
    evidence, and does not amount to a legal error.

12.  The  second  aspect  of  the  second  ground  challenging  the  judge's
    decision was concerned with  whether  the  judge  should  have  made  a
    finding as to the appellant's parentage.  On this point  I  accept  the
    submission made that this would have been   speculative.   This  was  a
    difficult issue, and it appears to me that  the  judge  dealt  with  it
    well.   The  judge  noted  at  paragraph  80  that  the  DNA   evidence
    established that the appellant and sponsor were related, as required by
    the Rule.  The DNA evidence showed that the appellant and  the  sponsor
    were not full siblings, as they had believed, but were  half  siblings,
    although other close relationships were also possible.  The judge  went
    on, at paragraph 85, to look at the actual  relationships  between  the
    appellant, the sponsor, and his wife.   These findings appear to me  to
    be well reasoned, and to have been open to the judge on  the  evidence.
    The DNA result did raise a number of possibilities, but I  accept  that
    it would have been speculative to make findings as to what had occurred
    in  the  past.   The  findings  about  the   actual   nature   of   the
    relationships, and in particular  the  appellant's  dependency  on  the
    sponsor and his wife, and their formation of a family  unit,  were  the
    findings that counted in establishing the actual circumstances  of  the
    child at the date of decision.

13.  The third ground challenged the overall Article 8 reasoning.   Some  of
    the points of concern raised in the written grounds were not pursued at
    the hearing.  The main point that was pursued was connected to  the  TB
    certificate.  This was partly in connection to the fact that it emerged
    that this issue was the only one that led to the appeal being dismissed
    under the Immigration Rules, rather than being allowed under the Rules.



14.  It does not appear to me to be arguable that the judge erred in law  in
    considering the consequences for the appellant, and her best  interests
    as a child, if the appeal were to be  dismissed.   In  entry  clearance
    Article 8 is concerned with a positive  obligation,  and  although  the
    assessment is concerned with the date of decision, the  decision  maker
    at that date inevitably has to look forward to a certain extent at what
    the consequences of refusal would be for any  family  or  private  life
    rights that are engaged.  In this case, there were sustainable and well
    reasoned findings that the appellant was a child who was separated from
    her two closest relatives, who were in effect her guardians,  and  that
    she was  isolated  in  a  refugee  camp  in  a  foreign  country.   The
    suggestion that she should stay longer in that situation merely because
    the certificate showing that she was free of TB had been obtained  late
    is not an attractive one.  The issue becomes one  not  of  any  genuine
    public interest about protecting the UK from TB, but instead merely  an
    adherence to form  rather  than  substance  in  the  process  of  entry
    clearance applications.  I cannot see  that  the  judge's  approach  to
    Article 8, in effect deciding, in the light of the  best  interests  of
    the child,  that  it  was  disproportionate  to  insist  on  a  further
    application arising from the certificate issue alone, can  be  said  to
    involve any legal error for looking forward.

15.  The additional point that was discussed,  namely  that  it  would  have
    been open to the judge to regard the TB certificate as showing what the
    circumstances were at the date of decision, on the basis  that  if  the
    appellant was clear of TB shortly after the  decision,  then  she  must
    have been clear of TB at the date of decision, is one, as I have  said,
    that was not pursued.

16.  It was not suggested by  either  side  that  there  was  any  need  for
    anonymity in this appeal.  Despite the fact the fact that the appellant
    is a child I therefore make no such order.  The judge made a fee award.
    This has  not  been   challenged  and,  along  with  the  decision,  it
    therefore remains undisturbed.

Notice of Decision

17.  The appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer is dismissed.

18.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal on  Article
    8 grounds remains undisturbed.



Signed        Date 1 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb


