
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/04571/2014
                                                               OA/04574/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 October 2015                   |On 13 January 2016                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                            CHRISTOPHER FRIMPONG
                                 joel nyarko
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Gibson-Lee, instructed by Nasim & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are nationals of Ghana.  They appealed  to  a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the respondent's decision  of  5  March
    2014 refusing to grant entry clearance.   The  appellants  applied  for
    entry clearance to join their mother for the purpose of  settlement  in
    the United Kingdom.  The appeals were dismissed by the judge, and  that
    decision was challenged  partly  in  respect  of  whether  or  not  the
    appellants' sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  for  them  but  largely
    because the judge did not  consider  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
    Convention.  The judge who granted permission did so only  in  relation
    to the Article 8 point, and no other matters were pursued before me.

2.   In his submissions Mr Gibson-Lee argued that the judge was  obliged  to
    address Article 8 even if the matter was not raised before him.  It was
    a matter of the best interests of the children and it was a matter that
    should be addressed by a different judge because the opinion the  judge
    had formed could cloud his view.

3.   In his submissions Mr Melvin argues that Article 8  had  not  been  put
    forward at the hearing and therefore the judge was obliged  to  address
    it, but if it was found that he had not dealt with it it should go back
    to the same judge on the basis of the findings he had made.

Discussion

4.   It is clear that Article 8 was raised in the grounds of appeal  to  the
    judge but equally it is clear that it was a matter that was not  argued
    before him, and his notes from the hearing make it clear that that  was
    the situation. That might not matter, but issues going to the rights of
    children in the context of Article 8 and section 55 are  of  sufficient
    importance that even if they were not raised it is  my  view  that  the
    judge ought to have addressed the matter.   There  is  no  other  error
    argued for or identified in his decision, and I can see no  reason  why
    the matter should not simply be returned to Judge Jones QC for  him  to
    complete his determination by  considering  the  claim  in  respect  of
    Article 8.

Notice of Decision

5.   The appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  judge  did  not  address
    Article 8, and it will be remitted back to him for him to complete  his
    determination by considering Article 8 in the context of  the  findings
    which he made at the previous hearing.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

