
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04211/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 9 November 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MRS. ZUBARIA SHARAZ
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. S. Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Miss. R. Akther, instructed by Time Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese which allowed  the  appeal  of  Mrs.
    Sharaz against the decision to refuse entry clearance as the spouse  of
    the Sponsor, Mr. Sharaz Hussain, under Appendix FM of  the  immigration
    rules.

 2. For the purposes of this decision,  I  refer  to  Mrs.  Sharaz  as  the
    Appellant and  to  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  as  the  Respondent,
    reflecting their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.



 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the  judge  arguably
    erred in law in allowing the appeal on the basis that the  Respondent's
    decision was not proportionate.   The  judge  failed  to  consider  the
    public interest factors in section 117B of the 2002 Act, and failed  to
    give reasons as to why family life  could  not  reasonably  be  enjoyed
    outside of the UK.

 4. The judge found that the appeal could not succeed under the immigration
    rules as the Sponsor's wages were  not  paid  in  full  into  his  bank
    account ([10] and [11]), and this is not in dispute.

Error of law

 5. I have considered carefully the case of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387,
    in particular paragraphs 51, 53, 55 and 56 to which I was  referred  by
    Mr. Kandola.  Paragraph 51 states:

         "In our judgment, the approach to Article 8 in  the  light  of  the
         Rules in Appendix FM-SE should be the same as  in  respect  of  the
         substantive LTE and LTR Rules in Appendix FM.  In other words,  the
         same general position applies, that compelling circumstances  would
         have to apply to justify a grant of LTE or LTR where  the  evidence
         Rules are not complied with."

 6. In paragraph 53 of SS (Congo) it states: "Good reason would need to  be
    shown why a particular applicant  was  entitled  to  more  preferential
    treatment with respect to evidence than other applicants  would  expect
    to receive under the Rules."

 7. It was submitted that there were no compelling circumstances  made  out
    in the Appellant's case.  I find that in order for the  judge  to  have
    found  that  the  decision  of  the  Respondent  was  disproportionate,
    following SS (Congo), the judge needs to have  found  that  there  were
    compelling circumstances, and that there was a good reason  as  to  why
    the Appellant was entitled to more preferential treatment than  others.



 8. In relation to the "near miss" cases SS (Congo) provides that the "fact
    that an applicant may be able to say that their case is a  "near  miss"
    in relation to satisfying the requirements of  the  Rules  will  by  no
    means show that compelling circumstances exist requiring the  grant  of
    LTE outside the Rules. A good deal more than  this  would  need  to  be
    shown to make out such a case." [56]

 9. Paragraph [13] of the decision states:

         "The Tribunal considered that based on the  facts  and  information
         before  them  that  there  are  good  arguable  grounds  and   also
         compelling and compassionate circumstances which  do  warrant  this
         appeal to be further considered outside of  the  immigration  rules
         and under Article 8".

    However,  the  judge  did  not  set  out  what  these  compelling   and
    compassionate circumstances were aside from his findings  in  paragraph
    [14] that the Appellant and Sponsor are a couple who have been  married
    since 2011, and that the decision prevents them from  continuing  their
    married life together  [15].   No  other  compelling  or  compassionate
    circumstances are set out.  In paragraph [16] the  judge  accepts  that
    the Appellant does not meet the requirements of  the  rules  but  finds
    that the Sponsor earns "a sum equivalent to the required  figure".   SS
    (Congo) is clear that being a "near miss" case "will by no  means  show
    that compelling circumstances exist.

10. While SS (Congo) provides that the fact that a case  involves  a  "near
    miss" cannot be  said  to  be  "wholly  irrelevant"  to  the  balancing
    exercise required under Article 8, it is clear that an  applicant  must
    "show that there are individual interests at stake covered by Article 8
    which give rise to a strong claim  that  compelling  circumstances  may
    exist to justify the grant of LTE outside the Rules" [56].   Only  then
    can the fact that the case is also a "near miss" be considered to be  a
    relevant consideration.

11. It was necessary for the Appellant to show that there  were  individual
    interests  which  gave  rise  to  a  "strong  claim"  that  "compelling
    circumstances"  exist.   The  decision  records  no  evidence  of   any
    compelling circumstances beyond the fact that she and the  Sponsor  are
    married.  There are no children  of  the  relationship.   There  is  no
    evidence of anything compelling about the Appellant's circumstances  in
    Pakistan, or the Sponsor's circumstances in the United Kingdom.   There
    is no evidence of anything which sets them apart from any other  couple
    in their situation.  Any consideration of the fact that the sum  earned
    by the Sponsor was equivalent to the sum required  by  the  immigration
    rules is only relevant to the proportionality exercise once  compelling
    circumstances have been established.  The judge's consideration of  the
    fact that the Sponsor earned an equivalent sum to the  required  figure
    came  without  first  establishing  that  there  were  any   compelling
    circumstances.

12. Paragraph [57] of SS (Congo) states:

         "Generally, it is fair that the applicant  should  wait  until  the
         circumstances have changed and the requirements in  the  Rules  are
         satisfied and then apply, rather than attempting to jump the  queue
         by asking for preferential treatment outside the Rules in advance."

13. The decision does not identify any reasons why the Appellant  warranted
    preferential treatment and a grant of leave to enter  under  Article  8
    despite her failure to meet the immigration rules.

14. I find that the decision involved the making of  an  error  of  law  by
    allowing the appeal under Article 8.  There was no evidence before  the
    judge of any compelling  circumstances  which  warranted  allowing  the
    appeal outside the immigration rules following the case of SS (Congo).

Remaking

15. I have taken into account my findings above when remaking the  decision
    under Article 8.

16. No new evidence was provided for the hearing before me.   The  Sponsor,
    Mr. Hussain, provided a witness statement and gave oral evidence before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The Appellant provided a witness statement in
    which she adopted the contents of her husband's statement.

17. I have  considered  Mr.  Hussain's  witness  statement.   There  is  no
    evidence of any compelling circumstances in his witness statement.   He
    states "I feel that she has been away from me for many years and it  is
    extremely unbearable.  Due to this we are  unable  to  start  a  family
    together" [13].  Later he states that he has  an  amazing  relationship
    with the Appellant and is emotionally attached to her  [14].   However,
    there is no evidence of anything which would prevent him from going  to
    Pakistan to be with the Appellant.

18. I have found above that although  the  judge  stated  that  there  were
    "compelling and compassionate circumstances", he failed to identify any
    such circumstances.  I  find  that  no  compelling  circumstances  were
    demonstrated in the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  sufficient
    to justify allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.

19. In assessing the public interest, I have  taken  into  account  section
    117B of the 2002 Act insofar  as  it  is  relevant  to  the  Appellant.
    Section 117B(1) provides that the maintenance of effective  immigration
    control is in the public  interest.   There  is  a  significant  public
    interest in refusing leave to enter to those who have  failed  to  meet
    the requirements of the immigration rules.   The  application  was  not
    refused in relation to the Appellant's English  language  ability,  but
    the Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant met  the  financial
    requirements of the immigration  rules.   The  fact  that  all  of  the
    Sponsor's wages may now be paid into a  bank  account  means  that  the
    Appellant may be able to show that she satisfies the immigration  rules
    at some point in the future, but following SS (Congo)  this  is  not  a
    reason to allow the appeal outside of the  immigration  rules  for  the
    reasons set out above ([5] to [14]).

20. Any family life between the Appellant and Sponsor can continue  in  the
    way in which it has done for the past four years, or alternatively  the
    Sponsor can relocate to Pakistan to enjoy family life there.  There was
    no evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  of  anything  which  would
    prevent the  Sponsor  from  relocating  to  Pakistan  to  be  with  the
    Appellant.

21. Further, as the Sponsor now states that he pays all his wages into  the
    bank, the correct approach would be to make a fresh application, rather
    than seek preferential treatment in the form of a  grant  of  leave  to
    enter outside the immigration rules.

22. I find that the  Appellant  has  failed  to  show  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the decision is disproportionate.  I find  that  she
    has failed to show that the decision is a  breach  of  her  rights,  or
    those of the Sponsor, to a family life under Article 8, or  indeed  any
    other rights protected by the Human Rights Act 1998.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to  dismiss  the  appeal  under  the
immigration rules is preserved.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appeal under Article  8
is set aside.

I re-make the decision, dismissing it on human rights grounds.


Signed:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

Date:  5 November 2015

