
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
OA/04919/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                  |Promulgated                          |
|On 15 December 2015               |        On 4 January 2016            |
|                                  |                                     |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL


                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                               Ms PARI SULTAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Pretzell, Counsel, (instructed by Haris, Ali &
Co)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 3  August  2015  against
           the decision and reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Quinn  who
           had allowed the Respondent's appeal on  Article  8  ECHR  family
           life grounds only against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision
           dated 17 March 2014 to refuse to grant the Respondent  leave  to
           enter the United Kingdom for settlement as  an  adult  dependant
           relative  under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
           decision and reasons was promulgated on 7 April 2015.


      2.    The Respondent is a national of Afghanistan, born  there  on  10
           March 1943.  She is currently resident  in  Pakistan.   She  had
           applied for entry clearance at the same time as her daughter-in-
           law and grandchildren.  Their applications had been granted  and
           they are now in the United Kingdom.  The Respondent claimed that
           she had care needs which met the Immigration Rules, paragraph EC-
           DR.1.1.  The Entry Clearance Officer (and  the  Entry  Clearance
           Manager on review)  refused  the  application  because  (a)  the
           claimed relationship between the Respondent and the sponsor  was
           not proved and (b) she was able to care for herself.  Any breach
           of Article 8 ECHR was proportionate.


      3.    Judge Quinn found that the  sponsor  and  other  witnesses  gave
           reliable evidence.  He found that the  evidence  fell  short  of
           demonstrating that any  necessary  care  was  not  available  in
           Pakistan with the practical and financial help of the sponsor or
           that there was  no  person  in  Pakistan  who  could  reasonably
           provide such care or that it was  not  affordable.   The  appeal
           under the Immigration Rules failed but the judge found that  the
           Respondent's exclusion from the United Kingdom would amount to a
           disproportionate interference with her family life and  that  of
           the sponsor and his wife and children.  The Respondent had lived
           for 20 to 25 years with the sponsor  and/or  his  wife  and  had
           assisted her daughter-in-law  with  raising  the  grandchildren.
           There would be no burden on public funds as  the  sponsor  would
           look after her.


      4.    Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
           Appellant was granted by Judge Gill because she considered  that
           it was arguable that the judge had failed to (a)  apply  section
           85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002;  (b)
           consider whether it was reasonable to expect the family  members
           (in the United Kingdom, Pakistan or Afghanistan) to  look  after
           her in Afghanistan or Pakistan; (c) resolve a material  conflict
           in the evidence and (d) consider SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387
           in the context  of  whether  the  evidential  requirements  were
           satisfied in assessing the Article  8  ECHR  claim  outside  the
           Immigration Rules, in particular, the  compelling  circumstances
           required to justify a grant  of  leave  where  those  evidential
           requirements were not met.


      5.    Standard directions were made by the Upper Tribunal,  indicating
           that the decision would be remade immediately in the event  that
           a material error of law were found.




      Submissions - error of law


      6.    Mr Staunton for the Secretary of State submitted that this was a
           clear case of legal error, as the grant of permission to  appeal
           by the Upper Tribunal Judge Gill had indicated.  The  judge  had
           taken  into   account   post   decision   evidence   which   was
           impermissible, as seen at [31], [33], [45], [48] and [49] of the
           determination.  At the date of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
           decision the Respondent had been residing with her  daughter-in-
           law and grandchildren.  The judge should have considered whether
           it was reasonable for the family or members  of  the  family  to
           remain in or to return to Afghanistan or Pakistan to  live  with
           the Respondent.  The public interest  had  not  been  adequately
           considered.  The Appellant had claimed that she did not need any
           particular care and the judge  had  not  resolved  the  apparent
           conflict in  the  evidence.   The  judge  should  have  examined
           Article  8  ECHR  through  the  lens  of  Appendix  FM  of   the
           Immigration Rules and had not  done  so.   His  Article  8  ECHR
           decision should be set aside, and remade so as  to  dismiss  the
           appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds  as  well  as  under   the
           Immigration Rules.


      7.     Mr  Pretzell  for  the  Respondent  accepted  that  there  were
           difficulties in the judge's approach to section  85(5),  but  AS
           (Somalia) [2009] UKHL 32, per Lord Hope at [21]  indicated  that
           there might be cases (identifiable on  a  case  by  case  basis)
           where the application of 85(5)  might  be  disproportionate  for
           Article 8 ECHR purposes.   The Respondent was a vulnerable adult
           and the judge had been entitled to take that into  account.   In
           any event, the "new" matters which the judge was  said  to  have
           taken into account were not really new, especially if the  Entry
           Clearance  Manager's  decision  reached  in  October  2014  were
           treated as the final date of decision.  The conflict of evidence
           complained of was more apparent than real.   The judge had taken
           all  relevant   factors   into   account   when   reaching   his
           proportionality  decision.   The  judge's  decision  should   be
           upheld, but if a material error of law were found  then  it  was
           accepted  that  the  appeal  could  be  remade  without  further
           evidence or submissions.


      8.    The tribunal reserved its decision which now follows.




      The error of law finding


      9.    Judge Quinn's determination was admirably clear but the tribunal
           finds that he fell into material error of law when allowing  the
           appeal under Article 8 ECHR.  The undisputed starting point  was
           that the applications of the Respondent, her daughter-in-law and
           grandchildren  were  voluntary.   They  had  lived  together  in
           Pakistan for some 25 years, mainly in the sponsor's absence,  as
           was unchallenged.  There was no evidence that they were not free
           to remain there.  The basis on which they were entitled to apply
           to enter the United Kingdom was fixed  by  Appendix  FM  of  the
           Immigration  Rules  which  applied  to  all  post  9  July  2012
           applications.   On  the  other  hand,  the  sponsor  (a  British
           Citizen), had lived in the United  Kingdom  since  2001,  making
           visits to his wife and children from time to time.


      10.   There was no challenge to Judge Quinn's finding of fact that the
           Respondent was not able to meet the Immigration Rules, which was
           plainly a correct decision.  Although the  judge  was  satisfied
           that the Respondent and her sponsor were related as claimed,  he
           found that the Respondent did not meet  the  care  requirements:
           see [3], above. The focus of the appeal before Judge  Quinn  had
           been the Appellant's ability  to  meet  the  Immigration  Rules.
           Indeed, Counsel's skeleton argument below (dated 16 March  2015)
           made no mention at all of Article 8 ECHR.  It appears  that  the
           judge may not have been directed to  the  relevant  authorities:
           see [40] of  the  determination.   There  is,  for  example,  no
           mention of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  This may explain how
           the error of law arose.


      11.   There is  a  direct  and  irreconcilable  conflict  between  the
           judge's finding that the  Respondent  was  unable  to  meet  the
           Immigration Rules (see, e.g.,  [32]  and  [39])  and  his  other
           findings in the Respondent's favour based on her need  of  care:
           see, e.g. [36] of the determination.  The threshold for  Article
           8 ECHR purposes was fixed by the Immigration  Rules,  because  a
           complete code was provided: see, by analogy, MM (Lebanon) [2014]
           EWCA Civ 985.   As  Patel  v  SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  72  (per  Lord
           Carnwarth) states Article 8  ECHR  is  not  a  general  remedial
           power.


      12.   In the tribunal's view, the  determination  creates  the  strong
           impression that  the  judge  took  into  account  post  decision
           evidence,  which  was  impermissible.   The  departure  of   the
           daughter-in-law and grandchildren was  a  post  decision  event.
           They had permission to enter the United Kingdom but it was up to
           them whether they left Pakistan if it meant that the  Respondent
           would be without them.


      13.   Mr Pretzell submitted that Lord Hope  in  AS  (Somalia)  (above)
           left open the  possibility  that  there  might  be  cases  where
           Article 8 ECHR dictated an exception to the strict  regime  laid
           down  by  parliament  in  section  85(5)  of  the   Nationality,
           Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and that the present appeal  met
           Lord Hope's suggested criteria.  Although Lord Hope agreed  with
           his fellow judges, the leading speech was  from  Lord  Phillips.
           Lord  Hope's  speech  was  the  only  one  which  suggested  the
           possibility of an exception to section 85(5) with  reference  to
           Article 8 ECHR and his observations must be regarded as obiter.


      14.   Now if the tribunal were mistaken in  that  view,  the  evidence
           before the tribunal was that the Respondent remained capable  of
           her own care.  It is frankly hardly, likely taking into  account
           the judge's findings  of  fact,  that  her  daughter-in-law  and
           grandchildren would otherwise have left Pakistan without  making
           suitable  arrangements  for  her.    The  judge   stressed   the
           emotional  loss  to  the  Respondent:  see  [45].   These   were
           decisions which the daughter-in-law and grandchildren had chosen
           to make.  There was no finding by the judge of  any  significant
           delay by the Entry Clearance Officer or Entry Clearance  Manager
           in the decision-making process.  The tribunal finds  that  there
           was  no  evidence  sufficient  to  meet  the  possible  criteria
           suggested by Lord Hope.  Nor did the judge refer to AS (Somalia)
           (above) to justify his departure from section  85(5),  no  doubt
           because he was not referred to it.


      15.   In the tribunal's view, the judge  misdirected  himself  in  his
           approach to Article 8 ECHR.  The Respondent's situation had been
           addressed comprehensively in Appendix FM.  The judge  identified
           no compelling circumstances which justified  going  outside  the
           Immigration Rules (see SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387).  At [45]
           and at [49], where he said "It did not seem right to me to leave
           the  Appellant  in  the  hands  of  strangers..."  he  gave  the
           impression of having  forgotten  how  that  situation  had  come
           about,  as  well  as   giving   the   impression   -   doubtless
           unintentionally - that he was preferring his personal  views  to
           the strict provisions of Appendix FM.


      16.    The  judge  referred  to  section  117B  of  the   Nationality,
           Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002,  but  that  section  merely
           identifies relevant factors for the  tribunal  to  consider  and
           creates no rights.  As  no  compelling  circumstances  had  been
           identified, section 117B took the Respondent's case no further.


      17.   For all of those reasons, the tribunal finds that  the  decision
           and reasons was subject to material errors of law, such that the
           decision and reasons must be set aside and remade.




      The fresh decision


      18.   For clarity the tribunal will now refer to the parties by  their
           original designations in the First-tier Tribunal.  Judge Quinn's
           finding that the Appellant was unable to satisfy  the  demanding
           requirements of Appendix FM applicable  to  an  adult  dependent
           relative stand.


      19.   The evidence produced discloses no compelling circumstances  and
           nothing   which    would    require    the    Entry    Clearance
           Officer/Secretary of State  or  the  tribunal  to  consider  the
           application outside the Immigration Rules.   The  Appellant  and
           her family are able to continue their family  life  in  Pakistan
           where  they  have  long  been  resident.   Their  wish  to  live
           elsewhere was voluntary.  The sponsor has been able to visit the
           Appellant from time to  time.   The  refusal  decision  did  not
           interfere  with  the  existing  level  of  family  life.     The
           Appellant and her sponsor can live as  family  in  other  places
           apart from the United Kingdom, with which she has no connection.
            The Appellant has been able to access health services  locally,
           as her medical reports showed.


      20.   If the tribunal were mistaken to consider that  the  refusal  of
           entry clearance for settlement caused no interference  with  the
           family life of the  Appellant  or  her  sponsor,  or  any  other
           relevant person, the tribunal finds  that  the  interference  is
           lawful  and  proportionate.   Parliament  has  laid   down   the
           procedure by which foreign  adult  dependant  relatives  can  be
           admitted to the United Kingdom.  That procedure is in pursuit of
           a legitimate objective, set out in  Article  8.2  ECHR,  usually
           summarised as  immigration  control.   The  public  interest  in
           maintaining  immigration  control  outweighs   the   Appellant's
           private interests.  The Appellant is able  to  live  her  family
           life elsewhere. That is a choice open to her relatives.


      21.   There was no application for  an  anonymity  direction  and  the
           tribunal sees no need for one.  The appeal is dismissed.






      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision involved the making  of  an  error
on    a point of law.  The tribunal allows the onwards appeal to  the  Upper
Tribunal,  sets  aside  the  original  decision  and  remakes  the  original
decision    as follows:

      The appeal is dismissed

      Signed


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




      TO THE RESPONDENT
      FEE AWARD


      As the appeal was dismissed, there can be no fee award


      Signed




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
