
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/04174/2013
                                                               OA/04170/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|Oral judgment given at hearing                |On 22nd September 2014       |
|On 17th July 2014                             |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mrs Susma Kunwor Karki
                              Mr Aadarsha Karki
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr V Makol, Legal Representative


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant in these proceedings is the Entry Clearance  Officer  New
    Delhi ("ECO").  However, for convenience we refer  to  the  parties  as
    they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. Thus the appellants are citizens of Nepal.   The  first  appellant  was
    born on 22nd July 1978.  The second appellant is her son and the son of
    the sponsor, Mr Ram Raja Karki. The second appellant was  born  on  6th
    January 2006.  Applications were made on 27th December 2012  for  entry
    clearance as the spouse and dependent child of a student.  The  sponsor
    was here as a  student  and  the  applications  were  made  as  Tier  4
    dependants.  The applications were  refused  in  decisions  dated  20th
    December 2012.  The appeals against those decisions came before  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Buckwell at a hearing on 1st April 2014.

 3. In the light of the way the hearing has proceeded before us we  do  not
    consider it necessary to set out in detail the  whole  history  of  the
    proceedings and the relevant law, as all  that  has  been  taken  quite
    shortly before us.

 4. The relevant part of the ECO's decision was  to  the  effect  that  the
    appellant had submitted a letter from her spouse stating that he  is  a
    student at Heriot-Watt University.  The ECO concluded that that was the
    awarding body for his MSc degree in financial management  but  was  not
    the sponsoring institution which  it  was  said  was  the  West  London
    College.

 5. The conclusion by the ECO was that the appellant was not the partner of
    a Tier 4 (General) Student  who  was  undertaking  a  course  of  study
    sponsored by a sponsor which is a recognised body or a body in  receipt
    of funding as a higher education institution from  the  Department  for
    Employment  and  Learning  etc.   The  refusal  was   under   paragraph
    319C(i)(5) of HC 395 (as amended).

 6. Judge Buckwell, correctly in our view,  identified  what  the  relevant
    provision of  the  Immigration  Rules  was,  notwithstanding  that  the
    notices of decision are rather obscure in that  regard.   The  relevant
    provision is to the effect that the appellant's husband needed to  have
    been undertaking a  course  which  is  of  1-12  months  or  longer  in
    duration, of postgraduate level and sponsored by a sponsor which  is  a
    recognised body or a body in receipt of funding as a  higher  education
    institution.

 7. The matter in issue before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was,  in  effect,
    whether the sponsor was  the  West  London  College,  which  is  not  a
    recognised body, or Heriot-Watt University, which, it is  accepted,  is
    and was a recognised body.

 8. Judge Buckwell concluded that on the evidence before him the  sponsor's
    academic sponsor was the West London College. He referred  to  the  CAS
    dated 17th August 2012 which it seems, on the  face  of  it,  had  been
    issued by the West London College.

 9. In the 'Rule 24' response, the ECO or the Secretary  of  State  on  his
    behalf, accepted that the issue in the appeal was who was the  sponsor.
    If it was Heriot-Watt University, the appellants were able  to  satisfy
    the requirements of the Rules.  If it was West London College they were
    not.

10. As  the  Rule  24  response  correctly  states,  paragraph  6A  of  the
    Immigration Rules provides the meaning of "sponsor", and that  is  that
    it is the person or government  that  the  Certificate  of  Sponsorship
    Checking Service or Confirmation of  Acceptance  for  Studies  Checking
    Service records as being the sponsor for a migrant.

11. The CAS in this case, as we have already indicated,  at  least  in  its
    heading purports to be from the West London College.  It is dated  17th
    August 2012.  Manifestly however, the sponsor is identified  in  box  1
    under the heading "sponsor", as Heriot-Watt University.  That, it seems
    to us, is conclusive evidence that the sponsor was in fact  Heriot-Watt
    University, not the West London  College.  However,  support  for  that
    proposition comes from other sources.

12. There is a letter to the sponsor  from  the  UKBA  itself,  dated  19th
    October 2012.  That letter in the respondent's bundle  also  identifies
    the  sponsor  as  Heriot-Watt  University.   The  endorsement  on   the
    sponsor's passport, that is to say the first appellant's husband, gives
    a sponsor licence number  of  F7W7RNTXX,  which  is  the  same  sponsor
    licence pertaining to Heriot-Watt as appears on the CAS.

13. There is a letter from West London  College  dated  11th  January  2013
    which states that the student is sponsored  by  Heriot-Watt  University
    and that his CAS was issued by the University.

14. There is also a letter from Heriot-Watt University itself,  dated  13th
    March 2014, which states that "the above named is registered on a full-
    time course of study at West London College,  an  associate  campus  of
    Heriot-Watt University", leading  to  the  qualification  that  he  was
    seeking.  It goes on to state that the student is sponsored by  Heriot-
    Watt University and Mr Karki's CAS was issued by the University.

15. All those, as we say, are features of the evidence  which  support  the
    proposition that the sponsor is, and was,  Heriot-Watt  University.  In
    those circumstances the first appellant is able to establish  that  she
    meets the requirements of the Rules.

16. Therefore, we  are  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error  on  a  point  of  law.   That
    decision is set aside and we  re-make  the  decision  by  allowing  the
    appeals of both appellants. That is a conclusion that was  foreshadowed
    by Mr Walker's helpful submissions whereby he accepted that  there  was
    an error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and that the
    correct outcome was for the appeals to be allowed.







Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 22/08/14
