
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/04024/2013
     OA/04026/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 November 2014                          |On 27 November 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   THE HONOURABLE MRS JUSTICE ANDREWS DBE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    O.O.E
                                    O.G.E
                         (anonymity directiON MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Appiah, Counsel, instructed by Isaac Akande &
Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of  State  against  a  determination
    that was promulgated as long ago as 10 December 2013 by the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Wyman) in an appeal against a  decision  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer in January  2013  to  refuse  an  application  for  a
    Certificate of Entitlement to the Right of Abode.  The  applicants  are
    citizens of Nigeria who at the time of  the  determination  were  twins
    aged just over 1 year.

 2. In the determination the First-tier Tribunal made an assessment of  the
    credibility of the sponsor, the children's alleged father, found him to
    be credible, found his oral evidence corresponded with the  documentary
    evidence relied upon in support of the  application,  and  allowed  the
    appeal.

 3. In the appeal before the First-tier Tribunal reliance was placed  on  a
    number of documents including birth certificates ostensibly  issued  by
    the Anna Marie Hospital in Lagos stating that the twins were born on  5
    August 2012. Those  documents  had  been  before  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.  The Secretary of State  had  noted  that  despite  the  birth
    certificates there was no evidence that the births had been  registered
    with the appropriate Nigerian authorities, and there was an absence  of
    other usual documents such as health records  and  maternity  documents
    which would have provided good supporting evidence of the relationship.

 4. When the matter came before the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  appeal  some
    further evidence was submitted by the sponsor including  further  birth
    certificates issued by the National Population Commission  in  Nigeria.
    The sponsor gave an explanation to the Tribunal as to why  he  did  not
    obtain the birth certificates from the National  Population  Commission
    in Nigeria from the very beginning, and that explanation was  accepted.



 5. One of the points made on behalf of the Secretary of State at the  time
    was the failure by the sponsor and his wife to obtain DNA certificates.
    That would have proved beyond doubt that the relationship of parent and
    child subsisted between them and the twins. Other points were also made
    to undermine their credibility including the very late registration  of
    the births.

 6. On the face of the determination  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
    clearly given reasons for the conclusion to which she came, and it  was
    a decision that she was entitled to reach on the  evidence  before  her
    having found the evidence  of  the  sponsor  to  be  credible.   It  is
    inherent in the decision that the Judge was satisfied  that  the  birth
    certificates issued by the Anna Maria Hospital, which were not the full
    birth certificates, were nevertheless genuine documents.  That  finding
    is at the heart of the determination.

 7. No application for permission to appeal was made by  the  Secretary  of
    State initially or within time.  The next thing that happened was that,
    notwithstanding the successful appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    Secretary of State refused to issue certificates of entitlement for the
    right of abode and required further evidence of the relationship to  be
    provided before she did so.  There was an email sent by  the  Secretary
    of State on 15 January 2014 to  the  sponsor  explaining  why  she  was
    requiring further evidence to be provided.

 8. The  sponsor  sought  permission  to  bring  judicial  review  of  that
    decision,  pointing  out  that  no  challenge  had  been  made  to  the
    authenticity of the documents  on  which  he  relied.   Permission  was
    refused by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede on 14  August  2014.   It  would
    appear that the application for judicial review was not renewed  to  an
    oral hearing because by then matters had moved on.

 9. On 26 June 2014, several  weeks  before  Judge  Kebede  considered  the
    application for permission to bring judicial review, an application was
    made in this Tribunal for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    out of time against the determination of the First-tier Tribunal.   The
    application was based upon fresh evidence in the form of a letter dated
    23 April 2014 from the National Agency for the Prohibition  of  Traffic
    in Persons. That document, which appears to have been provided  to  the
    Secretary of State  after  the  application  for  permission  to  bring
    judicial review was issued, calls into question the authenticity of the
    Anna Maria Hospital certificates and it gives  various  cogent  reasons
    for that.  It is a document which not only raises serious doubt  as  to
    the authenticity of the birth certificates but more to  the  point,  it
    raises serious grounds for concern as to whether indeed  there  is  the
    claimed relationship between the appellants and their supposed parents,
    including the man whose oral evidence was accepted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

10. Initially permission to appeal to this Tribunal out of time was refused
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly, who in a careful reasoned  decision
    came to the conclusion that there was no arguable error of law in  that
    the Tribunal based its findings upon the information that was before it
    at the time.  However the application for permission was  renewed,  and
    in a decision dated  1  October  2014  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Macleman
    granted permission to appeal, observing  that  the  application  raised
    unusual questions about possible constructive legal error  arising  not
    from evidence which was before the First-tier Tribunal but  from  later
    evidence going not only to alleged  mistake  of  fact  but  to  alleged
    fraud.  He  thought  that  those  questions  called  for  full  debate.
    Notwithstanding the six months that had elapsed  between  the  decision
    under appeal and the application for permission, he considered that  it
    was appropriate to admit the application under  Rule  21(7),  observing
    that the delay would no doubt be part of the debate  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

11. Before us, Mr Tufan on behalf of the appellant, the Secretary of State,
    relied upon the decision of the Court of Appeal in  the  case  of  Cabo
    Verde v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2004]  EWCA  Civ
    1726.  The case concerned a man who had claimed and had initially  been
    refused asylum on grounds that  are  not  really  spelled  out  in  the
    judgment, but which expressed what was described as a "high  degree  of
    scepticism" about the truth of  his  account.   He  had  come  to  this
    country from Belgium and was claiming asylum against return to  Angola,
    of which he was ostensibly  a  citizen,  and  where  he  had  allegedly
    suffered torture at the hands of the  authorities.  Less  than  a  year
    after he had successfully appealed to the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
    against the decision to refuse him asylum, (having been found to  be  a
    credible witness), the Government received an  extradition  request  in
    his name  from  the  authorities  in  Portugal  claiming  that  he  had
    committed a number of serious criminal offences, principally  concerned
    with robbery or conspiracy to rob. The  alleged  offending  took  place
    during precisely the same period when  he  was  alleging  that  he  was
    detained and tortured in a prison in Angola.

12. In the light of that fresh  information,  even  though  the  Portuguese
    allegations were at that stage unproven, and  objection  was  taken  to
    admitting the evidence on that basis, the Court of Appeal took the view
    that the matter should go back before the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal
    on the basis that it had been arguably seriously misled.  In  paragraph
    15 Lord Justice Buxton giving the main judgment in the case said:

         "I would not  undervalue  or  diminish  the  importance  of  prompt
         applications to this court not least where what is  sought  to  set
         aside a decision originally given in favour of the liberty  of  the
         subject.  But in any discretionary determination the seriousness of
         the  allegations  that  are  made  against  Mr  Cabo   Verde   must
         necessarily be weighed in the balance. If what is  claimed  in  the
         Portuguese material is correct, not  only  is  Mr  Cabo  Verde  not
         somebody who should benefit from the claims that he made, but  also
         the Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal  in  considering  his  case  were
         seriously misled. We therefore turn to the question of whether this
         Court should remit this matter for rehearing in the  light  of  the
         material from Portugal."

13. Ultimately the Court of Appeal came to the conclusion that  it  should.
    In paragraph 19 they said that the materials showed  that  the  factual
    basis upon which the Tribunal proceeded was, through no  fault  of  its
    own, simply wrong in that the Tribunal were unaware of the  involvement
    of the Portuguese authorities in investigating the affairs of  Mr  Cabo
    Verde.  That being so, fairness (by which the court meant fairness to a
    proper and rational immigration policy) clearly demanded that the whole
    facts of the matter should be  placed  before  the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal. Reference was made to the fact that Mr Cabo  Verde  would  no
    doubt want to give further evidence before the Tribunal when the matter
    was remitted to it.

14. The conclusion was reached that all that had to be established for  the
    appeal to succeed, was  that  relevant  evidence  was  not  before  the
    Tribunal (paragraph 21.)  Lord Justice Buxton observed: "It would be  a
    sorry day if it were not possible now to  revisit  the  matter  in  the
    light of the full facts and allegations as they are now known."

15. That is clear authority for the proposition that this Tribunal has  the
    jurisdiction to remit the matter on the basis of the fresh evidence  if
    it is satisfied that  there  is  a  sufficiently  arguable  case  that,
    through no fault of  its  own,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  misled,
    misdirected or reached a conclusion that it would not have  reached  if
    it had had the full evidence before it.

16. On behalf of the respondents Miss  Appiah  argued  that  that  decision
    could be distinguished from the current case, on  the  basis  that  the
    information from Portugal in the Cabo Verde  case  could  not  possibly
    have been put before the Immigration Appeal Tribunal when it  made  the
    decision.  In this case, however, she submitted that it  was  incumbent
    upon the Secretary of State at the time of the hearing before the First-
    tier Tribunal to bring to the Tribunal's attention  any  evidence  that
    might cast any doubt upon the material relied upon by the sponsor.   In
    particular if the Secretary  of  State  had  wished  to  challenge  the
    authenticity of the documents relied on, it would have been possible to
    obtain  the  evidence  from  the  trafficking  agency  much  sooner.  A
    respondent cannot sit on its hands and  wait  until  it  has  lost  the
    appeal before producing evidence challenging the  authenticity  of  the
    evidence relied on by the winning party. It is notable, she  submitted,
    that that letter of 23 April 2014 was only produced at the last  minute
    in response, it appears, to the application  for  permission  to  bring
    judicial review in  which  the  very  point  had  been  made  that  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal was not  the  subject  of  any
    appeal by the Secretary of State.

17. We see the force of those submissions, and if this were a standard Ladd
    v Marshall type situation where it  is  incumbent  upon  the  appellant
    seeking to rely upon  fresh  evidence  to  show  that  they  could  not
    reasonably have provided that evidence at the  date  of  the  decision,
    matters might have taken a different  course.   But  in  our  judgment,
    looking at the decision of Cabo Verde it is not simply  a  question  of
    whether that evidence could or should have been provided at an  earlier
    juncture.  The evidence that has been produced raises a  serious  issue
    as to whether  the  Tribunal  has  been  deliberately  misled  and  the
    documents that it believed to be genuine are fake.  A judgment that has
    been obtained by fraud is always susceptible  to  being  set  aside  on
    provision of the appropriate evidence to prove it; as the  decision  in
    Cabo Verde demonstrates, the same principle applies to decisions of  an
    appellate Tribunal.

18. There is a clear distinction between an ordinary case where a party  is
    belatedly seeking to argue a point that it did not take below, or which
    could easily have  been  the  subject  matter  of  an  application  for
    permission to appeal within time, and  a  situation  like  this,  where
    permission to appeal out of time has been granted  on  the  exceptional
    basis that the fresh evidence from a reputable third party source  upon
    which the appellant seeks to rely could make  a  very  significant  and
    material difference to the outcome of the case,  because  it  tends  to
    undermine the whole basis upon which the Tribunal accepted the veracity
    of the other party's evidence.

19. We bear in mind also the very serious nature of  the  allegations  that
    have been made, and that no wrongdoing has yet  been  established.  The
    same was true in Cabo Verde. It may be that there is absolutely nothing
    in this, and that the case would still fall to be determined  the  same
    way in the light of the evidence that will be adduced before the First-
    tier Tribunal the next time round.  We observe that it is still open to
    the alleged parents to have the DNA testing which would put the  matter
    beyond doubt. It does beg the question why,  notwithstanding  the  fact
    that this case has been all the way  to  an  abortive  application  for
    judicial review, and despite the lapse of time since  the  letter  from
    the Trafficking Agency was first produced, that simple step still  does
    not appear to have been taken.

20. There is credible  evidence  to  suggest  that  there  is  at  least  a
    possibility that there is a case here of human trafficking and that the
    victims are vulnerable babies.  We put it no higher than that,  but  in
    the light of the guidance we have from the Court of Appeal in the  Cabo
    Verde case that evidence is enough to send the matter back, and to  say
    that there is at least a real possibility that the basis on  which  the
    First-tier Tribunal proceeded was (through no fault of its own)  simply
    wrong. In the light of the contents of that letter of 23 April 2014 and
    notwithstanding the very able submissions of Miss  Appiah  we  conclude
    that the threshold in Cabo Verde has been met.

21. For those reasons, therefore, we consider that the decision made by the
    First-tier Tribunal should be set  aside.  There  is  constructively  a
    material error of law in that, through no fault of its own, the  First-
    Tier Tribunal did not have all relevant material before it on which  to
    reach an informed decision about the veracity of the sponsor's account.
    We shall direct that the matter be sent back to the First-tier Tribunal
    for a fresh decision on the evidence, including the fresh evidence, and
    of  course  any  other  evidence  that   the   appellants   and   their
    representatives see fit to put before the Tribunal.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. The matter  is  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a fresh determination.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed  [pic] Date 16 November 2014

Mrs Justice Andrews

