
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04991/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Laganside Courts Centre, Belfast     |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 15 April 2014                              |On 17 April 2014             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NAIROBI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                              FARXAN XIRSI RAFLE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

 Appellant:   Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
 Respondent:      Mr Brennan, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The  Respondent  is  a  national  of  Somalia,  presently  residing  in
    Ethiopia, aged 32 years.  His appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  originates
    in  a  decision  made  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  of   Nairobi
    (hereinafter the "ECO"), the Appellant herein, dated 14  January  2014,
    refusing the Respondent's application to enter the United Kingdom under
    the family reunification provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    Respondent's ensuing appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal (the "FtT")  was
    allowed.  The ECO appeals, with permission, to this Tribunal.


 2. The ECO's refusal decision was based on an assessment that  a  document
    purporting to be a certificate recording the marriage of the Respondent
    and the sponsor, his asserted spouse,  was  a  false  document.   While
    acknowledging that there was certain other evidence  of  the  marriage,
    including the claims made by  the  sponsor  in  her  asylum  interviews
    following her arrival in the United Kingdom, the ECO pronounced himself
    not satisfied that they are man and wife.  Having referred to paragraph
    320(7A) of the Immigration Rules, the ECO stated:

         "I am satisfied, to a higher balance of probabilities,  that  false
         documents in the form of a marriage certificate  were  produced  in
         your visa application.  I therefore refuse your application."

         [My emphasis.]

    The further aspect of the impugned decision,  which  was  that  refusal
    would not constitute any  infringement  of  Article  8  ECHR,  followed
    inexorably from this finding.

 3. In paragraph 13 of his determination, the FtT Judge stated:


         "The onus of proving that the document in the form of the  marriage
         certificate provided is not  genuine  is  on  the  Respondent.  The
         Respondent relied upon a  report  from  an  official  in  the  High
         Commission ....."


     The Judge then rehearsed the terms of this report.  He continued:


         "There is an abundance of evidence before me that the Appellant and
         the sponsor are married."


    In this appeal, there is no challenge to the lengthy paragraph, wherein
    the  Judge  recites  and  summarises  this  evidence,  which   follows.
    Continuing, the Judge stated:


         "I have no reason to doubt that when the Appellant sought to obtain
         a marriage certificate from the Imam the document provided was  not
         in a format which the Respondent regarded as genuine."


    The Judge then observed, uncontroversially, that having regard  to  the
    ECO's assessment of law and  order  in  Somalia  during  the  past  two
    decades it is unclear whether any type of document (and, if  so,  what)
    would be accepted as a genuine marriage certificate.  Thus,  the  Judge
    reasoned, the ECO's conclusion that the document in question was  false
    "measured against a standard which does not exist".   Next,  the  Judge
    stated that the onus was on the ECO to establish that the document  was
    false, under paragraph 320(7A) of the Rules.  It is  common  case  that
    the Judge formulated this proposition correctly. He continued:


         "I find that the extensive evidence provided by the  Appellant  and
         the sponsor is sufficient to establish that the Appellant  and  the
         sponsor were married,  as  claimed,  in  2009.   I  find  that  the
         Respondent has not  established  to  the  high  standard  of  proof
         required that the document is, as claimed, not genuine."


         [Emphasis added.]


    I have highlighted  the  latter  sentence  as  it  is  central  to  the
    determination of this appeal.


 4. On behalf of the ECO, it  was  argued  that  the  passage  in  question
    betrays a misdirection in law by the Judge on the issue of standard  of
    proof.  It is agreed between the parties  that,  the  burden  of  proof
    resting on the ECO as regards this issue, the standard of proof  to  be
    applied was the civil one.  The leading authority on the civil standard
    of proof is Re B (Children) [2008] UKHL 35.  Lord Hoffmann  stated,  in
    [15]:


         "There is only one rule of law, namely that the occurrence  of  the
         fact in issue must be proved to have been more probable  than  not.
         Common sense, not law, requires that  in  deciding  this  question,
         regard should be had, to whatever extent appropriate,  to  inherent
         probabilities."


    This echoed the oft cited statement of Lord Nicholls in Re H and Others
    (Minors) [1996] AC 563, at page 586:


         "The balance of  probabilities  standard  means  that  a  court  is
         satisfied an event occurred if the Court  considers  that,  on  the
         evidence, the occurrence of the event was  more  likely  than  not.
         When assessing the probabilities the Court will have in mind  as  a
         factor, to whatever extent is appropriate in the  particular  case,
         that the more serious the allegation, the less likely  it  is  that
         the event occurred and, hence, the stronger should be the  evidence
         before the Court concludes that the allegation  is  established  on
         the balance of probability.  Fraud is less likely  than  negligence
         ......


         Built into the preponderance of probability standard is a  generous
         degree  of  flexibility  in  respect  of  the  seriousness  of  the
         allegation .....


         Although the result is much the same, this does not mean that where
         a serious allegation is in issue the standard of proof required  is
         higher.   It  means  only  that   the   inherent   probability   or
         improbability of an event is itself  a  matter  to  be  taken  into
         account when weighing the probabilities and  deciding  whether,  on
         balance, the event occurred."




    [My emphasis]


    As ever, two golden rules apply.  The  first  is  that  these  passages
    repay careful reading.  The second is that they must be considered as a
    whole.


 5. Of equal importance is the obligation to consider the decision  of  the
    FtT in full, rather than  in  isolated  fragments.   Its  full  context
    includes the statement in the  ECO's  refusal  decision  which  I  have
    highlighted above.   This  used  the  language  "a  higher  balance  of
    probabilities".  I consider that the Judge had these words in mind when
    he adverted to "the high standard of proof".  The Judge made no mention
    of the criminal standard of proof.  Nor did he  rehearse  the  hallowed
    words beyond reasonable doubt.  Considered as a whole, I  am  satisfied
    that the Judge  did  not  fall  into  the  error  suggested.   Properly
    construed,  the  passage  in  question  was  simply  acknowledging  the
    doctrinally  correct  truism  tha,  where  the  serious  allegation  of
    fabricating a document for the purpose of securing immigration entry is
    made -  to  wit,  engaging  in  deceit,  perpetrating  a  fraud  -  the
    supporting evidence must, within the flexible contours of  the  balance
    of probabilities standard,  be  sufficiently  persuasive.   Context  is
    everything.  The allegation in question or the  fact  in  dispute  must
    always be considered in its full context. Stated succinctly, the  civil
    standard of the balance of probabilities will be satisfied more  easily
    in some contexts than in others.  Thus  it  has  been  said  from  time
    immemorial that fraud is never easily proved.  The rationale of this is
    quintessentially simple: the  more  serious  the  allegation  the  more
    difficult it will be for the party on whom the onus of  proof  lies  to
    discharge such onus to the requisite standard.


 6. It follows that the ECO's appeal must be dismissed.

 7. I record, for completeness, that an application under Rule  15(2A)  for
    the reception of further evidence has been  lodged  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent. In the circumstances, it has  been  neither  necessary  nor
    appropriate to rule thereon.

DECISION

 8. The appeal is dismissed.   The  effect  of  this  is  to  reaffirm  the
    decision of the FtT that the ECO's decision is not in  accordance  with
    the law and, thereby, to require the ECO to make a fresh decision which
    accords with the law. Given that the impugned decision is now  of  some
    16 months vintage, it would  obviously  be  desirable  that  the  fresh
    decision be made expeditiously.


                                    Signed:
                                                 [pic]
                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date:   14 April 2014
