
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04157/2014
                                                               VA/01547/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 October 2015                    |On 19 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between
                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                 (ISLAMABAD)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                            MRS ANNAM HASSAN BUTT
                           MS MEHMONA HASSAN BUTT
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms E Daykin of counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision
         of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeals of Mrs Annam Hassan
         Butt ('the first claimant') and Ms Mehmona Hassan Butt ('the second
         claimant') who appealed against decisions of  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer taken on 28 February 2014 to refuse entry clearance to  the
         claimants.

Background Facts

      2. The claimants are citizens of Pakistan. The first claimant was born
         on 12 August 1991 and her daughter, the second claimant,  was  born
         on 5 September 2010.  The first claimant claimed a right to  reside
         in the UK as a third country national upon whom  an  adult  British
         citizen was dependent in accordance with Regulation 15A(4A) 15A(4A)
         of the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006/1003
         (the "EEA Regulations").  That application was refused because  the
         Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the  first  claimant
         was the adopted daughter of the sponsor, that she was the sponsor's
         primary carer and questioned why  the  sponsor's  husband  was  not
         capable of looking after the sponsor. The Entry  Clearance  Officer
         noted that the first claimant was married with one  child  and  had
         stated that she would remain in the UK for a period of 6 months and
         her husband would not travel with her. The Entry Clearance  Officer
         questioned what would happen  to  the  care  arrangements  for  the
         sponsor after 6 months.

      3. Additionally the Entry Clearance Officer recorded that in  December
         2012 the first claimant had  been  refused  a  visa  to  visit  the
         sponsor  with  her  husband  and  child.  They   had   made   false
         representations and provided falsified or non-genuine documents  in
         support  of  their  application.  The   Entry   Clearance   Officer
         considered that the fact that the family had  previously  attempted
         to gain entry to the UK by using deception further  undermined  the
         first claimant's stated intentions in going to  the  UK  now.   The
         Entry Clearance Officer was not therefore satisfied  that  the  EEA
         regulations were  applicable  and  refused  the  application  under
         paragraph 15A (4A) of the  EEA  Regulations.  The  Entry  Clearance
         Officer was also not satisfied that  the  first  claimant  met  the
         requirements of regulation 12 of the EEA Regulations.

      4. The second claimant's application was refused on the basis that, as
         the first claimant's application had been refused and  she  was  no
         longer travelling to the UK and no  other  reason  for  the  second
         claimant to travel  had  been  put  forward,  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer was not satisfied that she was genuinely seeking entry as a
         visitor, that she intended to leave at the end of the visit or that
         suitable arrangements were in place for her reception and  care  in
         the UK.

  The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

      5.  The  claimants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    In   a
         determination promulgated on 22  April  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Eames ('the judge')  allowed  the  claimants'  appeals.   The
         First-tier Tribunal made a number of  findings  of  fact  the  most
         relevant of which were that  the  first  claimant  is  the  adopted
         daughter of the sponsor, that she is the sponsor's  primary  carer,
         that the sponsor would be unable to reside in the UK if  the  first
         claimant was not able to enter the UK to assist her  and  therefore
         regulation  15A(4A)  is  satisfied  giving  the  first  claimant  a
         derivative right of residence. With regard to the  second  claimant
         the judge found that she did not satisfy the requirements under the
         EEA Regulations but derives her own right of residence derivate  on
         her mother's derivative right notwithstanding an apparent lacuna in
         the UK's codification of the 'Zambrano'  principles  (C-34/09  Ruiz
         Zambrano  v  Office  National  de  l'emploi   [2011]   ECR   I-1177
         ("Zambrano")).

  The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

      6. The Entry Clearance Officer sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the
         Upper Tribunal. The grounds of appeal, in  essence,  asserted  that
         the judge had erred by considering the sponsor's position  at  some
         point in the future and not at the date  of  decision,  by  finding
         that the first claimant was the primary carer of the sponsor, erred
         in applying the principles set out in the case of Zambrano and that
         the judge failed to give adequate reasons. On 19 June  2015  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Chohan  granted  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
         permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before me.

  Summary of the Submissions

  Considering matters at a future date

      7. The grounds of  appeal  assert  that  the  judge  made  a  material
         misdirection  of  law.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refers   to
         paragraph 25(1) where the first-tier tribunal judge found:

         "I find that she would be unable to reside in the UK if  the  first
         appellant was not able to enter the UK to assist her. I reach  that
         conclusion based on her own testimony, and the likelihood  I  infer
         that her increasing  level  of  disability  will  make  independent
         living impossible. It follows that  if,  theoretically,  the  first
         appellant  entered  the  UK  and  then  had  to  leave,  the   same
         consequences would flow: Mrs Hassan would not be able  to  continue
         living in the UK. No other EEA member state has been  mooted  as  a
         possible place for her to live, nor is it sensible to consider that
         avenue. Though an EU citizen she would therefore have to leave  the
         territory of the EU."

      8. It is asserted that from this passage it is clear that the judge is
         considering the sponsor's situation at some future  date.  This  is
         clearly erroneous the judge should consider  the  position  of  the
         sponsor as at the date of the  decision  not  at  some  unspecified
         future date. Mr  Bramble  relied  on  the  grounds  of  appeal.  He
         submitted that this was an EC case which must be considered on  the
         facts at the date of decision. By using words such as 'I infer' the
         judge is looking at a future date.

      9. Ms Daykin submitted that with regard to future assessment the judge
         is making it clear that this is a long term problem not  a  passing
         and short term health disability. It is a chronic state and  it  is
         only going to deteriorate. The judge did  make  a  finding  of  her
         needs at the date of the decision.




    Finding that the first claimant was the sponsor's primary carer

     10. The grounds refer to the First-tier Tribunal decision at  paragraph
         25(G) where the judge states that:

         "The first appellant is Mrs Hassan's  primary  carer  in  that  she
         takes overall responsibility for overseeing Mrs Hassan's well-being
         - currently necessarily at a distance - but effectively by  talking
         through Mrs Hassan's crises and upsets on  the  phone;  this  is  a
         primary responsibility that she has adopted towards her mother."

     11. It was submitted that the judge has materially misdirected  himself
         by shoehorning both claimants into criteria which do  not  actually
         apply to them.  It was submitted that the first  claimant  in  this
         case cannot be the primary carer for the sponsor since she does not
         care for her in the sense intended by the EEA Regulations.  It  was
         submitted that talking through Mrs Hassan's crises  and  upsets  on
         the phone does not constitute being a primary carer.

     12. Ms Daykin submitted that the EEA Regulations define carer, although
         the extent of the limitations of  the  definition  of  care  is  in
         regulation 15(A)(8). The judge at Paragraph 25(g) and paragraph  28
         sets out the findings of the sponsor's care needs, the  sponsor  is
         the  person  that  is  envisaged  and  catered  for  by   the   EEA
         Regulations. What the judge says quite  clearly  corroborates  that
         need. The sponsor was accompanied by the instructing  solicitor  at
         the first hearing and today.

    Requirement that the British Citizen would be unable to reside  in  the
    UK

     13. With regard to 15A(4A)(c) -the relevant British  citizen  would  be
         unable to reside in the UK if P were required to  leave  -  it  was
         submitted that this does not apply to the first  claimant  for  two
         reasons: firstly, the sponsor clearly is able to reside here in the
         UK without the first appellant  since  she  is  doing  so  now  and
         secondly, this part of the regulation cannot  apply  to  the  first
         claimant who does not live here and cannot be required to leave.

     14. With regard to Regulation 15A(8) -P is to be regarded as a  primary
         carer of another  person  if  P  is  the  person  who  has  primary
         responsibility for that person's care. It was submitted  that  this
         does not apply to the first  claimant,  since  she  does  not  have
         primary responsibility for the sponsor's care. Mr Bramble  referred
         to the judge's findings that the first claimant  takes  an  overall
         responsibility for overseeing the needs, necessarily at a distance,
         he submitted that  assisting  by  phone  cannot  be  sufficient  to
         satisfy being a primary carer. The judge at paragraph 25(k)  talked
         about worsening common conditions and that the  sponsor  was  alone
         and quite vulnerable. The sponsor is here  today  and  was  at  the
         first hearing and gave evidence as set out at paragraph 18  of  the
         decision. The social services are involved,  she  is  dealing  with
         these issues which suggests that the sponsor is dealing with  these
         herself. The first claimant does not fall  within  the  role  of  a
         primary carer. The sponsor is residing here on her own and  getting
         assistance through the NHS and social services.

     15. Mrs Daykin submitted that from Zambrano it is not an answer to  say
         that a child can be cared for by social services and that this must
         extend to a dependant adult as well. She submitted that it is not a
         case where the Secretary of State has  been  able  to  identify  an
         error of law. Both social services' and the NHS's input is  limited
         to the extent that it is not personal care. The  sponsor  describes
         in evidence that her life is extremely tough.

    The principles set out in the case of Zambrano

     16. The judge found at paragraph 29 that the second claimant  does  not
         satisfy regulation 15(A)(5) but was nevertheless satisfied that the
         principle by which she derives her own right of  residence  is  set
         out by the ratio in Zambrano. It is submitted that  the  judge  has
         failed to explain what in  the  ratio  of  Zambrano  can  enable  a
         provision of the EEA regulations to simply be set aside. Mr Bramble
         submitted that the judge did not explain the Zambrano  point.  Both
         claimants are not even within the jurisdiction of an EEA country so
         how can they fall within the Zambrano principle. How  can  Zambrano
         trump the position where it was found that they did  not  meet  the
         regulations?

     17. Mrs Daykin referred to 2  key  points  from  the  EEA  Regulations.
         Regulation 11(5)(e) is prospective and deals with  the  point  that
         the EEA Regulations create a right of entry. This meets  the  point
         that they are not in the UK currently.

     18. The principal in Zambrano is that it must lead to a denial  of  the
         exercise of citizenship, which applied here because  if  the  first
         claimant could not bring her dependant child she could not come  to
         the UK and the citizen would have to leave  the  UK.  There  is  no
         mechanism under the EEA Regulations for  the  second  claimant  but
         this is a directly effective European Union law  provision  so  she
         can enforce her directly effective rights.

    Failing to give reasons or any adequate reasons on a material matter.

     19. The grounds set out that at paragraph 25(f) the judge states  that,
         'there is no one presently in the UK who takes care of Mrs Hassan.'
         It is submitted that this directly  contradicts  what  is  said  at
         paragraph 18 'now, if she was  unwell  she  would  go  to  see  her
         GP...social services in the UK have given her a  chair  and  raised
         her sofa and given her a raised toilet seat and put bath aids  in.'
         The sponsor plainly is being taken care of by the  NHS  and  social
         services and the judge has failed to explain why, despite that care
         'no one presently in the UK' is taking care of her.

     20. At paragraph 25(l) the judge states  'I  find  that  she  would  be
         unable to reside in the UK if the first appellant was not  able  to
         enter the UK to assist her.' It is submitted  that  the  judge  has
         failed to explain why this is so given that  the  sponsor  attended
         the First-tier Tribunal hearing apparently unaccompanied which must
         have involved a journey from Ilford to Hatton Cross. She  was  able
         to give evidence without difficulty - this is not suggestive  of  a
         person in such ill health that she cannot live in the UK unless her
         daughter comes to  look  after  her.  The  same  is  also  true  of
         paragraph 25(f) quoted above she  goes  to  her  GP  to  renew  her
         prescription. There is also the care provided by the NHS and social
         services referred to above.

     21. Ms Daykin, in response to a question I asked of her, explained that
         the application made by the claimants was for a limited period of 6
         months because this was the maximum she could apply for on a  visit
         visa  however  there  would  be  an  opportunity  to  make  further
         applications.

  Discussion

     22. The core  question  is  whether,  if  the  first  claimant  is  not
         permitted to enter the UK, the sponsor would not, as  a  matter  of
         practicality, be able to remain in the UK.

     23. I will deal with the issue that the claimants are not currently  in
         the  UK  first.  Although  Regulation  15A(4A)(c)  provides  for  a
         derivative right if the primary carer were required to leave the UK
         Regulation 11(5)(e) provides:

             'Right of admission to the United Kingdom

             11...

             (2) A person who is not an EEA national must  be  admitted  to
             the United Kingdom if he is-

             ...

             (b)... a person who meets the criteria in paragraph (5)...

             (e) P is accompanying a  British  citizen  to,  or  joining  a
             British citizen in, the United Kingdom and P would be entitled
             to reside in the United Kingdom pursuant to regulation 15A(4A)
             were P and the British citizen both in the United Kingdom.'

     24. In the case of Campbell (exclusion;  Zambrano)  [2013]  UKUT  00147
         (IAC) at paragraph 30 the Upper Tribunal held:

         "30. ... We see no reason  in  principle  why  Zambrano  principles
         cannot have application in  entry  clearance  cases:  in  both  in-
         country and out-of-country cases the Member State must ensure  that
         any "refusal does not lead, for the Union citizen concerned, to the
         denial of the genuine enjoyment of  the  substance  of  the  rights
         conferred by virtue of his status  as  a  citizen  of  the  Union":
         Dereci & Others (European citizenship) [2011]  EUECJ  C-256/11,  15
         November 2011, para 74. Indeed the ruling of the Grand  Chamber  of
         the Court of Justice in this case encompassed not just the cases of
         those applicants who were already living in the host  Member  State
         (Austria) but Mrs Stevic who resided in Serbia: see paras  26,  35,
         74."

     25. It is clear that the EEA Regulations permit a  right  of  admission
         and a derivate right of residence even where the carer  in  not  in
         the UK at the  time  of  application.  That  is  amplified  in  the
         Campbell decision.

     26. Regulation 15A(4A) of the EEA Regulations, which was inserted  with
         effect from 8th November 2012 by the Immigration (European Economic
         Area) (Amendment) (No.2)  Regulations  2012/2560,  provides  for  a
         derivative  right  of  residence  for  primary  carers  of  British
         citizens as follows:-

             '(1) A person ('P') who  is  not  an  exempt  person  and  who
             satisfies the criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4) (4A) or  (5)
             of this regulation is entitled to a derivative right to reside
             in the United Kingdom for as long as P satisfies the  relevant
             criteria. ...

             (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-

             (a) P is the primary carer of a British citizen ('the relevant
             British citizen');

             (b) the relevant British citizen is  residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom; and

             (c) the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside  in
             the UK or in another EEA State if P were required to leave.'

     27. Regulation 15A(4A) was inserted to comply with  the  interpretation
         of the Court of Justice of the European Union ("CJEU")  of  Article
         20 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union  ("TFEU")
         in the Zambrano case where the Grand Chamber of the CJEU held  that
         Article 20 of the TFEU "precludes national measures which have  the
         effect of depriving citizens of the European Union of  the  genuine
         enjoyment of the substance of the rights  conferred  by  virtue  of
         their status as citizens of the European Union" (paragraph 42).

     28. The judge found that the first claimant is  the  sponsor's  primary
         carer finding that the care currently undertaken was as follows:

         'The first appellant is Mrs Hassan's  primary  carer  in  that  she
         takes overall responsibility for overseeing Mrs Hassan's well-being
         - currently necessarily at a distance - but effectively by  talking
         through Mrs Hassan's crises and upsets on  the  phone;  this  is  a
         primary responsibility that she has adopted towards her mother.'

     29. The definition of primary carer is to be found in Regulation 15A(7)

             '(7) P is to be regarded  as  a  "primary  carer"  of  another
             person if

             (a) P is a direct relative or a legal guardian of that person;
             and

             ...

             (i) is the person who  has  primary  responsibility  for  that
             person's care; or...'

     30. The first point to note  is  that  this  level  of  care  currently
         undertaken by the first claimant can continue if the first claimant
         is  not  permitted  to  enter  the  UK.  The  sponsor   is   living
         independently in the UK presumably with assistance with  her  daily
         living needs. There is no suggestion that the care she is receiving
         will cease. If she is not receiving care then she must be  able  to
         currently manage to live independently without assistance. I  agree
         with Mr Bramble's submission that the level of care being performed
         by the first claimant identified by the judge is not sufficient  to
         engage the EEA Regulations. I consider that the first  claimant  is
         not the primary carer of the sponsor and the EEA Regulations do not
         apply.

     31. However, even if the  first  claimant  was  to  be  considered  the
         primary carer, if the first claimant did not provide this level  of
         care, it is highly unlikely that this would result in  the  sponsor
         being compelled to leave the UK (discussed below).

     32. In this case the judge considered that the sponsor was in  need  of
         care  finding  that  the  medical  evidence  from   the   two   GPs
         corroborates the need. The judge found that the doctor  noted  that
         she needed assistance with her daily living (paragraph 23) and that
         she has a number of chronic medical  conditions  including  type  2
         diabetes, kidney disease, cataracts and diabetic  retinopathy.  Her
         medical  conditions  cause  breathlessness,  tiredness   and   pain
         (paragraph  23).  However,  as  the   Entry   Clearance   Officer's
         representative pointed out, the sponsor was  able  to  attend  both
         hearings and attends at her GP every month. She is as a  matter  of
         fact currently living independently. The  judge  did  consider  her
         future  need  stating,  'I  infer  that  her  increasing  level  of
         disability will make independent living impossible'.  There  is  no
         definition as to the level or type of care needs  that  must  exist
         before the EEA Regulations are engaged. However,  I  consider  that
         the level of care needed is inextricably linked to the  requirement
         in 15A(4A)(c) that the removal (or in this case refusal  of  entry)
         would lead to the British citizen being unable to remain in the UK.

     33. In Hines v Lambeth London Borough Council [2014] EWCA  Civ  660  at
         paragraph 23 the court held:

         "I  have  no  doubt  that  the  test  applicable  under  regulation
         15A(4A)(c) is clear and can be given effect without contravening EU
         law. The reviewer has  to  consider  the  welfare  of  the  British
         citizen child and the extent to which the quality  or  standard  of
         his life will be impaired if the  non-EU  citizen  is  required  to
         leave. This is all  for  the  purpose  of  answering  the  question
         whether the child would, as a matter of practicality, be unable  to
         remain in the UK. This  requires  a  consideration,  amongst  other
         things, of the impact which the removal of the primary carer  would
         have on the child, and  the  alternative  care  available  for  the
         child."

     34. At paragraph 19 the court, referring to the  case  of  Harrison  v.
         Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  1736
         ("Harrison") set out:

         " ... Elias LJ's starting point in that case was that the  Zambrano
         principle did not extend to cover anything short of the a situation
         where the EU citizen is forced to leave the  territory  of  the  EU
         (paragraph 63). Elias LJ then dismissed the notion that the CJEU in
         Zambrano was leaving open the possibility that the  doctrine  might
         apply "more widely and loosely" (paragraph Judgment Approved by the
         court for handing down. Hines v.  Lambeth  64).  In  paragraph  66,
         Elias LJ makes clear that Dereci v. Bundesministerium  f?r  Inneres
         (Case C-256/11) [2012] 1 CMLR 45  (paragraphs  67-72)  demonstrated
         that the reduction of the enjoyment of family life  by  the  family
         members who remain when non-EU citizens leave was not sufficient to
         engage EU law. At paragraph 67, Elias LJ explained  the  matter  as
         follows:-

             " ... I accept that it is a general principle of EU  law  that
             conduct which materially impedes the exercise of an  EU  right
             is in general forbidden by EU law in precisely the same way as
             deprivation of the right. But in my judgment it  is  necessary
             to focus on the nature of the right in  issue  and  to  decide
             what constitutes an impediment. The right of  residence  is  a
             right to reside in the territory of the EU. It is not a  right
             to any  particular  quality  or  life  or  to  any  particular
             standard of living. Accordingly, there  is  no  impediment  to
             exercising the right to reside if residence  remains  possible
             as a matter of substance, albeit that the quality of  life  is
             diminished ...""

     35. At paragraph 8 the court effectively summarised that the  court  in
         Harrison:

         " ... held at paragraph 63 that  the  Zambrano  principle  did  not
         cover anything short of a situation where the EU citizen is  forced
         to leave the territory of the EU."

     36. In DH (Jamaica) and others v SSHD 2012 EWCA Civ 1736 the  Court  of
         Appeal held at paragraph 63:

         "I agree with Mr Beal QC, counsel for the Secretary of State,  that
         there is really no basis for asserting that it is arguable  in  the
         light of the authorities that the  Zambrano  principle  extends  to
         cover anything short of a situation where the EU citizen is  forced
         to leave the territory of the EU. If the EU citizen, be it child or
         wife, would not in practice be compelled to leave  the  country  if
         the non-EU family member were to be refused the right of  residence
         ..."

     37. In the case of  Jamil Sanneh v (1) Secretary of State for work  and
         pensions and (2) The Commissioners for Her  majesty's  Revenue  and
         Customs  [2013]  EWHC  793  (Admin)  ('Sanneh')  the  court  having
         considered the Zambrano case and subsequent authorities  derived  a
         number of propositions from those cases at paragraph 19:

         " ...

         iii) It is for the national courts to determine, as a question of
         fact on the evidence before it, whether an EU citizen would be
         compelled to leave the EU to follow a non-EU national upon whom he
         is dependent.

         iv) Nothing less than such compulsion will engage articles 20 and
         21 of the TFEU. In particular, EU law will not be engaged where the
         EU citizen is not compelled to leave the EU, even if the quality or
         standard of life of the EU citizen is diminished as a result of the
         non-EU national upon whom he is dependent is (for example) removed
         or prevented from working; ..."

     38. In MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside EU)  Iran  [2013]  UKUT
         00380 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal when applying the EU law  principles
         as summarised in Sanneh held at paragraph 56:

         "The right of residence is a right to reside in  the  territory  of
         the EU. It is not a right to any particular quality of life  or  to
         any particular standard of living (see Dereci at paragraph 68,  and
         Harrison at paragraph 67)."

     39. The above cases repeat and amplify that there  is  no  right  to  a
         particular quality of life or standard of living and nothing  short
         of actual compulsion or being forced to leave the UK as a result of
         the removal or refusal of  entry  of  the  carer  will  engage  the
         Zambrano principles as enacted in  the  EEA  Regulations.  Applying
         those principles to this case it is clear that the  level  of  care
         required must be such that without the care of the  first  claimant
         the  sponsor  would  be  compelled  to  leave  the  UK.  The  judge
         considered the sponsor's current need  for  care  noting  her  many
         chronic medical complaints and that she needs assistance with daily
         living. I note that the sponsor's evidence was that  if  the  first
         claimant did not come to the UK to care for her she would  have  to
         leave the UK. As a matter of choice the sponsor may wish to  go  to
         Pakistan to be with her daughter and receive the personal care  she
         needs but, in my view, she would not  be  compelled  or  forced  to
         leave the UK. The sponsor has described life as very  tough.  I  do
         not wish to diminish the  importance  of  having  close  family  to
         attend to personal care but the reality is  that  the  sponsor  can
         obtain (and clearly is obtaining) the care that she needs.  I  note
         that the sponsor is in receipt of higher rate attendance  allowance
         for help with personal care in the amount of �77.45 per  week.  She
         is living independently. Her quality of life might be  enhanced  if
         her daughter undertook the carer role but the right is not a  right
         to any particular quality of life or to any particular standard  of
         living.

     40. The judge erred in considering the future needs of the sponsor.  As
         at  the  date  of  the  decision  the  sponsor  was  able  to  live
         independently and her care needs in relation to  her  daily  living
         and personal care were clearly being  met.  However,  even  if  the
         sponsor was unable to live independently  that  is  not  sufficient
         necessarily to engage Article 20 of the TFEU. Ms  Daykin  submitted
         that just as it is not an answer to removal  of  a  parent  that  a
         child could be adopted or looked after by the  state  this  applies
         equally to the sponsor. I do not accept that submission. There is a
         world of difference between the needs and status of a child who  is
         reliant on adults in his formative years for ensuring his  welfare,
         development, moral compass and to make decisions on his behalf  and
         an adult. As a British citizen the sponsor is entitled to the level
         of care she requires whether that is support in her own home or  in
         residential/nursing care. The sponsor would  not  be  compelled  to
         leave the UK to receive the care she needs either now  or  even  in
         the future on the basis of  a  worsening  of  her  current  chronic
         medical conditions. The sponsor quite understandably  would  prefer
         to have her daughter care for her. However, the right under the EEA
         Regulations is not to a quality of  life  that  the  sponsor  would
         prefer.

     41. In relation to the second claimant the judge found  that  she  does
         not satisfy regulation 15(A)(5) but was nevertheless satisfied that
         the principle by which she derives her own right  of  residence  is
         set out by the ratio in Zambrano. The judge did not give reasons or
         explain how that right was derived. Ms Daykin submission was that a
         denial of the exercise of citizenship applied here because  if  the
         first claimant could not bring her dependant child  she  could  not
         come to the UK and the citizen would have to leave the UK and  that
         this is a directly effective  right.  In  this  case  there  is  no
         evidence that the second claimant would have to accompany the first
         claimant. Her father is in Pakistan. There was no  evidence  as  to
         why she cannot remain in Pakistan in the care of her father.

  Conclusions

     42. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  involved  making
         material errors of  law.  I  set-aside  the  decision  pursuant  to
         paragraph 12(2)(a) of the  Tribunals  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
         2007.

     43. I re-make the decision. For the reasons set  out  above  the  first
         claimant is not the primary carer of the sponsor and in  any  event
         the sponsor would not be compelled to leave the  UK  if  the  first
         claimant was not admitted to the UK. The second  claimant's  appeal
         fails as the first claimant's appeal has failed. Additionally, even
         if the first claimant's appeal succeeded the second  claimant  does
         not meet the  EEA  Regulations  and  has  no  directly  enforceable
         derivative right of residence as there  is  no  evidence  that  the
         first claimant could not come to the UK to  care  for  the  sponsor
         without bringing her daughter with  the  result  that  the  sponsor
         would be unable to reside in the UK.

  Article 8

     44.  The judge did not consider the claimants' Article 8 grounds  given
         the findings on the EEA Regulations. I have not gone on to consider
         Article 8 as this is an appeal under the EEA Regulations. The claim
         was for admission to the UK under the EEA Regulations.  By  analogy
         the reasoning in the case of Amirteymour and others  (EEA  appeals;
         human rights) [2015] UKUT 00466 (IAC) applies. The  Upper  Tribunal
         held at paragraph 75:

         "For these reasons, we conclude that, where no notice under section
         120 of the 2002 Act has been served and where no  EEA  decision  to
         remove has been made, an appellant cannot in an  appeal  under  the
         EEA Regulations bring a Human Rights challenge to removal."

     45. I have considered whether any parties require the protection of  an
         anonymity direction. No anonymity direction  was  made  previously.
         Having considered all the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not
         consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

     46. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law.  I set aside that decision. I  re-make  the  decision
         dismissing the first and  second  claimant's  appeals  against  the
         decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 18 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
