
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/04285/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11 March 2014                                |On 2 May 2014              |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                              SAMSUNNAHAR KERON
                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Hasan
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born in  1984.   She  appealed
    against a decision of the Respondent made on 23 December 2012 to refuse
    her entry clearance as the spouse of Moatahar Hossein.

 2. The Appellant stated that she was  exempt  from  the  English  language
    requirement as she is joining her spouse who is serving  in  the  Armed
    Forces.  However, the Respondent's position was that  such  applied  to
    Sponsors of foreign or Commonwealth  citizens.   As  her  spouse  is  a
    British citizen the application fell to be considered  under  paragraph
    EC-P1.1 of Appendix FM of the Rules.   She  was  not  exempt  from  the
    English language requirement for any of the reasons stated  in  ECP4.2.
    The Respondent also considered the Appellant's rights under  Article  8
    of ECHR but considered that refusal was justified and proportionate.

 3. She appealed stating that she met the requirements of  the  Rules;  she
    relied on policy guidance which stated that  the  language  requirement
    does not apply to her as the spouse of a member  of  the  Armed  Forces
    applying under Part 7 of the Rules.  Further she  is  exempt  from  the
    requirement as there are exceptional circumstances which would  prevent
    her from being able to meet the requirement prior to entry.

 4. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 10 January  2014  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Suchak allowed the appeal under the Rules.

 5. He noted the history, which is not in dispute.  The Sponsor joined  the
    army in December 2007.  At that time he was a Bangladeshi citizen.   He
    is now a dual Bangladeshi and British citizen.   He  became  a  British
    citizen in 2009/2010.

 6. In his conclusions the judge stated (at [16]) 'It seems to me that  the
    Respondent ignored the fact that the Sponsor is  a  dual  national  and
    went on to consider the Appellant's application under Appendix FM'.

 7. And at [19]

         'I have considered the  Guidance  in  SET  17  which  provides  the
         language requirement will not apply to Sponsors of members of Armed
         Forces applying under Part 7 of the Rules  specifically  where  the
         Sponsor falls into one of the groups specified in SET 17.9.1.   The
         Appellant is a serving foreign or  Commonwealth  national  who  has
         completed five years service in the army.  He  is  also  a  British
         citizen but remains a Bangladeshi national and there is  no  reason
         why he cannot be considered to be a Commonwealth  national  who  is
         able  to  benefit  from  the  exemption  of  the  English  language
         requirement'.

    He also noted that 'the Appellant has now  provided  evidence  to  show
    that she does meet the English language requirement'.  He  allowed  the
    appeal under paragraph 276S.

 8. The Respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted by a judge
    on 31 January 2014.

 9. At the error of law hearing Mr Tarlow submitted  that  the  Sponsor  on
    joining the army as a Bangladeshi citizen came within the provisions of
    s8(4)(a) of the Immigration Act 1971 a consequence of  which  was  that
    his spouse did not need to satisfy the English language requirement and
    could succeed under paragraph 276S.  However,  on  becoming  a  British
    citizen s8(4)(a) no longer applied.  His spouse was  not  exempt  under
    Appendix FM.

10. Mr Hasan submitted that there was no error.  As a dual  national  there
    was no reason why he could not take  advantage  of  s8(4)(a).   In  any
    event it  was  clear  that  she  had  now  satisfied  the  requirement.
    Although post decision that evidence was admissible.

11. Paragraph 276S under which the appeal was allowed reads:

         'A person seeking leave to enter the UK as  the  spouse  ...  of  a
         person present and settled in the UK or being admitted on the  same
         occasion for settlement in accordance with paragraphs 276E to  276Q
         or of a member of HM Forces who is exempt from immigration  control
         under section 8(4) (a) of the Immigration Act 1971 and has at least
         5 years' continuous service may  be  granted  indefinite  leave  to
         enter provided a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry  in
         this capacity is produced to the Immigration Officer on arrival'.

12. Section 8(4) of the 1971 Act reads:

         'The provisions of this Act relating to those who are  not  British
         citizens, other than the provisions relating to deportation,  shall
         also not apply to any person so long as either -

         (a)  he is subject, as a member of the home forces, to service  law
             ...'

13. I do not consider it necessary to construe section 8  (4)  because  the
    Tribunal referred to guidance SET 17.9.1. It was not suggested that the
    guidance were not in force at the time. It states:

         'The language requirement  will  not  apply  to  the  Sponsors  and
         partners of members of the Armed Forces applying under  Part  7  of
         the Immigration Rules specifically where the Sponsor falls into one
         of the following groups:

             is a member  of  the  Armed  Forces  exempt  from  immigration
             control under section 8(4) of the Immigration Act 1971 or is a
             Gurkha granted indefinite leave on discharge from the  British
             Army or is a foreign or Commonwealth national given indefinite
             leave on discharge from HM Forces or is a serving  foreign  or
             Commonwealth national who has completed 5 years' service.'

14. The guidance explains the purpose of the rule and the context in  which
    it is intended to operate. It appears that the  guidance  may  be  more
    generous than the rule in that it does not only refer to  those  exempt
    under s 8 (4) but  specifically  includes  'a  serving  ...Commonwealth
    national who has completed 5 years' service.' It is not  disputed  that
    the Sponsor is a serving soldier who has completed 5  years.  He  is  a
    Commonwealth national as well as a British national. A British national
    is also a Commonwealth national.  I conclude that the First tier  judge
    was entitled to find 'there is no reason why he cannot be considered to
    be a Commonwealth national who is able to benefit from the exemption to
    the English language requirement.' [19]

15. If the judge erred it was in not allowing the appeal to the extent that
    it was not in accordance with the  law  as  the  policy  had  not  been
    applied. However, I do not find such to be a material error. The  terms
    of the policy are clear. The only outcome could be that the  matter  is
    allowed. I note that in any event the Appellant has subsequently passed
    the English language test.

16. I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  does  not  show
    material error and that decision allowing the appeal stands.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law and its decision allowing the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules
stands.







Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


