
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04320/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2017                            |On 24 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       MR JAHVAN ZIPPHON LYNDON HOWELL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Adophy, Solicitor's Advocate, Rana & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is the Secretary of State.   The  respondent
    is Mr Howell.  However for the purposes of this decision I refer to the
    parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal where Mr Howell was
    the appellant.  Mr Howell is a citizen of Jamaica  born  on  8  October
    1996.  He appeals the decision of the respondent dated 8  January  2015
    to refuse him leave to enter under paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules as the child of Mr Carlton George Howell who, it is not disputed,
    is present and settled in the UK.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 9 August  2016  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  J  Bartlett  allowed  the  appellant's   appeal   under   the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. The Secretary of State appeals with permission on the grounds that  the
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal has  made  an  error  of  law  in  her
    application of TD (Yemen)  [2006]  UKAIT  00049.   Although  the  judge
    refers to TD (Yemen) at paragraph 15 it was submitted that there was no
    specific reference to the ratio of that case which is as follows:

         "The  test   is,   not   whether   anyone   else   has   day-to-day
         responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control  and
         direction of  the  child's  upbringing  including  making  all  the
         important decisions of the child's life.  If not, responsibility is
         shared and so not 'sole'".

 4. The grounds for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  submitted
    that  the  judge  had  found  at  paragraph  18  that  there  was  sole
    responsibility.  However, the paragraph contained a number of  negative
    findings and it was submitted that inadequate reasons  had  been  given
    for the finding of sole responsibility.

Error of Law

 5. Mr Walker on behalf of the Secretary of State rehearsed the grounds for
    permission but submitted that he  could  not  take  those  grounds  any
    further.  Mr Adophy on behalf of Mr Howell submitted that the  decision
    was not flawed and that the judge gave reasons at paragraph  18  as  to
    why the sponsor has sole responsibility.  Mr  Adophy  argued  that  the
    standard of proof was the balance of probabilities and that  the  judge
    had made appropriate findings.

 6. I am satisfied that the judge reached a decision that was open  to  her
    on the evidence before her.   The  fact  that  she  has  made  negative
    findings in relation to the appellant and the sponsor is not  fatal  to
    her  finding  of  sole  responsibility  which  is  cogently   reasoned.
    Although the judge may not have set out the ratio of TD (Yemen)  it  is
    clear from a reading of her decision and reasons as a  whole  that  she
    had in mind the that the test was whether  the  parent  had  continuing
    control and direction of the child's upbringing.

 7. The judge found that the evidence referred  to  financial  contribution
    from the appellant's father in the  UK  and  that  the  appellant  also
    provided  a  letter  confirming  that  his  mother  had  not  played  a
    significant part of his life.  The judge was satisfied that Mr  Howell,
    the sponsor, had been in touch with the appellant's school and that  in
    addition to paying fees for a remedial  college  he  had  arranged  and
    encouraged the appellant to attend.  The judge was of the view that the
    fact that Mr Howell was not able to carry out day-to-day  care  of  the
    appellant  was  not  what  was  required  and  the  judge   took   into
    consideration that at the time of the  application  the  appellant  was
    only a few days short of his 18th birthday and that  children  of  that
    age could be expected to have less decisions made by their parents.

 8. The judge carefully weighed  all  the  positive  and  negative  factors
    including that Mr Howell had only visited the appellant once  since  he
    had left Jamaica, albeit that he stayed for seven months spending  most
    of his time with the appellant which does not appear  to  be  disputed.
    The judge also took into consideration that she was not satisfied  that
    the appellant's  mother  had  relinquished  interest  or  care  of  the
    appellant.  However her finding, which distinguished such interest from
    exercising responsibility,  was  one  that  was  open  to  her  on  the
    evidence.

 9. As I indicated at the hearing the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge does not disclose an error of law and shall stand.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award was sought or is made.



Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
