

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/04298/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 18th November 2014                        |On 20th November 2014        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                               Ghnwah Almdlal
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Beirut
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:         Mr Moran, Alex Moran Immigration and Asylum
For the Respondent:      Ms Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Syria date of birth 28th  March  1997.
       She  appeals  with  permission[1]  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal  (Judge  MR  Oliver)  to  dismiss  her  appeal  against  the
       Respondent's decision to refuse to grant her entry clearance  as  the
       pre-flight spouse of a refugee.


    2.  The  Appellant  made  her  application  for  entry  clearance  under
       paragraph 352A of the Immigration Rules.  In the refusal  dated  13th
       March 2014 the Respondent took no issue with her ability to meet  the
       requirements of that rule.  The  sole  ground  for  refusal  was  the
       Appellant's age: at that time she was only 16 years old  and  so  the
       application fell for refusal under paragraph 277 of the Rules:
           277. Nothing in these Rules shall be construed as  permitting  a
           person to be granted entry clearance, leave to enter,  leave  to
           remain or variation of leave as a spouse  or  civil  partner  of
           another if either the applicant or  the  sponsor  will  be  aged
           under 18 on the date of arrival in the United Kingdom or (as the
           case may be) on the  date  on  which  the  leave  to  remain  or
           variation of leave would be granted. In  these  rules  the  term
           "sponsor" includes "partner" as defined in GEN 1.2  of  Appendix
           FM.
    3. In respect  of  Article  8  the  Respondent  found  there  to  be  no
       satisfactory evidence that the Appellant shared a  family  life  with
       her husband; even if there was an interference it was  deemed  to  be
       proportionate.


    4. On appeal the First-tier Tribunal  found  "no  reason  to  doubt  the
       genuineness of their family life"[2] but dismissed  the  appeal  with
       reference to paragraph 277.  At paragraph 9 the determination  refers
       to the "good reason for the existence" of that provision: "because of
       the public importance of preventing abuse I find  that  the  rule  is
       necessary in a democratic society". Having found  that  the  decision
       would inevitably entail an interference with the  Appellant's  family
       life the  Judge  concluded  that  weighed  against  the  "vice  which
       underlies the rule" the decision is nevertheless proportionate. It is
       suggested that the Appellant is currently living in a safer  part  of
       Syria than she was previously. The  appeal  is  dismissed  under  the
       Rules and Article 8.


    5. The Appellant accepts that she cannot succeed under  the  Rules.  The
       grounds of appeal are that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  the
       following respects when considering Article 8:


        i) The decision was found to be a proportionate  interference  with
           the Appellant's right to  family  life  because  of  the  "vice"
           underlying paragraph 277 of the Rule.  The  Appellant  does  not
           know what that means.  If the  Judge  means  that  the  rule  is
           intended to prevent some kind of abuse, such as forced marriage,
           it was irrational to apply that rationale to this case, where he
           has found that there is no abuse or vice.


       ii) The evidence was that the Appellant is currently  living  in  an
           area of Syria where she is  in  constant  danger.  There  was  a
           failure to give appropriate, or any, weight to that factor.


    6. The Respondent opposes the appeal on all  grounds.  It  is  submitted
       that there are sound public  policy  reasons  for  the  existence  of
       paragraph 277 and that these would render any decision to refuse  the
       Appellant - still under 18 - proportionate.


  Error of Law: Discussion and Findings


    7. The First-tier Tribunal found that there is  a  genuine  family  life
       shared between the Appellant and her husband. Although the spectre of
       forced marriage was clearly raised before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       since it is at the centre of the debate in ex parte Quila [2011] UKSC
       45,  there is no suggestion in either the evidence, or the Tribunal's
       findings, that this issue has any application in this case.  This  is
       then a genuine marriage.


    8. The nature of the relationship notwithstanding, the Appellant accepts
       that she cannot be granted entry clearance under the Rules because of
       the operation of paragraph 277.  Her case has been  squarely  put  on
       Article 8 grounds. Mr Moran's skeleton, submitted to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, makes this clear.  There is a family life, and the decision
       represents an interference with it, since the Sponsor, now recognized
       as a refugee, cannot be expected to go to Syria to be with his  wife.
       As to whether the decision is taken in pursuit of a  legitimate  aim,
       the Appellant submits that this is not the usual "protection  of  the
       economy" framed as "immigration  control".  As  the  Respondent  made
       clear in Quila, paragraph 277 is directed at another matter entirely:
       "It was not to control immigration. It was to deter forced marriages"
       [per Lord Wilson at paragraph 8].  Mr Moran submitted that  since  it
       is accepted that this is not a forced marriage,  the  analysis  could
       stop here, the legitimate aim behind the rule having  no  bearing  on
       this decision[3].  In the alternative he focused his  submissions  on
       whether the First-tier Tribunal had properly weighed this matter, and
       others, in the balance when assessing proportionality.


    9. I am not going to here address the Quila  question  of  whether  this
       decision is rationally connected with  the  legitimate  aim  pursued.
       That question, in the case of 16 and 17 year olds,  requires  further
       debate and analysis.   Although it is clear that paragraph 277 is not
       directed at "immigration control" but at other social issues,  it  is
       not so clear  that  it  is  confined  to  the  prevention  of  forced
       marriage.  In Quila the Supreme Court makes  reference  to  Directive
       2003/86/EC of the Council of  the  European  Union  which  explicitly
       refers to the promotion of social integration as being an aim  behind
       setting a minimum age for spousal settlement into the EU.


   10. I need not address the 'legitimate aim' question raised by  Mr  Moran
       because  I  am  satisfied  that  the  proportionality  assessment  at
       paragraph 9 of this determination is flawed. The analysis consists of
       two points: the rule serves a legitimate purpose, and  the  Appellant
       has moved "to a safer part of Syria". In respect of  the  former  the
       Tribunal appears to have placed great weight on this factor, with  no
       attempt to balance against the legitimate public  interest  the  fact
       that he had already found  that  this  is  not,  in  fact,  a  forced
       marriage. That is one problem. The second arises in  respect  of  the
       finding that the Appellant has "moved to  a  safer  part  of  Syria".
       Whilst that may be true, it was apparent from the evidence before him
       that this did not mean that it was actually  safe  there.  There  was
       country background evidence before the Tribunal that there were  real
       difficulties in the Appellant surviving where she is currently living
       in Syria. The determination fails to take any of  that  evidence,  or
       that of the sponsor, apparently accepted in all other respects,  into
       account. The error of law is the failure to take this  evidence  into
       account when assessing proportionality.  The  decision  is  therefore
       set aside, with the findings of fact, and  the  dismissal  under  the
       Rules, preserved.


  The Re-Made Decision


   11. I re-make the decision only in respect of  whether  the  interference
       with the Appellant's  family  life  is  proportionate.  Although  the
       burden of proof lies on  the  Appellant  to  establish  any  relevant
       facts, it is  for  the  Respondent  to  show  that  the  decision  is
       proportionate.


   12. The Appellant and Sponsor are cousins from the Qadam neighbourhood of
       Damascus. They were married according to custom and Syrian law on the
       6th January 2013.  They lived together for three months  after  their
       marriage. In his witness statement dated 16th July 2014  the  Sponsor
       explains that their home in Qadam was destroyed  because  the  Syrian
       Free Army were active there and so they had moved to Suwayda:


           "This area is majority Druze, who are mostly supporters  of  the
           current Assad regime. This means that it has been  quieter  than
           many other places,  including  Damascus,  but  there  are  still
           dangers, especially for my wife as a  Sunni  Muslim.  There  are
           checkpoints everywhere and her origin  and  residence  is  clear
           from her ID card. This can often cause problems because Qadam is
           a known centre of opposition to the regime and  soldiers  harass
           her because of this. I am afraid that she  could  be  taken  and
           abused one of these days, such stories are very  common  at  the
           moment.


           In  fact  my  brothers  Ghanim  and  Ghaid  were   arrested   at
           checkpoints on their way from Damascus to Suwayda to see  family
           there and have been in detention  for  over  three  months  now.
           Ghanim's ID was recently returned to our family,  which  usually
           means that the person has died inside, but we are  still  trying
           to tell ourselves that this is not the case and  that  will  not
           believe it until they return the body. We fear the worst but are
           just hoping and praying that him and Ghaid are released alive.


           To make matters worse for Ghnwah, the situation could get  worse
           in Suwayda very quickly. The atmosphere is  very  tense  amongst
           the Druze, especially with the extremist Islamic fighting groups
           frequently attacking the area"


   13. The Appellant's bundle contains certified translations of Al  Jazeera
       news reports concerning the "protracted shelling" and siege of Qadam,
       a stronghold of the Syrian Free Army.   The  area  came  under  heavy
       bombardment by the government during a siege lasting two months. This
       evidence accords with that of the Sponsor,  and  I  accept  that  the
       Appellant has had to flee her home to live in Suwayda. I accept on  a
       balance of probabilities that her ID card is likely to show Qadam  as
       her place of origin and residence, and as such  may  attract  adverse
       attention at government-operated checkpoints.


   14. At the date of decision the Appellant was in  Suwayda.   She  remains
       there  today.  A  detailed  article  reproduced  from   the   website
       "syriadeeply.org" is entitled "In Swaida, kidnappings and  extremists
       finally lure Druze into conflict". It explains how the Druze majority
       province had  initially  managed  to  escape  much  of  the  violence
       affecting the rest of the country and as such had become a haven  for
       the internally displaced and humanitarian organisations. Since  early
       2013 that peace has been increasingly eroded  by  incursions  by  the
       Syrian Free Army and Islamic militants, with abductions and  violence
       erupting between the Druze and jihadi groups hoping to  provoke  them
       into open  conflict.  A  further  article  from  the  Arabic  website
       "zamanalwsl.net" is entitled  "Suwayda  on  the  Brink  of  Sectarian
       Abyss" reports on frequent fighting between government  forces  there
       and Bedouin militias. The reports consistently report that the  Druze
       leaders in this area are  trying  to  maintain  a  neutral  position.
       Having traditionally been seen as Assad supporters they are resisting
       calls from within their own community and  from  influential  figures
       such as  (Lebanese Druze leader) Walid Jumblatt to join the uprising.
       These  tensions  have  produced  numerous  checkpoints  and  a  heavy
       military presence aimed at  maintaining  government  control  of  the
       region. The objective material does not  support  a  conclusion  that
       this area is safe.  As a civilian Sunni  in  a  government  dominated
       area the Appellant is already in a precarious position.  As  a  young
       woman without her husband,  she is  all  the  more  vulnerable.   The
       Appellant's bundle contains numerous reports, from agencies  such  as
       the BBC, UNHCR, the Syrian Network for Human Rights, and the Lebanese
       Daily Star, about the prevalence of rape in the Syrian conflict.  All
       the reports echo the findings of the Euro-Mediterranean Human  Rights
       Network that these attacks are taking place "mostly during government
       raids, at checkpoints and within detention facilities" [page 88].   I
       find the  subjective  fears  of  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  to  be
       objectively well-founded in this regard.


   15. This is the factual background against which  I  assess  whether  the
       Appellant should be given entry clearance notwithstanding the purpose
       and operation of paragraph 277.  In her submissions Ms  Kenny  picked
       up  on  the   use   of   the   phrase   "exceptional,   compassionate
       circumstances", used in  Quila  in  discussion  of  the  Respondent's
       residual discretion to grant entry clearance outside of the Rules[4].
          She  submitted  that  the  Appellant  was  not  facing  any   such
       circumstances.   I cannot agree.   Although her representatives  have
       been  careful  to  produce  country  background   material   relating
       specifically to her geographical  location  within  Syria,  I  hardly
       think I needed it. As Mr Moran points out, if the  Appellant  arrived
       at our borders today it is overwhelmingly likely that  she  would  be
       given international protection on the  spot.   The  hearing  of  this
       matter has  twice  been  expedited  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
       recognition of the  "exceptional  circumstances"  pertaining  to  the
       Appellant. She is a seventeen-year old woman - sixteen at the date of
       decision - in the middle of a  war  zone.    She  meets  all  of  the
       requirements of the substantive Rule - paragraph 352A - and  in  just
       over four months paragraph 277 will  cease  to  apply  and  she  will
       qualify for entry as a pre-flight spouse of a refugee.   The Tribunal
       has accepted that this  young  lady  was  not  forced  to  marry  her
       sponsor. It is a genuine family life.  I have weighed  against  these
       factors the legitimate purpose  behind  setting  a  minimum  age  for
       spousal settlement, including  the  increased  prospects  for  social
       integration. That is an important consideration and I  have  afforded
       it considerable weight.  It  is  not  however  enough  to  show  this
       decision to be  necessary  in  a  democratic  society;  it  does  not
       outweigh the particular and exceptional factors in this case. I  find
       there to be a  disproportionate  interference  with  the  Appellant's
       family life and allow the appeal on human rights grounds.




  Decisions


   16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law
       and it is set aside to the extent identified above.  The finding that
       the appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules is preserved.


   17. I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it on  human  rights
       grounds.


   18. I direct that entry clearance be granted as soon as practicable.






                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          19th November 2014
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 2nd October 2014 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Reid
[2] This finding was based, it would seem, on the evidence of the Sponsor
and the hundreds of pages of text message records of communications between
the Sponsor and Appellant since his arrival in the UK.
[3] This was the line of argument supported by the Supreme Court in Quila
in respect of 19-21 year olds, Lord Brown dissenting.
[4] See for instance Lord Wilson at paragraph 7.

