
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/04777/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 February 2017                   |On 2 February 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BDM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Petterson a Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Nicholson of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background


    1. For the purpose of continuity with the determination in  the  First-
       tier Tribunal I  will  hereinafter  refer  to  the  Entry  Clearance
       Officer as the Respondent and BDM as the Appellant.


    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify BDM or any of her family members. This direction
       applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with
       this direction could give rise to contempt of court  proceedings.  I
       do so in order to preserve the anonymity of BDM who is a child.

    3. The Respondent refused BDM's application for leave to enter  as  the
       child of a person present and settled here on 7  January  2015.  Her
       appeal against this was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hindson
       ("the Judge") following a hearing on 6 June 2016.

    4. In summary the Judge found that BDM had established that her  mother
       here had sole responsibility for her  based  on  her  oral  evidence
       which he believed.

The grant of permission


    5. Judge Andrew granted permission to appeal (28 November 2016) on  the
       ground that it is arguable that the Judge erred given the absence of
       supporting documentation.


Respondent's position

    6. Mrs Petterson agreed that the application before me was based on  TK
       (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40, but in reality this was  simply
       a disagreement with the Judge's  decision  as  the  Judge  does  not
       require documentary evidence and made findings open to him.


Discussion

    7. Given the concession made by Mrs Petterson, I am not satisfied  that
       a material error of law occurred as the Judge was  not  required  to
       have documentary evidence and made  findings  open  to  him  on  the
       evidence he did have.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

      I do not set aside the decision.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
2 February 2017
