
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04763/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 March 2015                     |On 16 April 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM


                                   Between

                              mrs UMIT SHERIDAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, Umit Sheridan, is a citizen of Turkey and  her  date  of
    birth is [date] 1981.  She made an application for an EEA family permit
    pursuant to Regulation 12 of the Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2006.

2.   The appellant and her husband, the sponsor, Mr Sheridan, live  together
    in Austria.  The sponsor is a British citizen.  The respondent  refused
    the application in a decision  of  5  March  2014.   This  decision  is
    incomplete.  From the determination of Judge Howard it appears  that  a
    copy of a decision was provided to  the  appellant  on  24  March  2014
    giving reasons for the decision of  the  respondent,  namely  that  the
    respondent was not satisfied that the sponsor is an EU national or that
    he is exercising treaty rights.

3.   The appellant appealed against the decision of the ECO and  the  appeal
    was  dismissed  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Howard,   who
    determined the appeal on the papers at the request  of  the  appellant.
    The Judge in his findings indicated that  he  had  considered  all  the
    material before him although he did not specify what the  material  was
    or what it comprised.  He referred to the appellant having submitted  a
    copy of her  husband's  birth  certificate  and  passport  and  he  was
    satisfied that the sponsor is an EU national and he went on to identify
    the issue as to whether or not the sponsor was exercising treaty rights
    and he found that there was no evidence to suggest  that  he  was.   On
    this basis he dismissed the appeal under the 2006 Regulations.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted to the appellant by  Designated  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Coates in a decision of 3 February 2015.  He
    referred to the appellant's handwritten application for permission  and
    documents  on  the  Tribunal  file  which  are  referred  to   in   the
    application.  He went on to note that Judge Howard had not referred  to
    these documents and he granted permission on  the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that the Judge had not taken into account this evidence.

5.   On 13 February 2015 the parties were  issued  with  directions  by  the
    Upper Tribunal. There was no refusal notice  or  complete  Home  Office
    bundle and directions were made for the parties to file and serve  upon
    the other parties any  documentary  evidence  upon  which  reliance  is
    placed even if that material has been previously served.   No  evidence
    was forthcoming from either party following the direction.

6.   I am not satisfied that the documents referred to by Judge Coates  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant in these proceedings did
    not submit a bundle.  The  documents  referred  to  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal are the  documents  that  the  appellant  submitted  with  her
    application.  I note that at least one of the documents has a  date  on
    it which is post the date of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal
    which was on 9 October 2014.  It is clear that the documents now relied
    upon relating to the sponsor's employment and financial  position  were
    submitted with the application for permission.

7.   The Judge cannot be blamed for failing to take  into  account  evidence
    that was not before him.  There was no evidence  before  him  that  the
    sponsor was exercising treaty rights. The documents that have now  been
    submitted appear to me  to  be  a  residence  permit  relating  to  the
    sponsor, a registration document and  documents  relating  to  property
    ownership and accounts.   There  is  also  a  document  relating  to  a
    company.  Certain words have been translated into  English,  presumably
    by the appellant or the  sponsor,  but  the  documents  have  not  been
    properly translated into English and would therefore require  a  degree
    of speculation by a decision-maker who was not fluent  in  German.   It
    may well be that the documents are sufficient  to  establish  that  the
    sponsor was at the relevant time exercising treaty rights but there are
    no witness statements from either the appellant or the sponsor  and  no
    translation of the documents.   In  any  event,  the  evidence  is  not
    material to the issue which is whether there is  a  material  error  of
    law.

8.   It is of course open to the appellant to  make  a  further  application
    submitting documents to support the sponsor exercising  treaty  rights.
    She would of course  have  to  satisfy  Regulation  9  subject  to  the
    transitional arrangements.  The Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
    (Amendment) (No. 2) Regulations 2013 were amended on 1 January 2014  to
    include a new threshold test to  tighten  the  circumstances  in  which
    family members of British citizens can rely  on  the  ECJ  judgment  in
    Surinder Singh C-370/90.  The judgment has been implemented by  way  of
    Regulation 9 of the 2006 Regulations.

9.   There is no error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The decision to dismiss  the  appeal  under  the  2006  Regulations  is
    maintained.


Signed:  Joanna McWilliam       Dated: 13 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
