
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04233/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Determination Promulgated         |
|On 15th December 2014             |On 16th December 2014             |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 RAZNA BEGUM
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Dhaka
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr M K Mustafa of Kalam solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant appeals a decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  which
         dismissed her appeal against a  decision  by  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer to refuse to issue her with entry clearance as  the  spouse
         of a British Citizen residing in the UK on the grounds that the ECO
         was not satisfied that the  appellant's  marriage  was  genuine  or
         subsisting (paragraph 281(iii) Immigration  Rules)  or  that  there
         would be adequate accommodation without recourse  to  public  funds
         (paragraph 281 (iv)).


      2. Permission to appeal had been granted on  the  basis  that  it  was
         arguable  that  the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   were
         insufficient to justify the conclusion in paragraph 22 of the First-
         tier Tribunal determination that the marriage was not a genuine and
         subsisting marriage.


      3. The First-tier Tribunal heard oral evidence  from  the  appellant's
         spouse  and  submissions  from  both  representatives.  The   judge
         referred to the evidence, both oral and documentary, before him and
         sets out the submissions made. He correctly  directed  himself  (in
         [20]) to the burden and standard of proof  and  the  need  to  take
         cultural aspects into account and made the  following  findings  of
         fact:


               a. There is an age difference of over forty years between the
                  appellant (aged 31) and her spouse (aged 77) [20].
               b. The appellant has been previously married;  that  marriage
                  is dissolved and she has two children from  that  marriage
                  aged 7 and 11 [20].
               c. The current marriage is an arranged marriage [20].
               d. There is evidence that the appellant was  interviewed  and
                  indicated in that interview that she was going to care for
                  her husband; there may be an aspect of this that was  lost
                  in translation and what she really  meant  was  that  they
                  would care for each other.  However  given  the  sponsor's
                  circumstances namely his age and his ill health...it would
                  be reasonable to  conclude  that  the  appellant  will  be
                  acting  as  his  carer  in  the  future.  That   may   not
                  necessarily preclude an assessment that  the  marriage  is
                  genuine and the intentions of the parties is to  care  for
                  each other as husband and wife [21].
               e. The appellant had not sought to bring  her  children  with
                  her [22].
               f. It was implausible and untenable that  consular  officials
                  had told her to delay bringing the children [22].
               g. Although there is evidence of telephone contact and  money
                  remittances  there  is  no  evidence   of   affection   or
                  affectionate rapport [22].
               h. Time spent together in  the  last  three  years  has  been
                  sporadic and minimal [22].
               i. Sponsor has made no  effort  to  ensure  an  appropriately
                  improved marital home [22].
               j. Sponsor made no enquires about possible employment for the
                  appellant to meet her  purported  desire  to  be  able  to
                  provide for her children [22].


      4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge concluded that  overall  he  was  not
         satisfied the marriage was genuine and subsisting [22].


      5. Mr  Mustafa  drew  our  attention  to  the  IDIs  on  "Genuine  and
         subsisting marriages" which set out various  factors  that  it  was
         submitted  were  to  be  taken  into  account  in   assessing   the
         genuineness and subsisting nature of a marriage. We do  not  accept
         that the fact that the appellant does not fall within one of  those
         listed factors means that there is an error of law  in  the  First-
         tier Tribunal determination. Those factors (set  out  in  paragraph
         3.2 of the IDIs) are factors  that,  if  they  exist,  may  require
         further and additional scrutiny. They do not of themselves identify
         that a marriage is or is not genuine and subsisting.


      6. Mr Mustafa submitted that the judge had  placed  inordinate  weight
         upon the age gap, allowing this to infect the findings overall  and
         that to dismiss the appeal on the basis of the age gap  potentially
         amounted to  indirect  discrimination  on  the  basis  of  age.  He
         identified 3(d) above as a conflict upon which the judge had failed
         to reach a conclusion. We  do  not  agree.  The  judge  was  merely
         setting out the evidence he accepted,  namely  that  she  had  said
         this, and that there were possible  different  interpretations.  Mr
         Mustafa submitted that the fact that the appellant chose  to  leave
         her two children in Bangladesh had no bearing on the genuineness of
         the marriage and that the sponsor had said he  wished  to  play  an
         active part in their upbringing.  Mr  Mustafa  disagreed  with  the
         judge's description that the three periods of residence together by
         the couple amounted to only sporadic or occasional cohabitation. We
         consider these were all  matters  that  the  judge  quite  properly
         considered in reaching his decision; that another  judge  may  have
         reached a  different  conclusion  does  not  render  this  decision
         perverse or Wednesbury unreasonable.


      7. Overall we are satisfied,  as  submitted  by  Mr  Duffy,  that  the
         appellant's grounds and submissions are, in essence,  taking  issue
         with the weight placed upon the evidence before the  judge.  It  is
         possible that another judge hearing the same evidence  and  viewing
         the same documents could  legitimately  have  reached  a  different
         conclusion. That this judge placed weight on the age gap; that  the
         sponsor was leaving her children in Bangladesh; that there had been
         no evidence of improving  the  marital  home  or  investigation  of
         possible employment  opportunities  (two  findings  that  were  not
         challenged before us); that they had cohabited for the  periods  of
         time they had and the lack of other  evidence  in  connection  with
         devotion and affection are matters that the judge was clearly  able
         to consider. Taking account of the  age  gap  does  not  amount  to
         indirect discrimination.  The  judge  plainly  looked  at  all  the
         evidence before him and reached conclusions that were plainly  open
         to him. He did not view the evidence through the prism of  the  age
         gap  but  correctly  factored  that  evidence  in  to  his  overall
         assessment.


      8. Although not pleaded before us and although no mention was made  by
         either representative, we have noted that  the  ECO  refused  entry
         clearance not only on the  basis  of  the  genuine  and  subsisting
         nature  of  the  marriage  but  also  on  the  issue  of   adequate
         accommodation. It appears that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  only
         referred to this in passing and then only in terms of part  of  his
         assessment of the genuineness of the marriage.  It  is  plainly  an
         error of law to fail to deal with all issue but  given  the  First-
         tier Tribunal judge had found that the marriage was not genuine and
         subsisting there was, in practical terms, little necessity to  make
         a finding on accommodation. Likewise we make no finding:  there  is
         no error of law in the judge's finding that the  marriage  was  not
         genuine and subsisting.


    Conclusions:


    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


    We do not set aside  the  decision;  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands namely the appeal against the refusal  to  grant  entry
    clearance is dismissed.






             Date 15th December 2014
    Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
