
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04560/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 7th August 2014                              |On 5th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                               MR JITENDRA RAI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Shoeb
For the Respondent:    Mr Richards

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 1st January 1986 is  a  citizen  of  Nepal.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Shoeb.  The Respondent was  represented
    by Mr Richards, a Home Office Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. The Appellant had made  application  for  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom and that application had been refused by the Respondent on  3rd
    January 2013.  The Appellant had appealed that decision and his  appeal
    had been allowed by the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. The Respondent had made application and had been granted permission  to
    appeal that decision and the matter had come before myself in the Upper
    Tribunal firstly to decide whether or not an  error  of  law  had  been
    made.  That hearing took place on 12th June 2014 and an error  of  law
    was found for the reasons outlined within the determination.

 4. The matter came before me to remake that decision.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 5. I firstly noted the documents available to  me  in  this  case.   Those
    documents consisted of:

      i) The Respondent's bundle as before the First-tier Tribunal.

     ii) The Appellant's bundle pages 1 to 36 on  the  index  sheet  to  the
         bundle.

    iii) Appellant's authority's bundle those pages 1 to 288  on  the  index
         sheet to the bundle.

 6. Mr Shoeb and Mr Richards both agreed that there were no issues  arising
    in terms of the facts of the case  and  Mr  Shoeb  indicated  in  those
    circumstances that he only intended to make submissions.

The Proceedings - Evidence

 7. I firstly heard submissions  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent.   It  was
    submitted the Appellant was one of six children who  all  lived  abroad
    and he was well over the age of maturity.  He did not qualify under the
    Immigration Rules and even if one looked outside of the Rules this  was
    not an exceptional case and exclusion was proportionate.

 8. On behalf of the Appellant Mr Shoeb submitted  and  accepted  that  the
    Appellant could not succeed under the Immigration Rules  but  submitted
    that his case was exceptional in particular  relying  upon  authorities
    because the Appellant was the adult son of  a  Gurkha  father  who  had
    never been given the opportunity to settle  after  discharge.   It  was
    further submitted that the Appellant although one of six  children  was
    in  a  different  position  to  them  because  they  were  all  leading
    independent lives and he continued to live in the family  home  and  is
    reliant upon his father  both  emotionally  and  financially.   It  was
    submitted therefore the case merited consideration outside of the Rules
    and it was submitted that family life  was  engaged  and  applying  the
    ruling in  Ghising  that  could  tip  the  balance  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant.  It was said there was no other factors  going  against  the
    Appellant such as criminality or poor immigration history.

 9. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    documents and evidence submitted.  I now provide that decision with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

10. In October 2004 changes were made to the  Immigration  Rules  according
    Gurkha veterans discharged in or after July 1997 the right to settle in
    the United Kingdom with their families bringing them in line with other
    former foreign and commonwealth servicemen.  At the same time a  policy
    outside of the  Immigration  Rules  was  adopted  to  deal  with  those
    veterans discharged before 1997 if they  had  existing  ties  with  the
    United Kingdom.  The policy allowed for the exercise of  discretion  to
    grant application to a dependant of a family unit aged 18 years or over
    and gave five factors for consideration in assessing whether settlement
    was appropriate.  A further policy was introduced  in  2009  indicating
    that children aged over 18 years would not normally have the discretion
    exercised in their favour and they would be  expected  to  qualify  for
    leave to enter or remain under the Immigration Rules in their own right
    or  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR  unless  there  were   exceptional
    circumstances in their particular case.  In 2010 a new policy came into
    force in many ways similar to  the  earlier  2009  policy  although  it
    omitted the five listed factors.

11. That history of policies outside of the Immigration Rules introduced by
    the Home Office, and the fairness or otherwise was  considered  in  the
    case of Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8.   The  Court  of  Appeal  found  when
    specifically looking at the case of adult dependent  children  that  an
    adult dependent child would not normally qualify for  the  exercise  of
    discretion in line with the main applicant and that the normal position
    was that the child was expected to apply  for  leave  to  enter  either
    under the Immigration Rules (paragraph 317) or Article 8 of  the  ECHR.
    It was further said that there was  nothing  objectionable  in  law  in
    having a policy that allowed a decision maker the discretion to  depart
    to have regard to exceptional circumstances.  The court  further  found
    that the purpose of the policy had drawn a  clear  distinction  between
    dependent children under 18 years of age and those who were  over  that
    age and that the policy therefore was not to facilitate the  settlement
    in the  United  Kingdom  of  the  latter  category  unless  there  were
    exceptional circumstances.

12. The court further found that the historic injustice accorded to  Gurkha
    veterans was one of the factors to be weighed  in  the  proportionality
    balancing exercise under Article 8 of the  ECHR  against  the  need  to
    maintain a firm and fair immigration policy.  It was further noted that
    the weight to  be  given  to  that  factor  in  Gurkha  cases  was  not
    substantially less than that which had  been  given  to  other  British
    overseas citizens in earlier historic injustice cases (R  v  Patel  and
    Others [2010] EWCA Civ 17).  The court noted:

         "If a Gurkha could establish that but for the historic injustice he
         would have settled in the United Kingdom at a time when  his  child
         would have been entitled to accompany  him  as  a  dependent  child
         under the age of 18, that was a strong reason for holding  that  it
         was proportionate to permit the now adult child to join the settled
         family and to that extent the Gurkha and British  overseas  citizen
         cases were similar."

    It was therefore for the court to determine if the  historic  injustice
    factor was to be taken into account as  relevant  in  striking  a  fair
    balance in a particular case and that it was wrong to conclude that its
    significance was limited.  The court further noted  that  the  question
    whether an individual adult child enjoyed family  life  depended  on  a
    careful consideration of all the relevant facts of the particular  case
    in reference to one of the First-tier Tribunal  cases  that  they  were
    considering, the court had concluded that no error of law had been made
    where the Tribunal had found that although  the  usual  emotional  bond
    between parent and their children were present the requisite degree  of
    emotional dependence for the purposes of Article 8 was absent.

13. In the case of Ghising  [2013]  UKUT  00567  the  Upper  Tribunal  made
    reference to the  Court  of  Appeal  decision  in  Gurung.   The  Upper
    Tribunal had noted that in Gurung the historic wrong suffered by Gurkha
    ex-servicemen  should  be  given  substantial  weight  in  terms  of  a
    proportionality assessment.  The Tribunal also found  where  Article  8
    was engaged and before the historic wrong the Appellant would have been
    settled in the UK long ago this would ordinarily determine the  outcome
    of the Article 8 proportionality assessment in an Appellant's  favour,
    where the matters relied on by the Secretary of State  consists  solely
    of the public interest in maintaining a firm immigration policy.

14. In other  words  when  conducting  a  proportionality  assessment  with
    competing interests on the one hand being the historic  injustice  that
    would have allowed an Appellant to settle earlier and on the other hand
    the home office duty to maintain a firm immigration  policy,  if  those
    were essentially the  only  competing  features  then  the  substantial
    weight to be  accorded  to  the  historic  injustice  would  place  the
    proportionality exercise in the Appellant's favour.

15. It is conceded in this case  that  the  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
    Immigration Rules.  Accordingly I need to examine his case  outside  of
    the Immigration Rules in terms of Article 8 of the ECHR the basis  upon
    which this case is essentially submitted.

16. The Appellant's application was dated 2nd October 2012 and  accordingly
    I need to look at this application outside of the  Rules  in  light  of
    recent case law which provides guidance as to the  circumstances  where
    an exercise of discretion to comply with the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence
    is appropriate.

17. There have been a number of cases including MF  (Nigeria)  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192, Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640, Shahzad  [2014]  UKUT  85  and  more
    recently MM [2014] EWCA.  Those cases  in  part  use  similar  but  not
    identical language to express a view and the recent case of MM suggests
    that the initial part of the test in Gulshan namely "an  arguably  good
    case" is either unnecessary or surplus  to  requirements.   Whilst  the
    language varies somewhat the aim and  the  route  being  taken  can  be
    discerned.  Where a decision maker has found that  an  individual  does
    not fall within Immigration Rules it  is  necessary  to  consider  that
    individual's case to see whether there  are  exceptional  circumstances
    that would allow that individual to enter the United Kingdom (or remain
    in the United Kingdom) notwithstanding the inability to  meet  specific
    requirements of Rules.  Some of the Immigration Rules  allow  for  that
    individual assessment to be undertaken within the Rules themselves such
    as EX.1.

18. However where a set of Rules is sufficiently prescriptive that it  does
    not allow for any element of discretion then such discretion  needs  to
    take place by an examination of the facts freestanding  of  the  Rules.
    Firstly that is to ensure that the decision  maker  is  compliant  with
    Strasbourg jurisprudence and current thinking.   Secondly  and  perhaps
    more pertinently no set of Rules  however  carefully  and  detailed  in
    their construction can cater for every individual case  which  has  its
    own unique set of facts and common law fairness would tend to direct  a
    decision maker therefore to look beyond a prescriptive  set  of  Rules.
    However the case law indicates naturally, that if  a  person  fails  to
    meet a set of criteria that is nevertheless to be allowed to settle  in
    the United Kingdom then there must be some  compelling  or  exceptional
    circumstances inherent within his own case.  I have also had regard  to
    the cases above relating specifically to the case of Gurkhas.

19. The Appellant's father namely the Gurkha soldier served in the  British
    Army for a period of about fifteen years  including  boy  service  from
    when he was 15 years of age until the age of 30.  He was discharged  at
    that age from the army in 1971.  That is a substantial period  of  time
    ago.

20. The Gurkha father and his wife remained in Nepal from 1971 until  their
    settlement in the UK in 2010.  The decision to settle in the UK was not
    compulsory but a decision voluntarily undertaken by the  Gurkha  father
    and his wife and a decision taken in light of knowledge  of  their  own
    personal and family circumstances which clearly they would know  rather
    better than either myself or any other decision maker.  At the time  of
    his discharge from the army in 1971 it would seem that the  father  had
    two children born in 1969 and 1971 namely Mrs Prem Rai  and  Mr  Sukraj
    Rai.  Those adult children live in  Nepal  and  Malaysia  respectively.
    Thereafter the father and mother had four further  children  with  this
    Appellant being the youngest born on 1st January 1986.  Of  those  four
    children the eldest born in 1975 lives in Malaysia, the second born  in
    1979 lives in India, the third born in 1982 lives in  Dharan  in  Nepal
    and the Appellant born in 1986 lives at the family home also in  Nepal.
    On the basis of the father's evidence all  those  children  are  either
    working or married with the exception of the Appellant.   He  lives  in
    the family home where the other adult children were born and brought up
    together with the father and mother.

21. I accept the evidence essentially unchallenged that  he  is  unemployed
    and has a financial dependence on his father  and  mother  in  the  UK.
    There was some reference to the Nepalese culture of  the  youngest  son
    expected to look after the parents.  I do  not  know  whether  that  is
    genuinely a societal norm or how strictly such is applied in  this  day
    and age even if it exists.  If it is a societal norm then it is  within
    the context of Nepal in that if the  parents  had  remained  living  in
    Nepal it might have been expected for him to look after them.  They are
    not living in Nepal having made the  choice  to  come  to  the  UK  and
    therefore such concept even if genuine has  little  relevance.   It  is
    also said within the  father's  witness  statement  that  the  youngest
    daughter, Chandra, born in 1982 is also dependent  and  also  lives  in
    Nepal although involved in study.   There  is  no  application  on  her
    behalf.

22. There is no evidence presented as to why the Appellant alone of the six
    children appears to have remained  both  within  the  family  home  and
    without employment.  As I understand the evidence all six children  had
    been brought up in that family home and as years have  passed  each  in
    different ways have left the family home and have relocated  themselves
    primarily in that area of Asia.  The Appellant who is 29 years  of  age
    on the face of it would appear to have had a similar if  not  identical
    start and upbringing as his other siblings but does not appear to  have
    made the transition that the others have made.

23. The movement of the father and mother to the UK  as  I  have  indicated
    above was as recent as 2010 and at a time when the father  was  in  his
    mid-70's.  It was also a move taken at a time when  they  were  clearly
    aware of the circumstances of their youngest son in terms of  his  lack
    of employment and the fact that he would be left  on  the  face  of  it
    alone in the family home.  That did not deter them from settling in the
    UK despite having lived for 45 years in Nepal and making the move at  a
    relatively late stage in  their  lives.   It  is  not  unreasonable  to
    presume that in terms of the welfare of their son they would  not  have
    made the move if they had any real concerns.  It could not be said that
    settlement of their son in the UK would automatically follow  nor  that
    in any event there would  not  be  a  delay  in  that  occurring.   The
    Appellant is 28 years old and  there  is  no  evidence  indicating  any
    medical difficulties or concerns.  Whilst he has a  reliance  upon  his
    parents for income that does not place him in  any  particular  unusual
    category either within this country or internationally.  The concept of
    emotional dependence beyond the normal  that  can  be  assumed  between
    parents and adult children is not easy to quantify.  However as I  have
    indicated above the willingness  of  the  parents  to  leave  when  set
    against all the factors referred to above is some indication that  they
    viewed their son  to  be  able  to  exist  independently,  emotionally,
    physically or otherwise so long as he was provided with money unless or
    until he obtained employment or gained financial  independence  through
    some other means.

24. This is not a case where at the time the father retired from  the  army
    the Appellant was a dependent  child  and  therefore  would  have  been
    entitled to settle in the UK with his parents but for  that  historical
    position.  It is also  not  a  case  where  the  Appellant's  remaining
    siblings adult or otherwise have settled in the UK  and  his  exclusion
    would therefore place him outside of the extended family.  It  is  also
    not a case where the Appellant in terms of family  is  alone  in  Nepal
    given that he has two sisters one of  whom  is  married  with  her  own
    family.

25. Finally it is  not  a  case  where  the  Appellant  has  any  evidenced
    difficulties, mental or physical, that would indicate a need for him to
    be with his parents.

26. In terms of looking at the separation and the affect upon the parents I
    have not found any indication on balance of  a  dependency  beyond  the
    normal family ties and the financial dependency.  In terms of assessing
    any emotional impact of separation on the parents such is  a  difficult
    task but again  their  voluntary  leaving  of  Nepal  and  leaving  the
    Appellant  to  some  extent  assists  in  putting  that   matter   into
    perspective.

27. I have considered firstly whether the  collective  position  of  Gurkha
    adult children is in itself with nothing more a sufficiently compelling
    or exceptional circumstance for consideration outside of the Rules.   I
    do not find  that  what  may  be  described  as  a  class  case  is  an
    appropriate method of approaching that question.  In my view to  comply
    with Strasbourg jurisprudence it is necessary for a decision  maker  to
    look at the individual and specific facts of the case  before  him  and
    the question of compelling or exceptional circumstances must relate  to
    the facts of that specific case.

28. I accept that the fact the Appellant is  the  adult  son  of  a  Gurkha
    veteran is worthy of careful consideration given the historic injustice
    that has been referred to in respect  of  Gurkhas.   In  examining  the
    impact on the family as a whole including the parents it is also worthy
    to note the service afforded to this country by the father for which he
    has my admiration.  There are however no other features  in  this  case
    that render the specific facts of this  case  when  taken  as  a  whole
    sufficiently compelling or exceptional as to  allow  a  departure  from
    normal Immigration Rules.  If the Appellant had been under the  age  of
    18 or had all his other adult siblings settled in the  UK  those  would
    have  been  features  that  would  have  rendered   his   circumstances
    sufficiently compelling to warrant a departure from the  normal  Rules.
    Those factors however do not exist.

29. I have further noted the comments of the Court of Appeal as referred to
    at paragraph 24 of the case of Ghising.  The Court of Appeal said:

         "The flexibility of the exceptional circumstances criterion is such
         that it does not require the historic injustice to  be  taken  into
         account at all.  It certainly does not prescribe the weight  to  be
         given to the injustice if indeed it is to be  taken  into  account.
         The requirement to take the injustice into account  in  striking  a
         fair balance between the Article 8(1) right and the public interest
         in maintaining a firm immigration policy  is  inherent  in  Article
         8(2) itself and it is ultimately  for  the  court  to  strike  that
         balance.  This requirement does not derive from the fact  that  the
         policy  permits  an  adult  dependent  child  to  settle  here   in
         exceptional circumstances."

    That underscores the need to look at each case  on  its  own  facts  in
    determining whether there are exceptional  circumstances  and  that  in
    itself is in  line  with  current  case  law  referred  to  above  when
    considering Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.

30. Whilst not necessarily  an  easy  decision  to  make  for  the  reasons
    provided above I do not find there are exceptional circumstances in the
    Appellant's case such that he should be allowed entry clearance outside
    of the Immigration Rules under the terms of Article 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

31. I dismiss this appeal under the Immigration Rules.

    I dismiss this appeal under the Human Rights Act.


Signed                          Date



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
