
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/04213/2013
     OA/04217/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 2 July 2014                                |On 28th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                    THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE HADDON-CAVE
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                         The Entry Clearance Officer
                                    Cairo
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           nSREN SAMEER HASSAN ALY
                        MASTER AHMED WAEL AHMED OMAR

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Miss S Vidyadharan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of Judge
    Drabu promulgated on 24 March 2014 whereby the judge allowed appeals by
    Mrs Aly and Master Omar against  a  decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer ("ECO") in Cairo refusing them entry clearance as the wife  and
    son of Mr Wael Ahmed, who is present and settled in the  UK  and  is  a
    British  citizen.  For  convenience,  the  appellants  below  are  here
    referred to as the claimant or claimants, and  the  respondent  as  the
    Entry Clearance Officer.

 2. The reason given for the ECO's refusal was that the documents submitted
    with the application for entry clearance were  deficient  and  did  not
    comply with the  Rules.   The  deficiencies  identified  were  (a)  the
    principal claimant had not provided six bank statements as required  by
    the Rules but only three; and (b) she had not  provided  her  husband's
    employment contract but merely a letter of employment and his payslips.
     These were the only  grounds  for  refusal.  The  bona  fides  of  the
    marriage were not challenged nor any other issues raised, for  instance
    on accommodation.

 3.  At  the  hearing,  it  was  apparent  that  the  appellants  filed   a
    considerable number of documents with the notice of appeal.  The  judge
    recorded this in his judgment:

         "4.   At the hearing I asked for view on the appellant's bundle  of
             documents from Miss Dias. Her candid answer was that  she  was
             not in a position to challenge any of the  evidence  that  had
             been presented and which  showed  that  all  the  requirements
             under the Rules had been met. In the circumstances I  did  not
             need to call upon Mr Iqbal to make any submissions, as  I  was
             satisfied  that   the   decision   of   the   respondent   was
             unsustainable.  The  sponsor  had  produced  evidence  of  his
             employment in the UK since 2005 and  this  evidence  had  been
             sent to the respondent with the notice of  appeal.  Also  sent
             was his P60 for 2011-2012,  payslips  from  April  2012  until
             December 2012 and copies of his bank account statements for  a
             one year period - January 2012 to December 2012."

 4. In her helpful submissions for the Secretary of State, Miss Vidyadharan
    has made a simple point which goes to the heart of this appeal,  namely
    that the Rules are the Rules and notwithstanding  the  concession  that
    was incorrectly made on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  at  first
    instance, it was plain that these appellants had failed  to  lodge  the
    correct documentation when making their  entry  clearance  application.
    The concession that was made below by Miss Dias (recorded in  paragraph
    4 of the Determination and Reasons and  recited  above)  plainly,  Miss
    Vidyadharan says, should  not  have  been  made.  The  mere  fact  that
    documents were produced and appended to the notice of appeal which  may
    have fulfilled the entry clearance documentary  requirements  did  not,
    and could not, cure the original defect that the ECO  was  faced  with.
    She further submitted that the  judge  should  not  have  accepted  the
    concession that was made by Miss Dias in the light of the clear  breach
    of the clear non-fulfilment of the Rules. We agree.

 5. It was unfortunate that the judge found himself in the  position  of  a
    concession being made on behalf of the ECO that all of the requirements
    of the Rules had been met when it was quite clear  that  they  had  not
    been. It was, in our judgment, incumbent upon the judge  to  apply  the
    law and not to rely on a manifestly incorrect admission about it.

 6. We are, in these circumstances, in our judgment, bound to set aside and
    remake the decision. We do so and dismiss the appeal  by  Mrs  Aly  and
    Master Omar against the decision of the ECO in  Cairo  on  the  grounds
    that  the  documents  produced  did  not  fulfil  the  entry  clearance
    requirements.

 7. We would finally observe that there is no  reason  why  the  appellants
    should not lodge a fresh application with the requisite documents if so
    advised.

Signed                                  Date 24th July 2014

Mr Justice Haddon-Cave


