

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/04061/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22 December 2015                           |On 8 July 2016               |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                            KAMERON HARRIS DECENA
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No representation; the Sponsor in person
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1     This is an appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Hussain dated 7 July 2015 in which the  judge  dismissed  the
      Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision of 8 January 2014
      to refuse the Appellant entry clearance.

2     The background to the matter is this. The Appellant was  born  in  the
      Philippines on 11 October 1996. His  mother  is  Maria  Theresa  Kinch
      ('the Sponsor'). The Appellant has one  full  sister,  Kamille  Harris
      Decena, born  in  1994.   Their  father  is  Mr  Harris  Decena.   The
      Appellant and Kamille have two  half  sisters,  Kimberly  and  Katrina
      Tolosa, born in 1983, from a previous marriage of the  Sponsor,  prior
      to her relationship with Mr Decena.

3     The Sponsor's relationship with Mr Decena broke down in  around  2005.
      In or around 2010, the Sponsor married Mr Kinch, a  British  national,
      and on 30 August 2010, the Sponsor was issued entry clearance to enter
      the UK as his spouse. The Sponsor has had the  benefit  of  indefinite
      leave to remain in the United Kingdom since 25 February 2013.

4     In 2012, an application was made for entry clearance  for  Kamille  to
      enter the UK under the immigration  rules  on  the  grounds  that  the
      Sponsor had sole responsibility for her upbringing.  That  application
      was refused, and  an  appeal  was  brought  by  Kamille  against  such
      refusal. The appeal proceeded on the papers and was heard on 15  March
      2013 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Herlihy. On  23  March  2013,
      Judge Herlihy dismissed that appeal. There was subsequently an  appeal
      to the Upper Tribunal in relation to that decision, which resulted  in
      a hearing, and the Upper Tribunal  apparently  upholding  the  Judge's
      decision. I have not had sight of that Upper Tribunal decision.

5     On or around 15 October 2013, the Appellant made  an  application  for
      entry clearance under paragraph 297 of the immigration rules  to  join
      the Sponsor in the United Kingdom, on the grounds that the Sponsor had
      sole responsibility for his upbringing.

6     It is appropriate to set out  the  relevant  parts  of  paragraph  297
      HC395 at this point:

           "297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
           leave to enter the United Kingdom as  the  child  of  a  parent,
           parents or a relative present and settled or being admitted  for
           settlement in the United Kingdom are that he: the

           (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany  or  join  a  parent,
           parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:
                 (a) both parents are present  and  settled  in  the  United
                 Kingdom; or
                 (b) both parents are being admitted on  the  same  occasion
                 for settlement; or
                 (c) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom
                 and the other is being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
                 settlement; or
                 (d) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom
                 or being admitted on the same occasion for  settlement  and
                 the other parent is dead; or
                 (e) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom
                 or being admitted on the same occasion for  settlement  and
                 has had sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or
                 (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in  the
                 United Kingdom or being admitted on the same  occasion  for
                 settlement and there are serious and compelling  family  or
                 other considerations which  make  exclusion  of  the  child
                 undesirable and suitable arrangements have  been  made  for
                 the child's care; and
           (ii) is under the age of 18; and
           (iii) is not leading an independent life, is  unmarried  and  is
           not a civil partner, and has not formed  an  independent  family
           unit; and
           (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately  by  the  parent,
           parents or  relative  the  child  is  seeking  to  join  without
           recourse to public funds  in  accommodation  which  the  parent,
           parents or relative the child is seeking to join, own or  occupy
           exclusively; and
           (v) can, and will,  be  maintained  adequately  by  the  parent,
           parents, or relative the  child  is  seeking  to  join,  without
           recourse to public funds; and
            (vi) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for  entry  in
           this capacity; and
            (vii) does not fall for refusal under the  general  grounds  for
           refusal."

7     In a decision  dated  8  January  2014,  the  Respondent  refused  the
      application  for reasons, in summary, as follows:

           (i) An application for entry clearance made by  the  Appellant's
           sister Kamille had been refused on 26 June 2012  on  the  ground
           that the Entry Clearance Officer  was  not  satisfied  that  the
           Appellant's mother had sole responsibility for  the  Appellant's
           sister, and the subsequent appeal had been dismissed.

           (ii) Following an interview with the Appellant and Sponsor on  8
           January 2014, the Entry  Clearance  Officer  asserted  that  the
           Appellant continued to see his father who  had  also  written  a
           letter in relation  to  the  application.  The  Entry  Clearance
           Officer  stated: "I do not  accept  the  emotional  or  parental
           contact will be severed entirely with  your  father  if  you  do
           travel to the UK. For him to have been asked to give consent  to
           you to travel to the UK would indicate that he has some parental
           responsibility for you."

           (iii) There was no indication that the  Appellant's  father  did
           not have any contact with the Appellant.

           (iv) There was little to show that the  Appellant's  mother  had
           sole responsibility for the  Appellant's  upbringing  since  she
           decided to leave the Philippines in 2010.

           (v) There was no evidence of the Sponsor's financial support  of
           the Appellant.

           (vi)  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  satisfied  that   the
           Appellant was not living in serious  and  compelling  family  or
           other circumstances which made the  Appellant's  exclusion  from
           the United Kingdom undesirable.

           (vii)  There  was  no  indication  that  the   major   decisions
           concerning the Appellant's schooling and welfare were being made
           by the Sponsor.

8     The Appellant  appealed  against  that  decision,  the  matter  coming
      before Judge Hussain at the Birmingham Tribunal on 2  July  2015.  The
      Appellant was  not  represented  at  that  hearing,  but  the  Sponsor
      attended and gave evidence in support of the appeal.

9     At paragraph 9 the judge referred to  the  previous  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal  in  relation  to  Kamille  and  stated  that  the
      circumstances then were not materially different  to  the  application
      made today. The judge noted that that decision  was  appealed  to  the
      Upper Tribunal and was heard on  28  October  2013  when  the  Sponsor
      "attended to give oral evidence and to make submissions". At paragraph
      10, the judge suggested that the time difference between the two cases
      was  not  sufficient  to  have  caused  a  material  change   to   the
      circumstances claimed by the  Sponsor.  At  paragraph  11,  the  judge
      directed himself by stating that under the case of  Devaseelan  [2002]
      UKAIT 00702, the findings of the First and Upper  Tribunals  form  the
      starting point of the present appeal. At paragraph12, The  judge  also
      directed  himself  that  Devaseelan  was  also   authority   for   the
      proposition that if the issues and evidence in the  first  and  second
      appeals are materially the same, the second tribunal should treat  the
      issues as settled by the  first  decision  rather  than  allowing  the
      matter to be re-litigated.

10    At paragraph 13, the  judge  held  that  the  issues  concerning  sole
      responsibility for Kamille were no different to those  concerning  the
      present  Appellant  and  the  same  finding  can  be  applied  to  the
      Appellant's case. He held that for the  avoidance  of  doubt,  he  was
      satisfied on the findings of the First and the Upper Tribunal that the
      Sponsor did  not  have  sole  responsibility  for  the  Appellant.  At
      paragraph 14, the judge  held  that  he  gave  little  weight  to  the
      Sponsor's evidence as her credibility was damaged  by  reason  of  the
      fact (set out at paragraph 9) that it appeared to be recorded  in  her
      interview with the Entry Clearance Officer on 8 January 2014, that she
      had asserted that the Upper Tribunal had previously accepted that  she
      had had sole responsibility for Kamille, whereas it had not.

11    At paragraph 15, the judge held that the  Appellant's  father  had  on
      two occasions (in the applications for entry  clearance  for  Kamille,
      and  later  for  the  present  Appellant)  been  prepared  to  provide
      affidavits in support of the applications, thus confirming that he has
      not completely washed his hands of responsibility for his children.

12    In paragraph 16-24, the judge dismissed the appeal in the  alternative
      under Article 8 ECHR.

13    Grounds of appeal appeared to have been drafted  by  the  Sponsor.  In
      granting permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, Designated  Judge
      of the First-tier Tribunal Garratt stated as follows  in  relation  to
      those grounds:

           "The grounds appear to have  been  drafted  by  the  Sponsor  on
           behalf of the Appellant and, in the main, take  issue  with  the
           conclusions of the judge rather than pointing  to  any  specific
           arguable errors of law. However, in the second paragraph of  the
           grounds, it is suggested that the judge was wrong to  apply  the
           Devaseelan guidelines without considering the evidence submitted
           in this specific appeal which are related to a  different  child
           the Sponsor. This point is arguable. It  is  evident,  from  the
           decision, the judge relied heavily upon the decision made in the
           entry clearance appeal by the Appellant's sister which was  sent
           out on 8  January  2014.  This  was  done  without  any  evident
           consideration of evidence produced in  support  of  this  appeal
           which might have shown that the position in relation to the sole
           responsibility issue was not  the  same  to  this  Appellant  as
           opposed to his sister. In paragraph 14 of the decision the judge
           appears to dismiss the Sponsor's evidence for  the  sole  reason
           that she had accepted that she had made an inaccurate  statement
           in  an  ECO  interview  during  the  course   of   the   present
           application. Further, it is also arguable, having regard to  the
           decision of the Upper Tribunal in Mubu and  Others  (Immigration
           Appeals - res judicata) [2012] UKUT  00398 (IAC) that the  judge
           was wrong to apply  the  Devaseelan  guidelines  to  a  decision
           relating to a third-party."

      Judge Garratt granted permission generally.

14    In a Rule 24 response dated 21 October  2015,  the  Respondent  argued
      that the judge had been entitled to  conclude  that,  if  the  factual
      basis that was the same as that relied upon in the appeal  of  Kamille
      and that further the Sponsor had deliberately sought  to  mislead  the
      ECO as to material events in  respect  of  Kamille,  that  these  were
      points that he was entitled to take judicial notice  of  reaching  his
      decision. However, the  Respondent  accepted  that  the  reference  to
      Devaseelan was mistaken and amounted to an error in law. However, this
      was said not to be material, as the findings at paragraph  13  and  14
      were more than adequate to support the judge's decision, and  that  no
      material error of law had been disclosed.

15    Before me, the Appellant was not represent but  the  Sponsor  appeared
      in person, and the Respondent was represented by Mr Avery. I explained
      the procedure to the Sponsor and invited her to provide  any  argument
      she felt appropriate on behalf of her son the Appellant in relation to
      the appeal. She described the whereabouts of her four children, which,
      although not relevant to  the  primary  task  in  this  error  of  law
      hearing, I noted.  (Kimberly was 32 and lived in Manila;  Katrina  had
      now moved to Canada; Kamille, now 21 (who  has  behavioural  problems)
      lived in the family home, with the Appellant, now aged 19.)

16    I invited Mr Tarlow to address me. He relied on the Respondent's  Rule
      24 response,  and accepted that the authority of  Devaseelan  did  not
      apply because the Appellants in the first and second proceedings  were
      different. However, any error was not material.

17    During a reply from the Sponsor, she produced  a  copy  of  the  First
      tier decision of Judge Herlihy which I considered.

18    At the end of the hearing, I indicated that I found  that  there  were
      material errors of law in the judge's decision, and indicated  that  I
      intended to set aside the  decision,  and  to  remit  the  matter  for
      rehearing before the First tier Tribunal. I now provide my reasons for
      so finding.

      Discussion

19    I will not reiterate the whole of the guidelines provided in the  case
      of Devaseelan, but it  is sufficient for present purposes  to  suggest
      that where such guidelines apply, the first  such  guideline  provides
      that the first determination should always be the  starting-point  for
      the findings to be made by a second decision maker. The present  judge
      clearly held that the Devaseelan guidelines  applied,  and  held  that
      there was no so sufficient basis to come  to  a  different  conclusion
      than that made by the  First  tier  and  Upper  Tribunals  considering
      Kamille's appeal, which  was  that  the  Sponsor  did  not  have  sole
      responsibility for her. The present judge held, by extension, that the
      Sponsor did not have sole responsibility  for  the  present  Appellant
      either.

20    I find that the question of whether the Devaseelan principles had  any
      application  to  the present appeal is not as straightforward  as  the
      Respondent appears to indicate in her concession, which was that  they
      did not apply.

21    The headnote of Mubu and others (immigration appeals -  res  judicata)
      Zimbabwe [2012] UKUT 398 (IAC) provides as follows:

           "The principle of res judicata does not operate  in  immigration
           appeals.

           The guidelines set out in Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 00702;  [2003]
           Imm AR 1 are always to be applied  to  the  determination  of  a
           factual issue, the dispute as to  which  has  already  been  the
           subject of  judicial  determination  in  an  appeal  against  an
           earlier immigration decision involving the same parties. This is
           so whether the finding  in  the  earlier  determination  was  in
           favour, or against, the Secretary of State."

22    In that appeal, the appellants had argued that where an issue of  fact
      had been decided in their favour in  earlier  proceedings  before  the
      Tribunal to which they had been a party, that issue was to be  treated
      as res judicata. That proposition was  rejected  by  the  Tribunal  in
      Mubu. I find that the second paragraph of  the  head  note,  seemingly
      giving guidance as to the status of an earlier judicial  determination
      in an appeal against an earlier decision 'involving the same parties',
      is not intended to indicate that the Devaseelan principles apply  only
      to subsequent proceedings if the parties are the same as in the  first
      proceedings before the Tribunal.

23    This is clear from AA and AH v SSHD [2007] EWCA  Civ  1040,  in  which
      the Court of Appeal (by majority, Hooper LJ dissenting) held that  the
      Devaseelan guidelines may also apply to appeals where, notwithstanding
      that there were different parties, there was  a  material  overlap  of
      evidence; see Carnwath LJ,  paras  64-68  generally.  As  to  how  the
      Devaseelan guidelines might be applied in practice in such cases,  see
      Carnwath LJ at 69-70:

           "69 While I do not think it is open to us to depart from  Ocampo
           I would suggest two qualifications, which seem to me  consistent
           with it. First, Auld LJ said that the guidelines are relevant to
           "cases like the present" where the parties are not the same  but
           "there is a material overlap of evidence". The  term  "material"
           in my view requires some elaboration. It recognises I think that
           exceptions to the ordinary principle that factual  decisions  do
           not set precedents (see above) should  be  closely  defined.  To
           extend the principle to cases where there is  no  more  than  an
           "overlap of evidence" would be too  wide,  and  could  introduce
           undesirable uncertainty. In all the cases in which the principle
           has been applied so far, including Ocampo, the claims  have  not
           merely involved overlapping evidence, but have arisen out of the
           same factual matrix, such as the same relationship or  the  same
           event or series of events. I would respectfully read  Auld  LJ's
           reference to  "cases  such  as  the  present"  as  limiting  the
           principle to such cases.

           70 Secondly, in  applying  the  guidelines  to  cases  involving
           different claimants, there may be a valid distinction  depending
           on whether the previous decision was in favour of or against the
           Secretary of State. The difference  is  that  the  Secretary  of
           State was a direct party to  the  first  decision,  whereas  the
           claimant was not. It is one  thing  to  restrict  a  party  from
           relitigating the same issue, but  another  to  impose  the  same
           restriction on someone who, although involved  in  the  previous
           case, perhaps as a witness, was not formally a  party.  This  is
           particularly relevant to the tribunal's comments, in Devaseelan,
           on  what  might  be  "good  reasons"  for  reopening  the  first
           decision. It  suggested  that  such  cases  would  be  rare.  It
           referred, for example, to the  "increasing  tendency"  to  blame
           representatives  for  unfavourable  decisions  by  Adjudicators,
           commenting:

                 "An Adjudicator should be very slow  to  conclude  that  an
                 appeal  before  another  Adjudicator  has  been  materially
                 affected by a representative's error or incompetence..."

           I understand the force of those comments where the second appeal
           is by the same claimant, but less so where it is by a  different
           party, even if closely connected. Although I would  not  exclude
           the Devaseelan  principles  in  such  cases  (for  example,  the
           hypothetical series of cases involving the same family, cited in
           TK), the second tribunal may  be  more  readily  persuaded  that
           there is "good reason" to revisit the earlier decision."

      The present case

24    In the light of that authority, which I note was not discussed by  the
      Judge in the present decision, I find that it was  necessary  for  the
      judge to identify with some care:

      (i)   what evidence was relied upon by the first  Appellant  (Kamille)
           in her appeal, and how the issues in that appeal were determined
           by judge Herlihy; and

      (ii)  what evidence was being relied upon  by  the  present  Appellant
           (Kameron) in his appeal.

25    Neither Kamille nor the present Appellant  were  heard  by  the  First
      tier Tribunal (naturally, they being outside the United Kingdom).  The
      common factor in the two appeals is clearly the evidence given by  the
      Sponsor.

26    It is to be noted that the Sponsor did not give oral  evidence  before
      Judge Herlihy, that appeal being considered on the papers. The present
      judge observed as follows on that issue:

           "It could be argued that the Sponsor  did  not  attend  to  give
           evidence to the first Tribunal whereas she has done so  on  this
           occasion. However, the Sponsor concedes  that  when  the  matter
           went to the Upper Tribunal she did attend, not only to give oral
           evidence but also to make submissions as she has done today."


27    However, it is  not  clear  what  evidence,  if  any  (as  opposed  to
      submissions) the Sponsor actually gave to the Upper Tribunal,  at  the
      error of law hearing of 29 October 2013.

28    In any event, I find that the relevant  distinction  to  recognise  is
      the manner in which the First tier hearings proceeded, not whether the
      Sponsor attended at the Upper Tribunal hearing of 28 October 2013.  No
      oral evidence was heard by Judge Herlihy, whereas  oral  evidence  was
      heard by the present judge. As impliedly suggested by Judge Garratt in
      granting permission to appeal, if the judge has deemed  the  whole  of
      the Sponsor's oral evidence to be unreliable on  the  sole  the  basis
      that it was thought that in her interview with  the  Respondent  on  8
      January 2014 she mis-stated (whether purposely, or  accidentally)  the
      Upper Tribunal's findings, this was clearly  an  inadequate  basis  on
      which her evidence could be rejected. I find that the Judge  erred  in
      law in failing to have proper regard to the Sponsor's oral evidence.

29    Further,  applying AA and AH, I find that the Judge erred  in  failing
      to consider whether there may be a 'good  reason'  not  to  apply  the
      Devaseelan principles and to revisit  the  earlier  decision,  on  the
      basis, for instance,  that  the Appellant, a minor child,  was  not  a
      party to his sister's appeal, did not give evidence in  it,  and  that
      the only live witness in his appeal, did not give live evidence in his
      sister's appeal.

30    Further, I note that there were  other  differences  in  the  evidence
      before Judge Herlihy and the  present  Judge.  Whereas  Judge  Herlihy
      refers at para 5.5 to a Philippine bank account  and finds that it was
      not clear where the money appearing in that account  had  been  coming
      from, the present Appellant had included in his bundle his mother's UK
      bank  accounts,  which  showed  very  many  transfers  to  'Philippine
      Nationa..." (sic) which the Sponsor asserts  are  transfers  that  she
      makes to her bank in the Philippines which her children access there.

31    The Appellant and Sponsor were also interviewed  in  relation  to  the
      present application; something which does not, at least from the  face
      of Judge Herlihy's decision,  appear to have happened in  relation  to
      Kamille's  application.  Other  evidence  before  the  present   judge
      appeared to indicate that the Appellant's father does not even live on
      the same island in the Philippines as the Appellant (see the assertion
      to that effect at question 106 of the application form;  the  father's
      own affidavit, and the interview with the Sponsor, question 47).  This
      evidence does not appear to have been  taken  properly  into  account,
      whether for the purposes of determining whether the  evidential  basis
      of the present application differed  sufficiently  from  his  sister's
      appeal to depart from the Devaseelan guidelines, or at all.

32    Ultimately, I am able  to  agree  with  the  concession  made  by  the
      Respondent in this case in its Rule 24 Response, that  the  Devaseelan
      guidelines should not have been applied in this case, although for the
      rather more detailed reasons that I have set out at paragraphs  26  to
      31 above.

33    Further, I find that, even without the  matter  being  raised  in  the
      Appellant's grounds of appeal, that it is a Robinson obvious error  of
      law  for  the  Judge  to  have  failed  to  direct  himself   in   law
      appropriately  in  accordance  with  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole
      responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 as follows:

           "Sole responsibility" is a factual matter to be decided upon all
           the evidence. Where one parent is not involved  in  the  child's
           upbringing because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned  or  abdicated
           responsibility, the issue may arise between the remaining parent
           and others who have day-to-day care of  the  child  abroad.  The
           test is whether the parent has continuing control and  direction
           over the child's upbringing, including making all the  important
           decisions in the child's life. However, where both  parents  are
           involved in a child's upbringing, it will  be  exceptional  that
           one of them will have "sole responsibility".

      And see also the guidance at paragraph 52 of that decision

           "52 Questions of "sole  responsibility"  under  the  immigration
           rules should be approached as follows:
                 i. Who has "responsibility" for a  child's  upbringing  and
                 whether that responsibility is "sole" is a  factual  matter
                 to be decided upon all the evidence.
                 ii. The term  "responsibility"  in  the  immigration  rules
                 should not to be  understood  as  a  theoretical  or  legal
                 obligation but rather as a practical  one  which,  in  each
                 case, looks to who in fact is exercising responsibility for
                 the child. That responsibility may have been  for  a  short
                 duration in that the present arrangements  may  have  begun
                 quite recently.
                 iii. "Responsibility"  for  a  child's  upbringing  may  be
                 undertaken by individuals other than a child's parents  and
                 may be shared  between  different  individuals:  which  may
                 particularly arise where  the  child  remains  in  its  own
                 country whilst the only parent involved in its life travels
                 to and lives in the UK.
                 iv. Wherever the parents are, if both parents are  involved
                 in the upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional that
                 one of them will have sole responsibility.
                 v. If it is said that both are not involved in the  child's
                 upbringing, one of the indicators for that will be that the
                 other has abandoned or  abdicated  his  responsibility.  In
                 such cases, it may well be  justified  to  find  that  that
                 parent no longer has responsibility for the child.
                 vi. However, the issue of sole responsibility is not just a
                 matter between the parents. So even if there  is  only  one
                 parent involved in the child's upbringing, that parent  may
                 not have sole responsibility.
                 vii. In  the  circumstances  likely  to  arise,  day-to-day
                 responsibility (or decision-making) for the child's welfare
                 may necessarily be shared with others (such as relatives or
                 friends) because of the geographical separation between the
                 parent and child.
                 viii. That, however, does not  prevent  the  parent  having
                 sole responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.
                 ix. The test is, not whether  anyone  else  has  day-to-day
                 responsibility,  but  whether  the  parent  has  continuing
                 control and direction of the child's  upbringing  including
                 making all the important decisions in the child's life.  If
                 not, responsibility is shared and so not "sole".

34    Any decision as to what roles the  Sponsor,  the  Appellant's  father,
      and his older sisters may have had in the Appellant's upbringing, must
      be made bearing that  guidance  in  firmly  mind,  in  particular  the
      question raised at para 52(x): the test is, not  whether  anyone  else
      has day-to-day responsibility, but whether the parent  has  continuing
      control and direction of the child's upbringing including  making  all
      the important decisions in the child's life.  In making a finding that
      the Appellant's  father  had  'not  completely  washed  his  hands  of
      responsibility for his children' by dint of his  act  of  writing  two
      letters (which, somewhat ironically, were to the effect that he washed
      his hands of any responsibility towards this children)  suggests  that
      the Judge failed to have the guidance in TD Yemen in mind.

      Decision

35    I therefore find that the First tier decision involved the  making  of
      material errors of law.

36    I set aside the decision of the Fist tier. No  findings  of  fact  are
      retained from the decision.

37    I find that the degree of fact-finding that will be required  for  the
      present appeal to be remade is of a degree that the matter is suitable
      for  remittal  to  the  First  tier  Tribunal,  for  determination  in
      accordance with the legal issues set out in this decision.

38    Given the complexity and history of this appeal, the Sponsor is
      encouraged to give serious consideration to obtaining legal
      representation for the remitted hearing.

39    The Upper Tribunal regrets the time taken to produce the present
      decision.


Signed:                           Date: 6.7.16

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan





