
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04018/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8th September 2016                         |On 16th September 2016        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                 MASTER S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As this case
involves a minor, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, S A is a minor citizen of Pakistan whose date  of  birth
    is 7th May 2014.  He appeals with  permission  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    against the First-tier Tribunal (Judge McKenzie) which  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 8th February  2016  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal to grant him entry clearance as  the  child  of  a
    refugee, under paragraph 352D of the Immigration Rules. The date of the
    Respondent's decision is 14th January 2015.

 2. Neither the Entry Clearance Officer, nor the First-tier Tribunal,  were
    satisfied that the Appellant is related as claimed to his parents.

 3. When the appeal came before  the  FtT,  the  judge  took  into  account
    documentary evidence which included a family  registration  certificate
    naming the Appellant as his parents' child.  A copy  birth  certificate
    was also produced although there is nothing to show that the judge took
    that into account.  There was also produced (without objection)  mobile
    phone evidence from the  Appellant's  father  showing  the  Appellant's
    passport which also named him as the child of his parents.   There  was
    an understanding it would seem, that the Appellant could submit further
    evidence posthearing.  The decision  however  is  unclear  as  to  what
    timescale was set out for that evidence to be submitted.

 4. A great deal of the hearing before the FtT turned on  the  question  of
    DNA evidence.  It  seems  that  this  concept  was  introduced  by  the
    Presenting  Officer  in  cross-examination.   The  Appellant's   father
    intimated that he and his wife were more than willing  to  provide  DNA
    sampling.  They had not thought it was necessary in view of  the  other
    documentary evidence which was available.

 5. The judge in her consideration gave adverse weight to the lack  of  DNA
    evidence but gave no consideration to adjourning the  matter  for  that
    evidence to be obtained. She dismissed the appeal.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by UTJ Grubb on 19th August 2016.   In
    the interim period between the FtT hearing and the grant of permission,
    DNA testing was carried out on the  Appellant  and  his  parents.   The
    result of the  DNA  testing  was  forwarded  to  the  Tribunal  on  2nd
    September under cover of Thompson & Co Solicitors' letter of that date.
     It was accompanied by  an  application  under  Rule  15(2A)  for  that
    evidence to be admitted at the hearing before me.

Error of Law/UT Hearing

 7. Mr Hussain appeared for the Appellant; Mr  Duffy  for  the  Respondent.
    Unfortunately, Mr Duffy had not been served with  a  copy  of  the  DNA
    testing.  Arrangements were made for him to be shown the results of the
    DNA testing and very sensibly he accepted that there was  no  objection
    to this evidence being admitted. He also accepted  that  this  evidence
    changed the complexion of the appeal.  In the circumstances I  did  not
    need to hear from Mr Hussain.

 8. The DNA evidence shows that the probability  of  Master  SA  being  the
    biological child of his claimed parents is 99.9% more likely than  not.



 9. I find therefore that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
    aside  for  error.  The  Appellant  should  have  been   afforded   the
    opportunity to provide DNA sampling in view of his  parents  indication
    at the hearing that they were willing to provide the same. Whilst it is
    correct that there is no way that  the  ECO  could  have  foreseen  the
    result of that testing, it would have provided persuasive  evidence  to
    back the assertion  that  the  documentary  evidence  relied  upon  was
    credible. I hereby remake the decision remake  the  decision,  allowing
    the Appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dated  8th  February  2016  is  set
aside.  I remake the decision allowing the appeal of Master S A against  the
Entry Clearance Officer's decision of 14th January 2015 refusing  him  entry
clearance for family reunion purposes.

There was no fee award as the Appellant was fee exempt.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  this  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     15 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
