
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04560/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th February 2015                          |On 13th March 2015            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                            miss Sasha Rene finch
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. G. Hodgetts of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of New Zealand born  on  11th  January  1996
    and is therefore aged 19 years.  She appeals against a decision of  the
    Respondent dated 20th March 2014 to refuse her  application  for  entry
    clearance as the  child  dependant  of  a  representative  of  overseas
    business pursuant to paragraph  197  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   Her
    appeal was allowed at first instance by First-tier Tribunal Judge Perry
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 21st October  2014  under  Article  8.   The
    Respondent appeals with leave against that decision but for the sake of
    convenience I will continue to refer to the parties as they were  known
    at first instance.

2.   The Appellant submitted her application online on  24th  February  2014
    when she was already over 18.  She wished to join her  parents  in  the
    United  Kingdom.  Her  father,  Mr  Finch's  application  as   a   sole
    representative for a business entity "Beef and Lamb New Zealand" (which
    is  owned  outright  by  the  New  Zealand  Sheep  and   Beef   Farmers
    Association) was granted by the Respondent and her mother  Mrs  Finch's
    application was granted in line with that as his dependant.

Immigration Law and Rules relevant to the Appellant

3.   Paragraph 197 sets out the requirements for limited leave to enter  the
    United Kingdom as the child of a parent who himself has  limited  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom.  The child must be under the age of 18
    (sub paragraph (ii)) and not leading an independent life, is  unmarried
    and not a civil partner and has not formed an independent  family  unit
    (iii) and can be accommodated and maintained without recourse to public
    funds (iv) and will not stay beyond any period of leave  granted  to  a
    parent (v).  The burden of establishing that the  requirements  of  the
    paragraph are met rests upon the Appellant and the standard of proof is
    the usual civil standard of balance of  probabilities.   The  Appellant
    has also claimed that the refusal  of  the  application  breaches  this
    country's obligations under Article 8 (right to respect for private and
    family life) of the Human Rights Convention.  The burden  and  standard
    of proof of establishing this equates with the burden and  standard  of
    proof under the Immigration Rules.

The Respondent's Decision

4.   The Respondent refused the application stating:

     "You have applied for entry clearance to come to the United Kingdom  as
         the dependant of your father who is to be the  sole  representative
         in the UK of Beef and Lamb New Zealand.  Your date of birth is 11th
         January 1996 and therefore you are over 18  at  the  time  of  your
         application.  In the light of the above I am not satisfied that you
         are under the age of 18 or have current leave to enter or remain in
         this capacity as required by paragraph 197(ii)."

5.   The Appellant's appealed against this decision  arguing  that  she  was
    entirely dependent on her parents and had no independent means  or  any
    accommodation of her own.  She was unemployed.  The question of age was
    an arbitrary figure, it did not demonstrate that she had  the  maturity
    and wherewithal to live on her own without her parents.  She was not  a
    settled individual living an autonomous lifestyle.  Her  existence  was
    inextricably linked with her parents.

6.   Under work permit Rules, dependent applicants over the age  of  18  are
    entitled to a concession if they can demonstrate that they are entirely
    dependent  on  the  main  applicant  and  not  intending  to  lead   an
    independent life.  There was internal guidance to entry clearance staff
    in handling applications that as a concession outside the  Rules  Entry
    Clearance Officers had the  discretion  to  issue  entry  clearance  to
    children over the age of 18 provided that the work permit holder is  an
    intra-company transferee who has been posted to the UK by  his  or  her
    employer and the applicant is genuinely dependent on  the  work  permit
    holder.  It was argued that this provision  should  also  be  used  for
    those applicants who apply for a sole representative visa (as Mr  Finch
    had done) since they are transferring by their overseas employer to set
    up operations in the UK.  A review by the Entry Clearance  Manager  did
    not accept that the decision to  refuse  the  requested  visa  breached
    Article 8.

The Proceedings at First Instance

7.   The Judge was told that the  Appellant's  father's  application  for  a
    sponsorship licence was not approved  until  4th  February  2014.   The
    delay was due to Mr Finch receiving a  compliance  visit  from  the  UK
    sponsorship compliance team to ensure that the UK office of New Zealand
    Beef and Lamb had in place adequate human resources systems  to  employ
    overseas nationals.  The Judge  heard  evidence  from  the  Appellant's
    mother and submissions from the representatives.  It was conceded  that
    the Appellant could not satisfy paragraph 197(ii) as she had turned  18
    by the time she made her application, but the decision breached Article
    8.

8.   Beef and Lamb New Zealand initially sought  to  bring  the  Appellant's
    father to the UK via an application  under  Tier  2.   The  application
    needed to be started with an application for a Tier 2  Sponsor  licence
    which began in November 2013.  Had  the  application  for  the  Tier  2
    Sponsor licence been dealt with correctly and in a timely fashion,  the
    Appellant's application as a dependant  of  a  Tier  2  applicant  (her
    father) would have been made before the Appellant attained the  age  of
    18 years.  This was not possible as the Tier 2 approval to  her  father
    was only finally granted on 4th February.  It was  contended  that  the
    Home Office's initial  refusal  of  the  Tier  2  application  on  29th
    November 2013 was wrong.  Had the  application  been  granted  at  that
    stage a Tier 2 dependent's application could have been  made  prior  to
    the Appellant's 18th birthday.

9.   The Judge found that the appeal failed under paragraph 197(ii).   There
    was no discretion which could be exercised on appeal as the wording  of
    the paragraph made it clear that the requirements "are to be met".  The
    Judge thereafter went on to consider Article 8.  He  found  that  there
    were two principle issues to  be  considered.   The  first  related  to
    efforts by the Appellant's father to obtain leave to enter under the UK
    sponsorship licence, the second issue, the age of the Appellant and her
    dependency on her family.  The reason for the initial refusal  on  29th
    November 2013 to grant a UK sponsorship licence to Beef  and  Lamb  New
    Zealand was that the Home Office stated they were unable  to  ascertain
    the percentage shareholding of Beef and Lamb New Zealand between the UK
    offices and the overseas address.  In fact there  was  no  division  of
    shares.  Beef and Lamb New  Zealand  was  owned  outright  by  the  New
    Zealand Sheep and Beef Farmers.  If the Respondent  had  properly  read
    the evidence contained with the  application  for  the  UK  sponsorship
    licence the UK offices should have been approved as clear evidence  was
    submitted showing the link between the two overseas offices.

10.  Had this application not been wrongly refused it would  not  have  been
    necessary for the Appellant's father to  proceed  with  an  application
    under the sole representative visa category.  Beef and Lamb New Zealand
    would have been granted their sponsorship licence and they  would  have
    been able to sponsor the Appellant's father and in turn he  would  have
    been able to bring his daughter in under the age of 18.  The Judge felt
    this was a point but not a strong point.  The  primary  obligation  was
    upon the applicant for a sponsorship licence to make their case to  the
    Home Office and to make the links in the case being presented.  It  was
    not for the Home Office to scrutinise the application for  evidence  of
    such links.  The main responsibility lay with Beef and Lamb New Zealand
    and New Zealand Sheep and Beef Farmers to show the  links  between  the
    two entities, but the responsibility was not  on  the  Home  Office  to
    enter into correspondence about the  apparent  vagueness  of  the  link
    between the two entities in advance of a decision being made.

11.  The Judge continued at paragraph 46:

     "That said in considering the issue of what is proportionate  in  terms
         of the Razgar test it is reasonable for the father to contend  that
         the thrust of the application was to show  links  between  the  two
         organisations and the substantial documentation that  was  attached
         to the application for the UK sponsorship licence stands in support
         of such contention".

12.  The second issue, namely the question of dependency,  brought  together
    two  linked  matters.   The  timing  of  the  UK  sponsorship   licence
    application and the age of the Appellant.  The UK  sponsorship  licence
    application was submitted on 26th November 2013 and refused three  days
    later on 29th November 2013.  A further application was made  almost  a
    month later on 22nd December 2013  and  was  finally  approved  on  4th
    February 2014.  The delay was due to the compliance visit.   Only  this
    human  resources  issue  delayed  the  second  application.   That  was
    relevant to the issue of proportionality.  The Appellant's  father  had
    made all reasonable despatch, both in relation to the submission of the
    documents on the second occasion to the Home Office Sponsor  Management
    Unit, and secondly, when it became apparent that the  Appellant's  18th
    birthday would affect her status, steps were taken to apply under  Rule
    197(ii).

13.  The Appellant's  parents  had  delayed  their  arrival  in  the  United
    Kingdom to stay in New Zealand whilst she put in an application  for  a
    Tier 5 Youth Mobility Scheme visa (which was approved and  I  was  told
    the Appellant has since entered the United Kingdom  under  that  visa).
    The Appellant felt  that  the  whole  process  of  applying  for  entry
    clearance had taken an emotional toll upon her and she did  not  attend
    to give evidence at the hearing.  Her present employers would not  give
    her time off to attend the hearing.  The Judge found that although  the
    Appellant was aged more than 18 she  was  financially  and  emotionally
    dependent upon her parents.  This meant that the issue to be determined
    was whether the interference was proportionate to  the  legitimate  end
    being sought.

14.  The Judge concluded at paragraph 51:

     "I am satisfied and so find that the father made quite  reasonable  and
         conscientious efforts to meet the requirements of  the  information
         to be provided in support of his application for a  UK  sponsorship
         licence.  Whilst accepting that he fell short of  establishing  the
         necessary outright share ownership  of  the  two  organisations  he
         nevertheless made thorough and well-intentioned  attempts  to  meet
         the requirements of the licence qualification.  I am also satisfied
         and so find that the Appellant is a dependant of her parents,  both
         in financial and economic terms, and finally the period of 25  days
         between the Appellant's 18th  birthday  and  the  approval  of  the
         second UK sponsorship licence is insufficiently significant to make
         her refusal to enter the UK proportionate.   Taking  these  matters
         together I find that it would be disproportionate to the legitimate
         public end that is sought to refuse her entry to the UK".

    He allowed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

15.   The  Respondent  appealed  against  that  decision  arguing  that  the
    Appellant's application was governed by the provisions of Part 8 of the
    Immigration Rules as enunciated in Appendix FM.  By  finding  that  the
    period of 25  days  between  the  Appellant's  18th  birthday  and  the
    approval  of  the  second  UK  sponsorship  licence   application   was
    insufficiently significant to make the refusal proportionate, the Judge
    was in effect relying on a near-miss argument.  That had been  rejected
    in the case of Patel [2013] UKSC 72.   "A  near-miss  under  the  Rules
    cannot provide substance to a human  rights  case  which  is  otherwise
    lacking in merit".

16.  The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chambers on 18th November 2014.  In  granting
    permission to appeal he wrote:

     "The grounds seeking permission contend the Judge erred  in  not  first
         considering Appendix FM, not giving reasons for considering Article
         8 and in finding the Appellant was just 25  days  out  of  time  in
         making her application before her 18th birthday, in effect  relying
         on a near-miss.  The grounds are arguable".

17.  Following the grant of permission the Tribunal issued  directions  that
    the parties should prepare for the forthcoming  hearing  on  the  basis
    that if the Upper Tribunal decided to set aside  the  determination  of
    the First-tier Tribunal any further evidence,  including  supplementary
    oral evidence that the Upper Tribunal might  need  to  consider  if  it
    decided to remake the decision, can be so considered at that hearing.

18.  The Appellant's representatives filed a skeleton argument ahead of  the
    hearing before me which argued that the determination of the First-tier
    disclosed no error of law.  The second application for sponsorship  was
    also made before the Appellant attained the age of  18  years  and  was
    successful, but it was only decided and approved (after a delay) on 4th
    February, that is after the Appellant's 18th birthday.  The  Judge  had
    looked at the extent to which paragraph 197 was satisfied.  Section  E-
    ECDR (entry clearance as a dependent relative) of Appendix FM could not
    apply to the Appellant since her father was  neither  British  nor  had
    indefinite leave to remain or refugee status.

19.  Where the Immigration  Rules  did  not  provide  a  complete  code  for
    assessing Article 8 applications, the  proportionality  test  would  be
    more at large guided by the Huang test and the UK and  Strasbourg  case
    law (MM [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985).   In  this  case  the  proportionality
    assessment was more at large.  There was no requirement to  search  for
    all potential Immigration Rules to use as a yardstick by which to  test
    the proportionality of the refusal of entry clearance.  It sufficed  to
    consider the Rules under which the application was  made  and  refused.
    Paragraph 197 was thus only  a  starting  point  for  consideration  of
    Article 8.  The Rules were the beginning and not the end of the matter.
     The mere fact that  one  Tribunal  had  reached  what  might  seem  an
    unusually generous view of the facts of a particular case did not  mean
    that it had made an error of law.  One  had  to  consider  the  overall
    impact on the individuals concerned when balanced against  the  state's
    interest.  This was what the First-tier Tribunal had done.

20.  The First-tier decision could not be interpreted as  adopting  a  near-
    miss approach.  The Tribunal had made reference to a range  of  factors
    which it had taken into account in assessing the proportionality.   The
    Judge had said "Taking these matters together I find that it  would  be
    disproportionate to the legitimate public end that is sought to  refuse
    her entry to the United Kingdom".  The Judge had considered the history
    of the application prior to the Appellant's 18th  birthday,  had  taken
    into account the legitimate aim of protecting the economic interests of
    the state, the impact and emotional toll of refusal  on  the  Appellant
    and the only basis of refusal was the age issue.   Thus  the  case  was
    distinguishable from Haleemudeen.  The Tribunal  had  not  allowed  the
    appeal on account of a narrow margin, but  had  pointed  out  correctly
    that the state's interests by  imposing  an  age  restriction  was  not
    damaged by the Appellant tipping over the relevant  age  limit  on  the
    facts of the particular case and that the Appellant retained  the  same
    level of dependency, both before and  after  her  18th  birthday.   The
    purpose of paragraph 197 was to facilitate family cohesion of those who
    the Immigration Rules deemed  economically  attractive  to  the  United
    Kingdom by not  excluding  family  members  who  were  emotionally  and
    financially dependent on the principle.  A failure to allow  dependency
    under paragraph 197 could dissuade principles from  being  economically
    active in this country to the United Kingdom's benefit.  On  the  facts
    of this case the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom was  just  as
    much protected as it would have been if the Appellant  had  been  under
    the age of 18.



The Hearing Before Me

21.  For the Respondent it  was  argued  that  the  relevant  date  for  the
    Article 8 assessment was the date of decision of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer which was 20th March 2014.  The Judge had made no reference  to
    the requirements of  the  Rules  such  as  Appendix  FM  which  he  had
    misunderstood. That had flawed  his  proportionality  exercise.   Adult
    dependent relatives could enter the  United  Kingdom,  for  example  in
    medical or care cases.  These were rare cases and did not  apply  here.
    Adult entry  could  only  be  permitted  where  there  were  compelling
    circumstances.  There was no lacuna in the Rules.  The  Respondent  did
    not anticipate that an adult dependent relative would enter in anything
    other than extreme circumstances.  The Judge could not use Article 8 to
    make a free-ranging assessment.  The Immigration Rules were  more  than
    just a starting point.  The Judge had taken  matters  as  a  near-miss.
    What the Judge had done was to use Article 8 to rewrite the Rules.  The
    Appellant's application for a  Tier  5  visa  was  successful  and  the
    Appellant was able to obtain it and use it to enter the United Kingdom.



22.  At this point I queried with Counsel for the Appellant why if that  was
    the case the Appellant was pursuing her opposition to the  Respondent's
    appeal against Judge Perry's decision.  The  Appellant's  argument  was
    that she made her application under paragraph 197, and if that had been
    successful the family would have been kept together and  the  Appellant
    would have been granted three years' leave to remain in line  with  her
    parents.  She would then be able to enter university to study,  but  at
    the present time could not obtain a  degree  because  no  course  would
    accept her.  She thus had practical  reasons  for  pursuing  her  entry
    clearance application.

23.  In reply the Presenting Officer argued that the appeal  had  become  an
    artificial exercise.  Article 8 was not designed to  enable  people  to
    choose where to carry on their family life.  The separation  of  parent
    and child in this case would be a result of  their  choice.   Paragraph
    197 did not sit in isolation but was now within Appendix FM.   One  had
    to ask what was the interference caused by the Respondent's decision in
    this case.

24.  In response for the Appellant Counsel relied on his  skeleton  argument
    which I have summarised above.  The purpose of  the  paragraph  was  to
    facilitate the admission of economic reactive people by admitting their
    family members.  Section ECDR of Appendix FM was far removed  from  the
    facts of this case.  That was to facilitate sick relatives.  It was not
    concerned with facilitating whole family groups.  The Judge  was  right
    to focus on the Rules as the starting  point  for  his  proportionality
    exercise.  It had not been argued at the hearing at first instance that
    it was a core concept of Article 8 that one could not choose  where  to
    enjoy family life.  The  delay  in  finally  granting  the  sponsorship
    licence application was outside the control of the  Appellant  and  her
    family.  The paragraph 197 application had been made thereafter because
    that had a relevant criteria.  That had taken the history into account.
     The Judge had looked at the facts of the case that the  Appellant  was
    part of the family and taken into account the toll that the process had
    had on the Appellant.

25.  The Presenting Officer argued that the fact that the  Appellant's  case
    came nowhere near to the criteria set out in section ECDR did not  help
    the Appellant.  Haleemudeen was a binding authority  on  the  Tribunal.
    There  was  no  concession  of  what  the  public  interest  was.   The
    application made for the sponsorship licence had been made  very  close
    to the Appellant's 18th birthday.  There was nothing to guarantee  that
    it would be considered before the Appellant  attained  the  age  of  18
    years.

26.  As it was intended that this should  be  a  rolled-up  hearing  in  the
    event that I found an error of law, I asked Counsel for  the  Appellant
    whether there was any further evidence that the Appellant would wish to
    call in the event that an error of law was found.  Counsel replied that
    there would be no further  evidence  as  reliance  was  placed  on  the
    findings made by Judge Perry at first instance.  The Respondent's  main
    complaint in this case was that the Judge had  not  mentioned  Appendix
    FM, but it was difficult to see how that  was  relevant.   All  matters
    should be considered in the round.

Findings

27.  The Appellant could not satisfy the Rules  in  this  case  as  she  had
    submitted her application for entry clearance under paragraph 197 after
    she had attained the age of 18 years.  Whilst I appreciate the argument
    that there  had  been  delay  by  the  Respondent  in  considering  the
    application, it is also fair to point out that the  Appellant's  father
    had in any  event  been  cutting  things  rather  fine  by  making  the
    application for the sponsorship licence in November, two months  before
    the Appellant was due to become 18.  There can of  course  be  no  such
    thing as a near-miss argument as the Supreme Court made clear in Patel,
    nor was  it  particularly  helpful  to  consider  a  concession  for  a
    different  kind  of  visa  entrant,  namely  the  work  permit   holder
    dependants.  The issue simply was whether the Appellant  could  succeed
    outside the Immigration Rules under Article 8.

28.  It was always going to be difficult for the Appellant to succeed  under
    Article 8 since the reason for the separation was  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's father, accompanied by his wife,  the  Appellant's  mother,
    wished to come to the United Kingdom so that the father  could  be  the
    sole representative for a commercial organisation, Beef  and  Lamb  New
    Zealand.  The disruption caused  to  family  life  was  caused  by  the
    decision of the parents to come to this  country  and  to  leave  their
    daughter behind.

29.  The significance of paragraph 197 is  that  the  Rules  recognise  that
    economically active applicants  will  be  discouraged  from  making  an
    application to come to the United Kingdom if they  cannot  bring  their
    dependants with them.  In a sense therefore the Appellant could be said
    to have lodged her application under paragraph 197 not because it stood
    any chance of success, clearly it did not because she was already  over
    18, but in order to draw attention  to  the  underlying  principles  of
    paragraph 197 which should then translate  into  an  application  under
    Article 8.

30.  The starting point for  an  Article  8  assessment  must  be  that  the
    Appellant cannot succeed under the Rules and is therefore seeking leave
    to enter the United Kingdom outside the  Rules.   That  is  a  powerful
    factor to be weighed in the balance and indeed in many cases it is  the
    end of the exercise.  In this case the Article 8 application  was  more
    nuanced.  I accept the Appellant's point that the Judge did  not  allow
    this appeal on a near-miss basis.  He could not have done so,  but  had
    he done so that would have been a clear error of law and would have led
    to the decision being set aside.  As has been said in other  cases  the
    dependency of a child does not necessarily end at the age  of  18.   In
    this case the  Judge  was  clearly  impressed  by  evidence  that  this
    Appellant had a very strong dependency on her parents and  he  set  out
    with care the evidence that justified that  conclusion.   The  argument
    therefore was not that the Appellant had only just attained the age  of
    18 years and therefore paragraph 197 should apply, but rather that  the
    principles which underlay paragraph 197 were relevant when  considering
    an application outside the Rules.  It is  only  exceptionally  that  an
    application under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules will succeed.
     That has been made clear since the House of Lords decision  in  Huang.
    The question before me was whether the Judge was right in law  to  find
    that this was one such case?  The mere fact that his decision might  be
    characterised as generous does not of itself make it wrong  in  law  as
    the Appellant's skeleton argument makes clear.

31.  The Appellant's argument, in part at  least,  is  that  the  principles
    underpinning paragraph 197 are  just  as  applicable  under  Article  8
    whether or not the applicant is either side of the aged 18 requirement.
     If under 18 the applicant succeeds under the Rules.   If  over  18  an
    applicant must show (as the Appellant in this case did) that there is a
    strong dependency on her parents,  such  that  the  legitimate  aim  of
    immigration control would mean that the interference in the Appellant's
    private and family life was disproportionate.

32.  If the Judge had formed the view that the Appellant was a  more  robust
    individual than was presented  in  the  evidence,  then  the  case  for
    showing an emotional and financial dependency  would  be  significantly
    lessened.  It was clear that the Appellant could not meet  any  of  the
    provisions of Appendix FM for entry clearance as a  dependent  relative
    and has not sought to argue that.  Nor could she  meet  paragraph  197,
    but I find that the Judge did give adequate reasons for explaining  why
    this appeal should succeed outside the Rules.

33.  As was pointed out the assessment of Article  8  had  to  be  based  on
    factors at the date of decision, not the date  of  hearing.   The  fact
    therefore that  the  Appellant  had  subsequently  been  granted  entry
    clearance under Tier 5 and had  entered  the  United  Kingdom  was  not
    relevant to the Article 8 assessment.  It  was  thus  not  an  academic
    exercise  for  the  Appellant  to  pursue  her   appeal   against   the
    Respondent's decision.  There are  in  fact  certain  benefits  to  the
    Appellant if she succeeds under Article 8 rather  than  continues  with
    her Tier 5 visa, but those were not matters of relevance to  the  Judge
    at first instance and as I am dealing with an error of  law  I  do  not
    consider that they are relevant to my decision either.

34.  Since hearing this case the Upper Tribunal has given  further  guidance
    on the approach to Article 8 outside the Rules where (as in this  case)
    the provisions of section  117  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 apply. In the case of Dube [2015] UKUT 00090 the  Upper
    Tribunal stated:


    "... (e) sections 117A-117D  do  not  represent  any  kind  of  radical
    departure from or "override" of previous case law on Article 8  so  far
    as concerns the need for a structured approach. In particular, they  do
    not disturb the need for judges to ask themselves  the  five  questions
    set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  Sections 117A-117D are essentially a
    further elaboration of Razgar's question 5 which is  essentially  about
    proportionality and justifiability.

    (2) It is not an  error  of  law  to  fail  to  refer  to  ss.117A-117D
    considerations if the judge has applied the test he or she was supposed
    to apply according to its terms; what matters is substance, not form. "



35.  In this case I find that although the Judge did not specifically  refer
    himself to section 117A to D of the 2002  Act  he  did  carry  out  the
    balancing exercise with due regard to the public interest  and  I  find
    made no material error of law in doing so.

Notice of Decision

     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and I uphold the  decision  to  allow  the  Appellant's
    appeal against the Respondent's decision to refuse entry clearance.

     Respondent's appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed.

     I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy  reason  for  so
    doing.


Signed this 3rd day of March 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Judge made a fee award of �140.  As I have upheld his decision I  uphold
the fee award


Signed this 3rd day of March 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

