
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/04267/2015
                                                               OA/04270/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th September 2016                |On 22nd September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY


                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD HASNAT
                               muhammad adeel
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel, instructed by Morgan Mark
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Appellants'  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Swinnerton promulgated on 10th February 2016,  in  which
    she found that the Appellants did  not  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006.

 2. In the appeal before me in the Upper Tribunal the Appellants have  been
    represented by Mr Richardson of Counsel and  the  Respondent  has  been
    represented  by  Miss  Fijiwala,  the  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer.

 3. Within her decision which is a  matter  of  record  and  therefore  not
    repeated in full here, Judge Swinnerton noted how  the  two  Appellants
    were nationals of Pakistan  and  how  they  had  appealed  against  the
    decisions by the Entry Clearance Officer Islamabad, in respect  of  the
    First Appellant dated 4th February 2015 and in respect  of  the  Second
    Appellant dated 29th January 2015 to refuse them entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom as family members of an EEA national.

 4. She then considered the ECO's reasons for refusal  as  set  out  within
    those refusal notices  and  noted  how  the  ECO  had  found  that  the
    Appellants had applied to  join  their  Sponsor,  a  Romanian  national
    residing in the UK Monica Mosut who was said to be the married  partner
    of the brother of the Appellants. She  noted  how  the  ECO  originally
    found that he was not satisfied the Appellant's  had  demonstrated  the
    need for financial support provided in order to  meet  their  essential
    needs in Pakistan and the  ECO  stated  that  the  Appellants  had  not
    provided  any  documentation  in  relation  to  their   own   financial
    circumstances  or  documentary  evidence  relating  to  the   financial
    circumstances of their parents with whom they lived  in  Pakistan,  and
    that  therefore  the  ECO  concluded  that  the  Appellants   had   not
    demonstrated  financial  dependency  upon   the   Sponsor   and   their
    applications were refused.

 5. The Judge then in her decision considered the Grounds of Appeal and the
    Entry Clearance Manager's review and in accordance with these notes  of
    the evidence having heard from both Mr Bilal and also from Miss  Mosut.
    She then recorded the submissions made in terms of  the  findings  that
    were made.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge went on to consider and  find
    that she did not consider that the evidence  of  Mr  Bilal  was  either
    credible or consistent and she found that she did not consider that the
    evidence of Miss Mosut was consistent.

 6. She further found at paragraph 50 that she was not satisfied  that  the
    evidence  provided  showed  that  the  money  sent  to   Pakistan   was
    specifically for the financial support of the Appellants, as opposed to
    financial support generally for the family of Mr Bilal and it was found
    that Mr Bilal had not offered any explanation as to why  the  financial
    support to the Appellants did not start in 2010, when  his  father  was
    then unable to work.

 7. The Appellants have now sought to appeal that decision and  within  the
    Grounds of Appeal it was argued that the Judge's findings on dependency
    of the Appellants on there brother Mr Bilal and  his  partner  contains
    material errors of law and it is argued  that  the  decision  was  self
    contradictory and poorly reasoned.

 8. Within the  grounds  of  appeal  the  findings  of  the  Judge  between
    paragraphs 49 and 51 were set out, but it was argued that  the  Judge's
    findings were inconsistent  with  her  own  account  of  the  evidence.
    Examples were given including that  in  paragraph  22  of  the  witness
    statement it was said that Mr Bilal had been supporting his parents for
    the last [more than] three years and in paragraph 24 of the decision it
    was recorded that Mr Bilal stated that he  supported  his  parents  for
    more than three years, but the Judge noted that the support was said to
    have been for the last three years at paragraph 49.

 9. Permission to appeal was  granted  by  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy on 1st August 2016 when he found  that  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal argued that the Judge misunderstood  the  evidence  as  to  when
    financial support commenced and for how long it  continued.   He  found
    that it was arguable that the Judge failed  to  properly  consider  the
    evidence as to when financial  support  began  and  that  it  was  also
    arguable that the Judge failed to have regard to the holistic  approach
    to dependency as indicated by the Upper Tribunal in the case  of  Reyes
    (EEA Regulations - dependency) [2013] UKUT 314 and  on  that  basis  he
    granted permission to appeal.

10. I have also seen and taken account of a Rule 24 reply provided  by  the
    Secretary of State dated 12 August 2016. Although within that  document
    was stated that the Respondent had not had sight of the  determination,
    it was stated that it was open to the Judge to make findings  regarding
    the credibility of the Sponsor, Mr Bilal and Miss Mosut and it would be
    submitted that the Judge considered the evidence carefully.  There  was
    reference to the Judge stating that she had  carefully  considered  the
    evidence at p49, which in fact appears to be a reference  to  paragraph
    49 of the determination, which does indicate that the respondent did in
    fact have sight of the determination, as it is that paragraph the Judge
    does talk about having carefully considered the evidence .

11. In their oral submissions before me it has been argued by Mr Richardson
    on behalf of the Appellants drew my attention to paragraph 49 in  which
    it was stated that:

         "Having considered the  evidence  carefully  I  did  not  find  the
         evidence of Mr Bilal at the hearing to be consistent  or  credible.
         Mr Bilal was not consistent as to the point in time when  financial
         support to the Appellants was said to  have  commenced.  There  was
         reference to that beginning in 2010 and also to it having been  for
         the last three weeks."

12. Mr Richardson said that in fact Mr Bilal had not been  inconsistent  in
    the evidence that he gave and that when  one  considered  the  evidence
    recorded by the Judge at paragraph 22 it was recorded that "he and  his
    partner have been supporting the Appellants for over (more than)  three
    years".

13. The Judge recorded at  paragraph  24  that  Mr  Bilal  in  giving  oral
    evidence before him, in evidence-in-chief, had said that  he  had  been
    supporting the Appellants for more than three years and his father  had
    been disabled for five years.  His  father  had  previously  worked  in
    agriculture and suffered from back pain.  The Judge then made a note of
    the questions asked in cross-examination at paragraph 26 and noted that
    Mr Singh has asked questions  of  Mr  Bilal  and  Mr  Bilal  had  given
    evidence that he was sending money to his father in 2012 and his father
    stopped working in 2010.  He recorded that Mr Bilal that  he  had  been
    supporting his father financially since 2010 and that  the  beneficiary
    of the money transfers had changed from his brothers as his father  was
    unable to get the money due to his mobility problems.

14. In regard to paragraph 49 Miss  Fijiwala  argued  that  the  Judge  was
    entitled to take account of the credibility issue  and  the  Judge  had
    been correct find that there had been an inconsistency in the  evidence
    given by Mr Bilal regarding when the support had started.

15. When one actually looks at the  finding  made  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Swinnerton at paragraph 49 her finding was "There  was  reference
    to that beginning in 2010 and also to it having been for the last three
    years" in respect of when the financial support to the  Appellants  was
    said to have  commenced.  However, that this does not accurately record
    the evidence given by Mr Bilal, that he and his partner been supporting
    the appellants for over (more than) three years and that  he  had  been
    supporting them financially since 2010. A period  of  more  than  three
    years does equate to a period in excess of  three  years,  which  would
    potentially be consistent with the support having started in 2010.  The
    Judge having misquoted the evidence of  Mr  Bilal,  has  not  explained
    adequately, the reason why she found there to be  an  inconsistency  in
    that regard. This does amount to an error in law.

16. As regards to the credibility  of  Miss  Mosut  regarding  the  judge's
    findings at paragraph 51, in that paragraph the Judge stated:

         "I did not find the evidence of Miss Monut at  the  hearing  to  be
         credible.  It is claimed by Miss Monut that  she  has  been  living
         together with Mr Bilal for five years but she was not able to state
         when Mr Bilal started providing financial support to the Appellants
         nor when the father of the Appellants stopped working."

17. In that regard Mr Richardson again argues that in fact there  were  not
    inconsistencies in the evidence given by Miss Mosut and the  Judge  has
    not properly explained her reasoning in that regard.

18. Miss Fijiwala argues in that regard that the Judge was  able  to  reach
    the findings that she made regarding the credibility of Miss Mosut made
    findings which were open to her.

19. Again when one actually considers the evidence given by Miss Mosut  she
    stated as recorded by the Judge that in paragraph 29  of  her  decision
    that she was in a genuine and subsisting relationship with her  partner
    and that they had been living together for more than five years and  he
    also recorded that Miss Mosut and her partner had been  supporting  the
    Appellants for the last [more than] three years.

20. The Judge recorded at paragraph 31 that in cross examination:

         "Mr Singh then asked questions of Miss Mosut who gave evidence that
         she started sending money to the Appellants in 2013  and  that  her
         partner did so beforehand, but that  she  was  not  sure  when  her
         partner had started to do so."

21. In paragraph 32 the Judge recorded that Miss Mosut could  not  remember
    when the father of the Appellants stopped working.

22. The Judge at paragraph 51 said that he did not  find  the  evidence  of
    Miss Mosut to be credible and stated that Miss Mosut said that she  had
    been living with Mr Bilal for five years, but she was not able to state
    when Mr Bilal started providing financial support  to  the  Appellants.
    Miss Mosut clearly had given evidence herself that she and her  partner
    had been supporting the Appellants for more than three years  and  said
    in evidence that her partner did so beforehand. I do not  consider  the
    Judge has fully and adequately explained her reasoning in  that  regard
    in terms of the rejection of the credibility of Miss Mosut. She has not
    adequately explained why, even if Miss Mosut had  been  supporting  the
    appellant for more than three years, that would mean that she should be
    expected to know when Mr Bilal's father stopped  working,  or  when  Mr
    Bilal had himself started to fund the Appellants. The judge's reasoning
    in this regard is not adequate or sufficient to allow the appellants to
    know why they lost, and amounts to an error in law.

23. I raised at the start of the appeal an issue as to whether  or  not  in
    fact the two Appellants would actually satisfy the requirements of  the
    Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006  in  any  event
    given that it is said that at the time they were the  relatives  of  Mr
    Bilal rather than the relatives of Miss Mosut. Seemingly, however, this
    issue was not raised before the First-Tier Tribunal Judge,  nor  is  it
    raised as a reason for refusal within the refusal letter, nor has there
    been any cross-appeal on this basis. Nor is it dealt  with  within  the
    Rule 24 reply. Mr Richardson therefore has not had the  opportunity  of
    taking instructions on the point or making full submissions in  respect
    of that issue, and in circumstances where it was not argued before  the
    First-tier Judge, I do not consider that it is appropriate  for  me  to
    make findings specifically on that point at this stage.

24. I am therefore not in a position to state that the same decision  would
    have been reached had the errors not been made, and therefore I do find
    that the errors do amount to material errors  in  law,  such  that  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton is set aside  and  the
    matter remitted back to the First-Tier Tribunal  for  rehearing  before
    any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Swinnerton.




    Notice of Decision

25. The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Swinnerton  does  contain
    material errors of law and is set aside.  The case is remitted back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be  heard  before  any  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Swinnerton.   No  case  has
    been made for an anonymity order before me and I do not make  any  such
    order.


Signed                                  Date 21st September 2016

R F McGinty
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty

