
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04560/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24 October 2017                       |On 03 November 2017                 |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                Jitendra rai
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                              NEW DELHI, INDIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Jesurum, Counsel instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is the adult  son  of  a  Ghurkha  veteran.   His  appeal
    against refusal of entry clearance was heard originally in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in 2013.  The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid
    was then set aside and remade in the  Upper  Tribunal  and  it  is  the
    decision of the Upper Tribunal which is now to be remade, following  an
    appeal to the Court of Appeal.

 2. On 7 August 2014, the Upper Tribunal set aside the First-tier  Tribunal
    decision and on 5 September 2014,  the  Upper  Tribunal  dismissed  the
    appeal, holding that the appellant did not meet the requirements of the
    Immigration Rules and could not be admitted pursuant to Article 8 ECHR.



 3. The appellant appealed to the Court of Appeal and on 4 May  2017,  that
    Court allowed the appeal. The appeal was remitted for rehearing in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 4. That is how the appeal came before me today.

Section 117B

 5. Mr Jesurum has raised the question of whether Section 117B affects  the
    appellant's position.  I am quite satisfied  that  it  does  not.   The
    appellant has  not  sought  to  breach  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration controls (Section 117B(1)).  He remains outside the  United
    Kingdom, and his parents have at all times been lawfully in the  United
    Kingdom as settled persons such that Sections 117B(4)  and  117B(5)  do
    not bite.

 6. I spend no further time on Section 117B, save to observe that  my  view
    chimes with that expressed by Lord Justice Lindblom at [55]-[57] in the
    Court of Appeal's decision, and in particular at [57]:-

         "57. ...Certainly, if the Upper Tribunal Judge's  determination  is
         in any event defective as a matter of law, which in my view it  is,
         I cannot see how the provisions in Section 117A and B of  the  2002
         Act can affect the outcome of this appeal."

Family life

 7. Mr Deller reminds me that the date of assessment of family life is  the
    date of application, or at the very latest the date of decision by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer and not the date  of  the  hearing  before  the
    Upper Tribunal or any later date.

 8. When considering whether family life exists, I am not to apply  a  test
    of exceptionality:  I am guided by the judgment of Lord Justice Beatson
    in Rai v Entry Clearance Officer, New Delhi  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  320  at
    [61]:

         "61. ... in paragraphs 18 and 26-28 of his determination the  judge
         below appeared to apply a test  of  'exceptionality'  in  order  to
         determine whether family life exists between the appellant and  his
         parents. This is contrary to the  approach  in  the  Ghising  cases
         approved in this court in Gurung's  case  and  what  was  expressly
         stated by this court in Singh v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630.    In  Singh's  case,  Sir  Stanley
         Burnton (with whom Richards  and  Christopher  Clarke  LJJ  agreed)
         stated at [24] that there is no  requirement  of  'exceptionality',
         that all depends on the facts, and that  there  must  be  something
         more than the love and affection between an adult and  his  parents
         or siblings which will not in itself justify a  finding  of  family
         life."

Factual matrix

 9. The undisputed facts were set out by Lord Justice Lindblom in the Court
    of Appeal at [41]-[43]:

         "41. The burden of the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  father  and
         mother in their witness statements, and the appellant's in his, was
         this: that, in consequence of the 'historic injustice', it was only
         in 2010 that his father had been able to apply for leave  to  enter
         the United Kingdom; that his parents would have  applied  upon  the
         father's discharge from the army had that been possible; that  they
         could not afford to apply at the same time as each  other  or  with
         their dependent children [they had six children]  -  the  appellant
         and their daughter Chandra; that the stark choice they had  had  to
         make was either to remain with the appellant and Chandra  in  Nepal
         or to take up their long withheld  entitlement  to  settle  in  the
         United Kingdom; that they would all have applied together  if  they
         could have afforded to do so; that the appellant had never left the
         family home in Nepal, begun an independent family life of his  own,
         or found work outside the village; and that he had remained, as his
         father put it, 'an integral part of the family unit' even after his
         parents had settled in the United Kingdom. ...

         43.  Whether the appellant did enjoy family life  at  the  relevant
         time was, of course, a question of  fact  for  the  Upper  Tribunal
         ...".

    The parties today have confirmed that the  factual  matrix  is  not  in
    dispute.

10. I return therefore to the core  of  the  question  before  me,  whether
    having regard to that factual matrix,  family  life  existed  when  the
    application was made, such that the provisions of  Ghising  and  Gurung
    apply.

11. On the  facts  of  this  case,  and  given  the  appellant's  continued
    financial dependence and the  co-existence  of  this  family  in  Nepal
    before the parents travelled to  the  United  Kingdom  in  2010,  I  am
    satisfied that despite the appellant being an adult  there  was  family
    life between him and his parents and that  accordingly,  following  the
    established line of cases in relation to the historic injustice,  entry
    clearance should have been granted.

Conclusions

12. This appeal is therefore allowed.

13. I direct that entry clearance be granted to enable  this  appellant  to
    rejoin his parents in the United Kingdom.



Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Dated:   1 November 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson








