
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: OA/04844/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 1 February 2016                       |             On 12 February 2016    |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                              MS MALIKA HUSSAN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Ahmed of Law Lane Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan,  appealed  against  a  notice  of
    liability to removal from the UK.   Her  appeal  was  decided,  at  her
    election, on the papers by Judge V Jones sitting at  Birmingham  on  16
    July 2015.  In a decision of 22nd, promulgated on 23rd,  July  2015  he
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted to the Respondent by  Judge  Keki?  on
    12 November 2015 in the following terms:

         "The Respondent challenges the determination of First-tier Tribunal
         Judge V Jones who allowed this out of country  appeal  against  the
         respondent's decision to remove the appellant from the UK following
         her alleged use of  deception  in  obtaining  an  English  language
         certificate.  The appeal was determined on the papers.


         Reliance is placed by the  respondent  on  the  grounds  of  appeal
         submitted with the application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal.  Those grounds argue that the judge was  wrong
         to state that a bundle had not been submitted by the respondent for
         the appeal as the record shows it was forwarded to the Tribunal  on
         15 July 2015 and that it should therefore have been  placed  before
         the judge.  It is also maintained that the  generic  evidence  with
         regard to language certificates from ETS is well  known  to  judges
         and the judge could have adjourned the appeal in order to obtain  a
         bundle.


         Whilst I am less persuaded by the second ground, I am of  the  view
         that the first shows  a  procedural  impropriety  amounting  to  an
         arguable error of law and on that basis  permission  to  appeal  is
         granted."

3.   The error of law hearing before me took the form of submissions,  which
    I have taken into account.

Determination

4.   The complaint of the Respondent is that a Respondent's bundle dated  14
    July 2015 and date stamped as having been received on 16 July  2015  at
    Birmingham, was not before the judge when he considered the  appeal  on
    16 July nor when he  finalised  his  determination  on  22  July  2015.
    Indeed, this bundle had not reached the file by the time of  the  error
    of law hearing, and Mr Whitwell gave me a copy, which  shows  the  date
    stamp.

5.   Judge Jones summarised the position in relation to the evidence of  the
    Respondent thus:

         "7.  No documents were filed on behalf of the respondent.  Prior to
             this  hearing  the  tribunal  wrote  to  the  parties   making
             directions for them to lodge all documents they wished to rely
             on in support of their case.  The first  of  these  (dated  13
             March 2015) directed the respondent to lodge all documents  by
             10 April; the second (dated 28 April) extended that date to 26
             May and the third (dated 1  June)  gave  a  further  extension
             until 27th June.  The respondent has  not  complied  with  the
             directions or otherwise responded to the notices.  The notices
             explained clearly to the respondent that the appeal  would  be
             determined without the documents if they were not received  by
             27 June at the latest.  I have therefore  decided  to  proceed
             with the appeal in their absence.  In considering the matter I
             have taken account of the Secretary of State's response, dated
             24 December 2014, to a pre-action protocol letter  written  by
             the appellant's solicitors  on  15  December  2014  which  was
             included in the appellant's bundle."

6.   Checking the file,  these  dates  are  correct,  except  that  the  two
    references to 27 June should, I believe, have been to 29 June.  Nothing
    turns on this.

7.   As is the  normal  procedure,  none  of  the  notices  to  the  parties
    indicated the date upon which the appeal  would  be  considered.   With
    appeals considered on the papers, this is  inevitable,  because  nobody
    can say on what date there will be  judicial  capacity  to  hear  them.
    Neither party knew that the appeal would be considered on 16 July.   It
    was by chance that the Respondent's bundle arrived on that date.

8.   The issue is whether the fact that  the  Respondent's  bundle  did  not
    reach the file, so that the judge determined the appeal  without  sight
    of  it,  represented  a  procedural  irregularity.   Because   of   the
    chronology, I conclude that it did not.  The  appeal  might  well  have
    been determined at an earlier date.  The Respondent was  in  breach  of
    three successive directions.   There  was  no  procedural  irregularity
    simply by virtue of the Respondent's bundle having been received on the
    same date as the appeal was considered.

9.   This is the only basis  of  application.   I  accordingly  dismiss  the
    application and uphold the decision.

Decision

10.  There was no procedural irregularity, and thus no error of law  in  the
    original decision, which is upheld.

11.  No anonymity direction is made.

Signed
    Dated: 9 February 2016



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis


