
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-nl-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04588/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 July 2015                      |On 26 August 2015                    |
|Prepared 20 July 2015                |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    U S T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CHENNAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Heller, Counsel instructed by Sri Kanth & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Sri  Lanka,  date  of  birth  23  November
    1986, appealed against the Respondent's  decision,  dated  19  December
    2012 to refuse entry clearance as a returning  resident  on  the  basis
    that he had used a false birth certificate in order  to  obtain  a  new
    passport.  The  Appellant  therefore  fell  to  be  refused  under  the
    mandatory provisions of paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration  Rules  HC
    395 (as amended) (the Rules).

2.   By a decision [d] dated 28 March  2014  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Plumptre ( the judge)  concluded  that  the  Respondent  had  correctly
    applied the provisions of paragraph  320(7A)  as  well  as  320(3)  and
    320(9) of the Rules.  The judge,  however,  allowed  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

3.   Permission to appeal  the  judge's  decision  on  Article  8  ECHR  was
    granted to the ECO by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ransley on 8 May 2014.

4.    The  Appellant  by  an  application,   made  22  April  2014,   sought
    permission to appeal the decision,  under  paragraph  320(7A),  by  the
    Judge  which was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Fisher on 31 July
    2014.  The application was renewed and permission was  given  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Reeds on 19 September 2014.

5.   On 3 November 2014 I concluded that the judge had made no error of  law
    in relation to the findings on the use of a false birth certificate  to
    obtain a passport.  It was accepted that the Appellant had, whether  by
    himself or by use of an agent, provided a false birth certificate. Thus
    the appeal on that issue had been bound to fail. I gave my reasons in a
    determination dated  17  December  2014.  Thus  the  Original  Tribunal
    decision upon the immigration rules stands. I also set out  why  I  was
    satisfied the judge had failed to provide adequate reasons to deal with
    the childrens' (K and S) best interests or  the  issue  of  the  public
    interest or why the Respondent's decision was disproportionate

6.   The Appellant had acknowledged the false  certificate  by  obtaining  a
    new birth certificate and obtaining a valid  passport.   I  noted  what
    Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds had commented upon but it did not seem to me
    that added anything to the fundamental issue as to  whether  or  not  a
    false document had been used to obtain the passport.

7.   Before me Ms Heller sought to reargue the point that the Appellant  had
    not knowingly made false representations or provided a false  document.
    The judge  heard the evidence, assessed it against  the  case  law  and
    submissions made but concluded that the Appellant did know at the  time
    that he used birth certificate number  2656  that  it  was  false.  The
    Appellant made no mention of his lack of knowledge about the invalidity
    of the birth certificate in his undated letter to the ECO, referred  to
    as 'page 16', or the circumstances in which the passport  was  obtained
    via an agent.

8.   The judge noted the false birth certificate 2656 was used to obtain  an
    emergency travel document and a Sri Lankan passport.  The judge did not
    accept that the Appellant made such use of the birth  certificate  2656
    unwittingly  or  without  knowledge  that  it  was  false   given   the
    circumstances of its production to him by an agent.  I  do  not  accept
    that the judge's reasoning on the point disclosed any error of law.

9.   As I understand it the Appellant's wife through  naturalisation  became
    a British national in 2006 and similarly so did their two children  (11
    and 12 years born and brought up in the UK) as the judge  found  [D52].
    It seemed to me that the likelihood was that the Appellant's wife and K
    and S have dual nationality, in law,  even  if  in  fact  they  do  not
    presently possess passports from Sri Lanka.  It is plain therefore that
    the Appellant's wife and the Appellant himself have decided  that  they
    would prefer the family to remain in the United Kingdom.

10.  Ms Heller doubted whether or not the Appellant had ever needed to  make
    an application under Regulation 18 of the Rules bearing in mind he  had
    previously had indefinite leave to remain. Given the  circumstances  of
    the Appellant's return  I  did  not  understand  that  argument  to  be
    seriously pursued as opposed to one raised in faint hope. In any  event
    I do not accept the issue discloses any error of law by the judge.  Nor
    did  the  point  constitute  a  matter   of   weight   when   assessing
    proportionality

11.   It seemed to me in the factual circumstances raised, even if  ILR  had
    previously been granted, when such a person leaves the  United  Kingdom
    and later seeks to return, an application under  paragraph  18  of  the
    immigration rules application may be required unless  published  advice
    by the Secretary of State indicated to the contrary.

12.  It was argued that the returning resident  route  and  the  Immigration
    Rules were not a complete code in  the  consideration  of  private  and
    family life. I agreed and it seemed to me that the  appropriate  course
    was to ask whether or not the Respondent's decision was ECHR-compliant.

13.  On 19 July 2015 I considered whether or not in addressing Article 8  of
    the  ECHR  the  Appellant  had  raised  any  circumstances  which  were
    exceptional to justify looking at this matter outside of the rules.  It
    seemed to me the appellant's  and  his  wife's  circumstances,  of  his
    having been in the UK about 14 years , his wife 21 years,  the  British
    nationality  of  his  wife  and  children,   their   ages,   schooling,
    circumstances and the effects of his exclusion from return  to  the  UK
    for not less than 10 years were exceptional circumstances.

14.  On the evidence before me I considered the  refusal  of  entry  of  the
    Appellant was an arguable interference to re-establishing family  life.
    Further on the evidence that was not substantially challenged that  the
    interference was significant and sufficient to engage the operation  of
    Article 8(1) ECHR.

15.  I was satisfied that the Respondent's decision was lawful and  properly
    served the purposes identified under Article 8(2) of the ECHR.

16.  I note there was no reason why the  Appellant's  wife,  who  originated
    from Sri Lanka, or the children could not relocate as a family if  they
    wished to do so.  The fact that they are British citizens born  of  Sri
    Lankan parents does not exclude them, on the evidence before  me,  from
    entry to Sri Lanka.  I take particularly into  account  the  length  of
    time the Appellant's wife has lived in the United Kingdom for  some  21
    years and when she became a UK national in 2007.  Her date of birth  is
    7 September 1968.  She is therefore some 46 or 47 years of age.   There
    was no evidence to show that the Appellant and she had not grown up  in
    Sri Lanka understanding the language, lifestyle, customs and  mores  of
    the country.

17.  The family are not being required to leave.  Their doing  so  may  lose
    such benefits as flow from their presence in the United Kingdom.

18.  I do not accept that there would be a culture shock from the return  of
    the family to Sri Lanka and much of the impact depends upon the conduct
    of the Appellant and his wife.

19.  It is plain that it is considered desirable that a family  should  live
    together and thus develop the kinds of family support  and  structures.
    I take into account the Appellant's lengthy  residence  in  the  United
    Kingdom since 2000.

20.  I note the Appellant's children are nearly 14 and 13 years of  age  who
    have grown up in the UK, have their friends here, wish  to  remain  and
    who  are  able  to  express  their  views  as   they   have   done   in
    correspondence.  I accept as a starting point  the  importance  of  the
    children's interests with reference to Section 55 of the  BCIA  2009  .
    It is a primary consideration.  I apply the approach identified  in  ZH
    (Tanzania) as to how that matter can be addressed bearing in mind  that
    of course the Appellant's children are in the UK.

21.  I take into account the difficulties that the Appellant's wife has  had
    with the children leading to the intervention by the Royal  Borough  of
    Greenwich in seeking to protect the  wellbeing  of  the  children,  the
    reports from schools raised concerning the performance of the children,
    their general happiness and their position as a  whole.   I  take  into
    account  the issue of whether or not there  was  any  basis  under  the
    Rules which would enable the Appellant to return which  of  course  has
    been confounded by the issue of his dishonesty.

22.   Thus  the  Appellant  may  be  unlikely  to  succeed  in  relation  to
    'suitability' (Appendix FM) but I accept that the reasons for falsehood
    may have some  relevance  to  the  issue  of  proportionality  and  the
    assessment of public interest.  In coming to a view upon that matter  I
    find  the  judge's  unequivocal  findings  rejecting  the   Appellant's
    explanation should be given  significant  weight.   I  also  take  into
    account that at least one of the children (K in Yr 9)  now  moves  into
    the next educational phase (Yr10) of GCSEs. S in Yr 7 moves  to  Yr  8.
    There is no information before me  that  particularly  relates  to  the
    standards in Sri Lankan schools and what consequences  there  might  be
    for the Appellant's children's development were they  to  remove  as  a
    family to Sri Lanka. I note the child S is asthmatic and currently  age
    uses an inhaler but I do not know on the evidence if that would  be  of
    any significance on a return to Sri Lanka . K has visited Sri  Lanka  3
    occasions: S on 2.  I readily understand that the children prefer to be
    reunited with their father in the United  Kingdom  and  that  they  are
    upset by his continued absence.

23.  I also  take  into  account  the  public  interest  with  reference  to
    Sections 117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2002.  The assessment of proportionality in the  Respondent's  decision
    takes into account  the  events,  the  references  to  the  impacts  of
    separation from his wife and children, his  wife's  own  mental  health
    problems and the concerns represented by the Royal Borough of Greenwich
    putting in place an agreement to secure the protection of the  children
    in the family home.  I take into account the  correspondence  from  the
    children and from good friends of the children K and S.

24.  It is clear to me that the children  are  very  unhappy  without  their
    father being absent and to a degree I accept the children's performance
    at school  may not be as good  as  it  has  been;  although  I  do  not
    understand the standard to be falling below that of their peer  groups.
    It seemed to me  the benefits of life in the UK and the best  interests
    of the children do not inevitably lead to the conclusion that a life in
    Sri Lanka is necessarily worse or not in their best interests.  I  have
    no evidence to show that may  be  the  case  nor  to  sustain  such  an
    assumption. Rather I find  the benefits of a united family are  in  the
    best interests of these children which can be with the Appellant in Sri
    Lanka.

25.  Ultimately the children have been  back  to  Sri  Lanka  to  visit  the
    Appellant and it is understandable that the children  would  prefer  to
    remain in the United Kingdom where they have grown up and their current
    friends are present.

26.  Having weighed the  public  interest  as  a  factor  to  which  I  give
    significant weight I take into account that the Appellant had  been  in
    the United Kingdom and as I understand it can  speak  English  and  has
    worked  here.  The  Appellant  has  been  and  would  be  the   primary
    breadwinner.  To that extent he is not likely to be an  obvious  burden
    upon the taxpayer. I take into account the potential upheaval  for  the
    family if they decide to relocate to Sri  Lanka  although  no  specific
    evidence was produced.  In  these  circumstances,  weighing  all  these
    factors up, I find this is a case where the Respondent's  decision,  in
    the light of the Appellant's  conduct  and  the  public  interest,  was
    proportionate.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The Original Tribunal's decision on the issues arising under  paragraph  320
of the Immigration Rules stands.  The  following  decision  is  substituted.
The appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds is dismissed.

ANONYMITY

No anonymity was requested but it seems to me given the  two  children  that
an anonymity order is appropriate.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 13 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal of the Appellant is dismissed, no fee award is appropriate.


Signed   Date 13 August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
