
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04550/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 September 2015                           |On 4 September 2015           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between


                               TINOTENDA ZEMBE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss M Hannan, Corban Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss E Savage, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 31 March 2015  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Napthine which  refused  the  appeal  against
    refusal of entry clearance as a dependent child.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on 17 May 1996.

 3. Judge Napthine found that the sponsor, the appellant's father, did  not
    have sole responsibility and that it had also not been shown  that  the
    decision amounted to a disproportionate interference  with  his  rights
    under Article 8 the ECHR.

 4. The grounds at paragraph 1 and 2 appear to misunderstand what was  said
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraphs 11, 12  and  13  of  the
    decision. Judge Napthine states at [12]  that  the  relevant  date  for
    establishing whether the Immigration Rules were  met  was  26  February
    2014, the date of the decision. That is correct.   At  [11]  the  judge
    finds that the evidence indicated that the appellant  was  living  with
    his maternal aunt until the end of  2014  and  that  the  reference  to
    difficulties after that in the letter of the appellant's uncle was  not
    relevant to the date  of  the  decision.  That  is  also  correct.  The
    reference to the appellant becoming 18 years old on 17 May 2014 and  at
    that  point  no  longer  subject  to  paragraph  297  is  correct,   if
    irrelevant. The judge is not saying here that the application  did  not
    fall to be considered under paragraph 297. The determination  considers
    that paragraph, and no other, in terms.

 5. Paragraph 3 of the grounds submits that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    did not take into account properly a social worker's  report  contained
    at pages 61 to 66 of the appellant's bundle of  materials.  The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge clearly did take account of the social work report.
    He indicates at paragraph 9 that he considered all the evidence  before
    him.

 6. In addition it is difficult to see  how  this  document  taken  at  its
    highest could have made a material difference to the decision of  Judge
    Napthine. The report does not indicate the  context  in  which  it  was
    prepared, who instructed the social worker, how or when the information
    in the report was obtained or set out a  proper  understanding  of  the
    need for independence if the  report  is  to  be  relied  on  in  these
    proceedings.

 7. Further, the report contains a number of references to the  appellant's
    ongoing relationship with his mother, for example at 64 recording  that
    the appellant's mother wants to be there for her son and  continues  to
    attempt to do so albeit she is constrained by her new relationship.  As
    in the reported case of TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e) "sole  responsibility")
    (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 00049 at paragraph 45 the starting point  is  that
    both parent do share responsibility for a child even if one partner has
    moved to the United Kingdom.  At paragraph 46 the  same  decision  sets
    down that it is necessary for a parent to "abdicate" responsibility  if
    sole responsibility is going to be  clearly  made  out  for  the  other
    parent. Further, where the  evidence  showed  that  both  parents  were
    involved whatever the extent, paragraph 52(iv) of TD indicates that "it
    will be exceptional that one of them will  have  sole  responsibility".
    Given the references  to  the  mother  still  playing  a  role  in  the
    appellant's life, the social work report could not show that the mother
    had abdicated responsibility or that, exceptionally, she did not retain
    some parental responsibility for him.

 8. At paragraph 4 the grounds maintain that the First-tier Tribunal failed
    to refer to other documentary evidence. That argument can have no merit
    given what the judge says at paragraph 9 as  to  having  given  careful
    consideration to all of the documents and evidence before him.  He  was
    not required to refer to every piece of evidence before  him  and  that
    included the visits between the appellant and sponsor. In  the  context
    of the matters in the previous paragraph concerning  the  role  of  the
    appellant's mother, the visits were not matters obliging the First-tier
    Tribunal to decide the appeal differently,  the  key  issue  being  not
    whether the sponsor had a close relationship  with  the  appellant  but
    whether he had sole responsibility as of the date of the decision.

 9. Paragraph 5 of the grounds suggests that there was  a  requirement  for
    the First-tier Tribunal to state the "period of sole responsibility  in
    respect  of  which  the  evidence  was  assessed."  There  is  no  such
    requirement. As above, the First-tier Tribunal considered the situation
    as of the date of the decision which was correct.

10. The grounds at paragraph 6 and 7 challenge the Article 8 decision.  The
    grounds are incorrect in asserting that  Section  55  of  the  Borders,
    Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009  applies  to  entry  clearance
    appeals. It does not; see T (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry clearance)  Jamaica
    [2011] UKUT 00483 (IAC) applied. In any event, a fair  reading  of  the
    Article 8 consideration at paragraphs 27  to  30  shows  that  relevant
    material matters were taken into account. As above, Judge Napthine  was
    entitled to find that the appellant  was  being  cared  for  by  family
    members including his mother and that he had family life in Zimbabwe as
    well as his relationship with his father. The  Immigration  Rules  were
    not met, a significant factor weighing against  the  appellant  in  any
    Article 8 consideration; see Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014]  EWCA  Civ  558.
    The grounds do not show a material error has been shown in the  Article
    8 assessment.

11. For all of those reasons I did not find that an error on a point of law
    had been shown in the First-tier Tribunal decision.

Decision

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.





Signed   [pic]                               Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

