
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04131/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 August 2015                    |On 8 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                            Miss Abolore Oladeji
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Aina, Counsel instructed by Martyns Rose
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is  an  appeal  brought  against  a  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Flynn promulgated on 11 February 2015.   The  appeal  is
    brought with the permission of First-tier Tribunal Judge McDade dated 4
    May 2015.  The appeal was technically out of time,  and  this  was  not
    addressed when permission was granted. But  no  point  was  taken  this
    afternoon and I will not allow a substantive appeal to fail on  a  mere
    technicality.  The ground in relation to which permission to appeal was
    granted was that the judge may have made an error of law by misapplying
    the burden of proof given that the refusal was based on  paragraph  320
    of the relevant Immigration Rules.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria who was born on  20  April  1982.
    The appeal arose from a decision of  an  Immigration  Officer  dated  5
    October 2013 refusing the appellant leave to enter the  United  Kingdom
    and cancelling her leave to remain.  That refusal letter was handed  to
    me in copy form during the course of oral submissions today.

3.    The  determination  includes  at  paragraph  13  the  following:   "In
    immigration appeals the burden of proof is on  the  appellant  and  the
    standard of proof required is on a balance of probabilities."  Mr Aina,
    who acts for the  appellant,  states  that  this  is  not  an  accurate
    statement of the burden  of  proof  and  Mr  Walker,  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, concurs that this is a misstatement.   However,  it
    is important to read this offending paragraph in  the  context  of  the
    determination as a whole because if one looks at paragraph 18 the Judge
    says this: "Looking at the evidence  in  the  round  I  find  that  the
    respondent has not  shown  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    appellant used deception  in  her  application."   To  my  mind  it  is
    abundantly plain that the Judge recognised not only that in this matter
    the burden of proof lay on the respondent but also  that  the  standard
    was the balance of probabilities.

4.   There is no suggestion in the course  of  the  determination  that  the
    Judge misapplied the standard of proof. To  my  mind  paragraph  13  is
    nothing more than a typographical error and that the  word  'appellant'
    appears whereas properly the word 'respondent' should appear.  I am not
    satisfied that there is an error of law at all, merely a slip.  Even if
    there were an error beyond the merely typographical,  it  is  certainly
    not material because as is clear from the balance of the  determination
    notwithstanding the misstatement in paragraph 13 the  burden  of  proof
    was correctly applied by the Judge in making the  assessment  which  he
    did and Mr Aina in the course of his oral  submissions  when  that  was
    pointed out to him accepted that this represented the position.

5.   It therefore follows that the issue upon which  this  appeal  turns  is
    whether there was a separate error of law in the judge's determination.
     I need say nothing about the issue of deception in that  there  was  a
    rejection of this by the Judge in his evaluation  of  the  facts.   The
    focus of the adverse determination and the focus of the  submissions  I
    have heard this afternoon has been on financial  misstatements  alleged
    on the part of the appellant.  It is first said, relying on the  burden
    of proof point, that there was little if any evidence  put  forward  by
    the respondent and it is suggested that there may have been breaches of
    orders requiring matters or evidence to be lodged  by  the  respondent.
    It is clear, however, that at least one document was before the  First-
    tier Tribunal, namely the refusal letter, and I have been taken to  the
    third bullet point in that refusal letter of 5 October 2013 which says:

         "You stated on your  application  that  you  earned  195,000  naira
         monthly as your total income after tax.  You stated during  further
         interview that you earned 5,000,000  naira  per  year.   There  are
         significant  anomalies  between  your  declared  income   on   your
         application and the income you state you receive today and are  not
         able to evidence.  You were previously refused a visa due  to  this
         very reason."

6.   The Judge carried out his function based  on  the  material  which  was
    before him considering this financial material.  I have been  taken  to
    the bundle of documents that was before the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It
    included at page 2 an excerpt from a witness statement  signed  by  the
    appellant which read as follows:

         "My net monthly income, as the court will see from my payslips, was
         the amount stated in my visa form.  However, my annual salary  with
         bonuses and allowances is about 5,000,000 naira.  I also enclose  a
         letter from my employer with  my  visa  application  confirming  my
         annual salary.  I was not previously refused a visa for any  reason
         connected with my salary."

7.   If we work our way through this bundle we find at page  10  an  extract
    from the application for United Kingdom entry clearance which  asks  at
    question numbered 61: "What is  your  total  monthly  income  from  all
    sources of employment or  occupation  after  tax",  and  the  reply  is
    "N195,679.73".  Again working one's way through these  documents  there
    are further references to income.  The first is at page  23,  a  letter
    dated 15 August 2013 sent by the First City Monument Bank  PLC  to  the
    British High Commission in Lagos, the third paragraph of  which  refers
    to the appellant and states  that  her  total  annual  remuneration  is
    5,059,507.79 naira.  There is then a further letter, this time dated 22
    March 2012 which gives a breakdown of figures, some of which are put in
    terms of monthly pay, some quarterly pay, some yearly  pay,  some  year
    end (thirteenth month) pay and others in the form of general allowances
    which are stated in  the  letter  (although  I  have  not  checked  the
    arithmetic) as making a total remuneration package said to be 4,662,500
    naira per annum.

8.   The submission maintained before me today by Mr Aina is that the  Judge
    misunderstood the content  of  the  documentation  which  I  have  just
    summarised and accordingly his findings and conclusions  in  paragraphs
    20 to 22 inclusive of the determination cannot stand.  He presents that
    as being an error of law sufficient to found a successful appeal.

9.   To my mind, having reviewed that evidence in its  entirety  and  having
    considered the totality of the determination, I am not  satisfied  that
    this amounts to anything approaching an error of law. As I have already
    stated, it is clear from the determination that  the  judge  approached
    this assessment with the burden of  proof  resting  on  the  respondent
    Immigration Officer and he looked at the totality of the evidence in  a
    fair, detached and proper way.  What he found was that the  appellant's
    explanation was not credible and that giving  a  monthly  salary  which
    when multiplied by twelve was significantly below the  5,000,000  naira
    annual salary was a cause of  significant  concern  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge in reaching his view  as  to  the  credibility  of  this
    appellant.  It is stated in the refusal letter  that  previous  matters
    had been refused due to difficulties with  the  issue  of  finance  and
    there is some dispute on that.  In an ideal world it  might  have  been
    that those earlier documents could have been provided, but I  take  the
    view that the Judge was entitled to take at face value the  content  of
    the refusal letter stating what it did.

10.  The judge was similarly  entitled  to  take  an  adverse  view  of  the
    appellant's evidence in the absence of any proper explanation  for  the
    misstatement of her earnings and even today, having been taken de  novo
    to the totality of  the  documentation,  I  am  of  the  view  that  no
    criticism can be made of the Judge for the assessment which he came  to
    in looking at the documents and in deciding whether the respondent  had
    properly discharged the burden of proof in demonstrating  that  it  was
    not appropriate for leave to enter to be granted.

11.  On the basis therefore that no error of law is made out as  alleged  in
    the grounds of appeal it must therefore follow that this appeal will be
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No order for anonymity is made.


Signed   Mark Hill         Date 4 September 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

