
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04529/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 13th May, 2014                             |                             |
|Signed 20th May, 2014                         |On 23rd May 2014             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley



                                   Between

                        Entry Clearance Officer Dhaka

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                             RUKSHANA ZAMAN SUMI


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Hafizur Rahman the Sponsor was present



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   In this appeal the Entry Clearance Officer Dhaka is the  appellant  and
    to avoid confusion I shall refer to him as  being  "the  claimant".   I
    shall refer to Rukshana Zaman Sumi as the appellant as she  was  before
    the First Tier Tribunal.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on 31st  October,
    1968, and who is the wife of Hafizur Rahman, a British subject  settled
    in the United Kingdom ("the sponsor").

3.   The claimant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Herbert OBE, who in a determination promulgated on 23rd January,  2014,
    allowed the appellant's appeal against the decision of the claimant  to
    refuse to grant her entry clearance as the partner of the sponsor under
    Appendix FM of Statement of Changes in Immigration Rules,  HC  395,  as
    amended ("the immigration rules").

4.   In  paragraph  20  of  his  determination,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herbert found that the appellant did not meet the requirements  of  the
    Immigration  Rules.   He  purported  to  apply  the  decision  of   the
    Administrative Court in MM [2013]  EWHC  1900  Admin  and  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal on human rights grounds under Article 8.

5.   The claimant's refusal of entry clearance was  taken  on  7th  January,
    2013,  and  the  appellant's  application  was  refused   because   the
    requirements of paragraph EC-P.1.1(d) of Appendix FM of the Immigration
    Rules was not met.   The  application  was  also  refused  because  the
    documents required to be produced in accordance with Appendix FM-SE had
    not been produced.

6.   When the appellant gave Notice of Appeal, the Entry  Clearance  Manager
    reviewed the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  and  in  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager's review decision dated 15th December 2013, the Entry
    Clearance Manager noted that the appellant  had  included  two  City  &
    Guilds certificates as evidence that she satisfied the requirements  of
    paragraph  281(1)(a)(ii).   Although  not  challenged  by   the   Entry
    Clearance  Officer  at   the   date   of   the   decision,   subsequent
    investigations conducted by City & Guilds and UK Visas and  Immigration
    Dhaka revealed inconsistencies in  testing  in  Bangladesh  and,  as  a
    result,  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    documents which the appellant had provided satisfactorily  demonstrated
    that  she  had  obtained  the  qualifications  referred   to   on   the
    certificates.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Herbert  OBE  allowed  the
    appellant's  appeal  under  Article  8  and  in  paragraph  28  of  his
    determination said this:-

         "I therefore allow this appeal on a balance of  probabilities  for
         the reasons set out above.  I do however advise  the  appellant  to
         undertake the City & Guilds English language test again although it
         is unfortunate to say the least  that  this  requirement  was  only
         communicated very recently to the  appellant  based  upon  apparent
         inconsistencies that had gone back for some two years.  There is no
         letter in the bundle other than a statement of the Entry  Clearance
         Manager to  verify  the  extent  of  this  problem  or  indeed  the
         necessity that it affects every  single  claimant  and  not  simply
         those that obtain some form of borderline score."


7.   The claimant's grounds point  out  that  in  allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal under Article 8, the judge erred by failing  to  properly  apply
    Bibi and another v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]
    EWCA Civ 322.

8.   At the hearing before me, the sponsor was present with his  sister  and
    he confirmed that he did not require the services of an interpreter.

9.   He told me that the  appellant  no  longer  had  a  representative.   I
    explained the purpose of the hearing to him.  Mr Bramble told  me  that
    he relied on the grounds and pointed out that the judge had  misapplied
    MM.  Unfortunately at the  time  of  the  appellant's  application  the
    sponsor had not been in salaried employment  for  sufficient  time  and
    under Appendix FM was required to supply specific evidence namely  wage
    slips for six months with the same employer.  The judge found that  the
    appellant could not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  but
    then went on to purport to allow the appellant's appeal under Article 8
    notwithstanding that he was aware that the appellant had  not  met  the
    English language requirement that, suggested Mr Bramble was an error of
    law.  He invited me to set the decision  aside  and  remake  it  myself
    refusing the appellant's appeal.

10.  I explained to the sponsor the significance  of  what  Mr  Bramble  had
    said.  He told  me  that  he  had  not  received  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager's notice, but I pointed out to  him  that  it  appeared  to  be
    addressed to the appellant and was in the form of a letter sent to  her
    on 17th December, 2013.  He felt that the appellant  had  been  wrongly
    advised to appeal in the circumstances but had  relied  on  lawyers  in
    Bangladesh.

11.  I explained to him that it appeared to me that the judge had  erred  in
    law.

12.  I indicated that  I  would  prepare  a  determination  and  reserve  my
    decision.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for the reasons  it  clearly  set
    out.  However it purported to allow the appeal under Article 8.   As  I
    have indicated above, the judge was well aware of  the  fact  that  the
    Entry Clearance Manager had  pointed  out  that  the  English  language
    certificates relied on by the appellant were not acceptable, because of
    difficulties  which  had  come  to  light  during  the  course  of   an
    investigation by City & Guilds and by UK Visas and Immigration Dhaka.

14.  At paragraphs 30, 31, 32 and 33 of Bibi  and  another  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department Lord Justice Maurice Kay said this:-

         "30.   The pre-entry test was conceived as a benign measure of
         social policy with the purpose of facilitating the integration of
         non-English-speaking spouses. Where a State seeks to change its
         immigration rules in order to produce a benign result, it would be
         regrettable if, in order to justify the measure, whether pursuant
         to Article 8.2 or Article 14, it faced a burden which could only be
         discharged by irrefutable empirical evidence. The Secretary of
         State's perception is essentially one of predictive judgment. Many
         a well-intentioned social change is supported by a rational belief
         in its potential to achieve its benign purpose but without being
         susceptible to empirical proof prior to its introduction. It is for
         this reason that it is appropriate for the State authority to be
         accorded a margin of appreciation in the formulation of its social
         policy. Without such an indulgence, many benign reforms would be
         stifled in limine. Of course the implications of the change of
         policy may be so dubious that it is demonstrably not justifiable.
         However, in some situations a margin of appreciation has to be
         pitched at a level which allows for change, even if there is some
         risk to some individuals, that they will be adversely affected by
         it. The principle was articulated in Stec v United Kingdom (2006)
         43 EHHR 47, a case concerning Article 14, together with Article 1
         of the First Protocol, but relevant to the present case, not least
         because the appellants emphasise the discriminatory aspect of the
         pre-entry test requirement (to which I shall return). The
         Strasbourg Court said (at paragraph 52):
         "... a wide margin is usually allowed to the State under the
         Convention when it comes to general measures of economic or social
         strategy. ... Because of their direct knowledge of their society
         and its needs, the national authorities are in principle better
         placed than the international judge to appreciate what is in the
         public interest on social or economic grounds and the Court will
         generally respect the legislature's policy choice unless it is
         'manifestly without reasonable foundation'."
         This test informed the recent decision of the Supreme Court in
         Humphreys v Revenue and Customs Commissioners ([2012] 1 WLR 1545,
         [2012] UKSC 18). Without it, it might become impossible for a
         government to govern without waiting for judges to judge.
         31.I can see no reason or contrary authority to preclude such an
         approach in a case such as this. The Secretary of State identified
         a social problem which may be described as an impediment to
         integration. A great deal of consideration was given to the
         implications of a change to pre-entry testing. There were two
         Impact Assessments and two Equality Impact Assessments. They are
         substantial documents. It is possible to take issue with points
         here and there but they have not been significantly undermined.
         Moreover, at the hearing before Beatson J, the appellants were not
         able to refute the submission on behalf of the Secretary of State
         that, in the first seven months of operating the amended Rule,
         there had not been a significant fall-off in spouse visas. Beatson
         J said (at paragraph 103):
           "[The figures] show that 'spouse entry clearance applications
           remain largely high' and that in the period between June and
           August 2011 there were only 40 less cases compared to the volume
           of applications in the same two month period in 2009. Mrs Sayeed
           also stated that the number of settlement visas issued in that
           period was higher than the number issued in the same period in
           2009 and 2010. Those statements are accurate."
         For what it is worth, we have also been shown the figures to June
         2012. They do not demonstrate any significant difference.
         32. I am led to the conclusion that the Secretary of State
         identified a social problem (see Beatson J at paragraph 94); she
         considered an ameliorating solution; she assessed the implications
         of introducing it; she provided for exempt and exceptional cases;
         and, in the event, the effect on applications and grants was not
         numerically significant. Moreover, it may well be that a
         significant number of those who are unable to satisfy the pre-entry
         test certificate requirement will benefit from the exceptions,
         particularly the one based on "exceptional  compassionate
         circumstances". Applying the wide margin of appreciation which I
         consider to be appropriate, I consider that Beatson J was right to
         conclude that the move to a pre-entry requirement, pitched at a
         rudimentary level, was proportionate. There is a world of
         difference between this requirement and the prohibition in Quila
         which acted as an insuperable barrier to entry to those in the
         proscribed age group, even when the intended marriage was
         demonstrably unforced. It is, of course, possible that in an
         individual case, with favourable facts found, a particular
         applicant may be able successfully to invoke Article 8 or some
         other protection (for example, section 55 of the Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009). The Secretary of State
         accepts this. But the head-on challenge to the amended Rule itself
         fails.
         33I have read in draft the judgment of Sir David Keene. He takes a
         different view about proportionality. He considers that prior to
         its amendment Rule 281 was not shown to give rise to significant
         problems and refers to statistics suggesting "a diminishing
         problem". It is not easy to interpret all the statistical material.
         The "diminishing" figures referred to were interpreted by the
         Secretary of State as being "most likely due to greater awareness
         of the need to meet the requirements", which had only been
         introduced in 2007: Equality Impact Assessment, October 2010,
         paragraph 2.1. That Assessment concluded that "Spouses granted
         leave to enter the UK are a key group unable to demonstrate the
         required knowledge of English language and life in the UK (KOL)
         when they come to the end of the two year probationary period at
         which they can apply for settlement". In the Impact Assessment of
         July 2009 it was stated that foreign spouses seeking settlement
         "are the largest group who do not pass the English test after two
         years". One also has to have regard to the fact that the pass rate
         in relation to the post-entry test included many who were not in
         this country on spouse visas but had entered, for example, for work
         purposes. Many would have been competent in English before arrival
         but would still have been required to pass the test. Their doing so
         inevitably inflated the pass rate. In her witness statement, Mrs
         Helen Sayeed stated that the data indicates that, after two years
         in the United Kingdom, almost a third of spouses/partners were not
         taking the post-entry test, "which suggests they may have acquired
         insufficient English to enable them to do so". That seems to me to
         be a natural inference. I do not consider that the Secretary of
         State or we are precluded from accepting (as has also been accepted
         in Germany, the Netherlands and Denmark) that there is evidence of
         a significant problem, which is susceptible to alleviation by a
         switch to pre-entry testing at an appropriately rudimentary level.
         For these reasons, I respectfully disagree with Sir David Keene."





15.  Lord Justice Toulson agreed with Maurice Kay LJ  and  at  paragraph  52
    said this:-

         "I do not consider that it would be right for the  court  to  apply
         article 8 so as  to  stultify  the  experiment  undertaken  by  the
         government through  the  adoption  (subject  to  exceptions)  of  a
         requirement of pre-entry tests.  In  this  respect  I  particularly
         agree with Maurice Kay LJ's approach in paragraph [31], except that
         I would prefer to substitute "unobtainable"  for  "irrefutable"  in
         the second sentence. The point is that government would  be  unduly
         trammelled if judges required an unrealistic level of proof of  the
         benefits intended to  be  obtained  by  new  processes.  A  broader
         approach is justified, under  the  rubric  of  a  broad  margin  of
         appreciation. In this context I find it difficult to  differentiate
         between rationality and proportionality as a measure of scrutiny of
         the lawfulness of the pre-entry test requirements. I conclude  that
         they are within a category of measures which the  government  might
         not unreasonably adopt for addressing the  perceived  problems  and
         therefore proportionate."


16.  I do not need to deal with MM because, in the light of the decision  of
    the Court of Appeal, the determination cannot stand.  I find  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal did err on  a  point  of  law.   I  set  aside  the
    previous decision.  My decision is that the appeal  of  Rukshana  Zaman
    Sumi be dismissed.

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
