
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04135/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th July 2016                            |On 28th July 2016             |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                  Between:

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [S S]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr O Ly, Harding Mitchell Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State on behalf  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer, I shall refer to the parties as in the  First-
    tier Tribunal. The Appellant is a citizen of Ghana born on  [  ]  2008.
    His appeal, against the refusal of entry clearance for settlement as  a
    family member of his mother [the Sponsor], was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fox in a decision promulgated on 22nd January 2016.
 2. The Respondent appealed on the grounds that the judge's decision  under
    the Immigration Rules was not entirely clear.  The  judge  agreed  with
    the Entry  Clearance  Officer  that  the  Sponsor  did  not  have  sole
    responsibility  for  the  Appellant  and  further  concluded  that  the
    Appellant lived in satisfactory accommodation where he  was  supervised
    at all times.  Further, the Appellant's father, with whom he lived, was
    a responsible guardian. Accordingly, it was unclear how,  in  light  of
    those findings of fact, the judge could have concluded that it  was  in
    the child's best interests,  which  were  limited  given  that  he  was
    outside the jurisdiction, to be uprooted from his daily life  in  Ghana
    to arrive in an unfamiliar country and be detached  from  his  familiar
    surroundings.  There was no proper or adequate analysis of Article 8.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page  on
    the basis that it was not clear from the decision how the judge arrived
    at the conclusion that the appeal should be allowed on all  grounds  or
    why the judge considered that the Respondent was in error  in  refusing
    entry clearance.


Submissions


 4. Ms Ahmad referred to the judge's conclusion, at paragraph 24: "There is
    no suggestion that the Appellant lives in anything other than  adequate
    accommodation and that he is effectively supervised at all  times.  The
    available evidence also demonstrates that  the  father  makes  adequate
    provision for care arrangements when he travels away from home and that
    on one occasion the Appellant accompanied the father when the Appellant
    refused to cooperate with the care provision made for him.  This  leads
    to the reasonable conclusion that the father is a responsible  guardian
    and does not leave the Appellant unattended."


 5. Ms Ahmad submitted that given this finding, the judge's decision,  with
    reference to Rule 297(i)(f)  and  the  case  of  Mundeba  (s.  55  para
    297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC), was not sustainable. She relied, in
    particular, on paragraph 37 of Mundeba which states:


         "Family considerations require an evaluation of the child's welfare
         including emotional needs.  'Other considerations' come  into  play
         where there are other aspects of the child's life that are  serious
         and compelling - for example where an applicant  is  living  in  an
         unacceptable social and economic environment the focus needs to  be
         on the circumstances of the child in light of his or her age social
         background and developmental history and will involve inquiry as to
         whether:-
           i) there is evidence of neglect or abuse;
          ii) there are unmet needs that should be catered for;
         iii) there are stable arrangements for the child's physical  care.


         The assessment involves consideration as to whether the combination
         of circumstances is sufficiently serious and compelling to  require
         admission."


 6. Ms Ahmad submitted that given the judge's findings at paragraph  24  it
    could not be said that the test set out at paragraph 37 of Mundeba  was
    met or that there were compelling circumstances which  meant  that  the
    Appellant's exclusion was undesirable under the Immigration Rules.  The
    judge's decision was unclear. He  had  taken  into  account  irrelevant
    considerations such as the Sponsor's reasons for  not  registering  the
    Appellant as a British citizen by descent  and  for  choosing  to  give
    birth to him in Ghana. Ms Ahmad submitted that the judge's  conclusions
    were  unclear  and  could  not  amount  to   compelling   compassionate
    circumstances rendering  the  Appellant's  exclusion  undesirable.  The
    Appellant's father was a responsible guardian who  did  not  leave  him
    unattended. There was adequate  accommodation  and  the  Appellant  was
    effectively supervised at all times.


 7. Mr Ly relied on his skeleton argument and submitted  that  the  judge's
    decision was not inconsistent or unclear. The judge concluded that  the
    Sponsor  did  not  have  sole  responsibility  for  the  Appellant  and
    therefore could not succeed under paragraph 297(e).  He then went on to
    consider whether there were compelling circumstances and considered the
    best interests of the child. There was ample evidence from the  Sponsor
    and from the Appellant's father to show that the Appellant's father was
    no longer able to look after the Appellant because of work commitments,
    and that the Appellant was spending a lot of time with other relatives.
    This was disrupting his education.


 8. The judge placed particular weight, at paragraph 30, on a  letter  from
    the Appellant's school, dated 19th January 2016, which stated that,  in
    the  latter  part  of  the  summer  term  2014/2015,  the   Appellant's
    performance started declining due to attitudinal change. A close  check
    on him revealed that he almost always looked tired and  sleepy  and  he
    sometimes became uninterested in the class. The teacher was asked to do
    a  further  check  on  him  and  report  any  necessary   action.   The
    investigation  conducted  by  the  class  teacher  revealed  that   the
    Appellant's father was hardly ever around and  the  Appellant  was  now
    having to move from one place to another. The Appellant was lacking  in
    parental care and proper supervision since his mother lived in the  UK.
    The Sponsor had been notified of the current developments  and  it  was
    suggested to her that the Appellant should be  enrolled  in  the  after
    school intervention so that he could do an extra hour of tuition  after
    close of school. This could help to some extent, but then  if  he  went
    back home with homework there would be no one to supervise his work and
    he would bring the work back to the school without it being  done.  The
    Appellant  was  losing  self  confidence  and  his  academic  work  was
    deteriorating too.  The school was of the opinion  that  the  Appellant
    needed one biological parent close to support him to  help  him  regain
    his self confidence.


 9. Mr Ly submitted that it was clear from the  judge's  decision  that  he
    found the Sponsor to be a credible witness who had not exaggerated  the
    situation and that on the evidence which was before him the Appellant's
    father was in a situation where he was unable to  carry  out  his  role
    effectively. He had to go away on business on  numerous  occasions  and
    the Appellant had to go with him on one occasion.


10. There was evidence before the judge  to  sustain  the  conclusion  that
    there were compelling circumstances which would render the  Appellant's
    exclusion from the UK undesirable and that the principles enunciated in
    Mundeba were in fact satisfied.  The Appellant was also separated  from
    his brother who was a British citizen living in the UK. The judge  took
    into account the emotional effect that would  have  on  the  Appellant,
    given the father's inability to provide  sufficient  care  for  him  in
    Ghana.


Discussion and Conclusions

11. The judge allowed the appeal on all grounds. I accept  that  the  judge
    may well have expressed himself slightly better. However, he has made a
    clear finding that the Sponsor did not  have  sole  responsibility  and
    then went on to consider the best interests of the child with reference
    to Mundeba and Rule 297(i)(f). The judge does not specifically set  out
    the Immigration Rule, but he does consider whether there  were  serious
    and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations   which   make   the
    Appellant's exclusion undesirable. There was  no  issue  that  suitable
    arrangements had been made for his care.


12. The judge found that, notwithstanding the  fact  that  the  Appellant's
    father is a responsible guardian  and  does  not  leave  the  Appellant
    unattended, the actual facts of the case  are  that  the  Appellant  is
    forced to live in  various  different  places  with  various  different
    relatives while the Appellant's father is  away  on  business.  On  one
    occasion the Appellant refused to comply with the arrangements that had
    been made and he travelled with his father away from home.  This  could
    not be said to be a  proper  environment  in  which  to  bring  up  the
    Appellant and that, whilst his father  did  not  wilfully  neglect  the
    Appellant, there was in fact  some  unwitting  neglect  caused  by  the
    demands on his father being called away to work.


13. Looking at the evidence which was before the judge, that  evidence  was
    sufficient to support a finding that there were serious and  compelling
    family or considerations making the Appellant's exclusion from  the  UK
    undesirable. The judge could have expressed his findings more  clearly.
    He found the Sponsor to be a credible witness and took into account the
    evidence submitted. He attached appropriate weight to the  letter  from
    the Appellant's school, which  stated  that  the  situation  was  quite
    clearly not one which showed that  the  Appellant's  needs  were  being
    catered for or that there were stable  arrangements  for  his  physical
    care.


14. The judge had Mundeba in mind when looking at this evidence  and  I  am
    not persuaded by Ms Ahmad's submission that the judge failed  to  apply
    what is set out at paragraph 37.  Whilst there is no evidence of  abuse
    or severe neglect, on the evidence before the  judge,  the  Appellant's
    emotional  needs  were  not  being  met  and  there  were   no   stable
    arrangements for his physical care because he was being looked after by
    several other relatives and this was having an adverse  effect  on  his
    school work.


15. Accordingly the judge's findings set out at paragraphs 25 to 39,  which
    deal with paragraph 297(i)(f) and Article 8 at the same  time,  address
    all the relevant issues to be considered. On the  evidence  before  the
    judge, his findings  were  open  to  him  and  his  reasons  have  been
    adequately expressed in those paragraphs, although I  accept  that  the
    judge could have made more reference to the Immigration Rules  and  set
    out what the serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations
    actually were.


16. However, I am of the view, on reading the  statements  and  the  letter
    from the school, in particular, that serious and compelling  family  or
    other considerations did in fact exist and the judge rightly took  into
    account all the evidence in concluding that the Immigration Rules  were
    satisfied.


17. Accordingly, I find that there was no material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's conclusion to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules with
    reference to Rule 297(i)(f) and under Article  8  taking  into  account
    Section 55 and the case of Mundeba. I dismiss the Respondent's  appeal.




Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



             J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 26th July 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


