
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/04534/2014
     OA/04535/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2015                              |On 30 April 2015              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                Ayesha Sadaf
                               Mubasher Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Ghani, Ismail & Ghani Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Ayesha Sadaf and Mubasher Ahmed, are both over the age of 18 years  and
    are citizens of Pakistan.  The appellants appealed against  a  decision
    of the respondent, dated 4 March 2914, to refuse to  grant  them  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom for the purposes of family  reunion  as
    the children  of  a  refugee.   The  sponsor  is  the  father  of  both
    appellants.  He is Muzafar Ahmed and he has been granted refugee status
    in the United Kingdom on the  basis  of  his  Ahmadi  faith.   Granting
    permission in the Upper Tribunal, Judge Reeds, noted that,

         The grounds raise an issue of law as to how, in  the  circumstances
         of these appellants outside the UK seeking entry clearance,  [they]
         can rely in part upon  persecutory  treatment  in  the  country  of
         origin where the findings of fact should have  been  made  in  that
         respect  and  if  so  how  this  would  affect   any   balance   on
         proportionality.

    It is common ground between the  parties  that  the  appellants  cannot
    satisfy the Immigration Rules for entry clearance because they are both
    aged over 18 years.  The grounds of appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    refer to incidents in which the appellants were allegedly  harassed  on
    account of their Ahmadi faith in Pakistan.

 2. The judge, following Gulshan  (Article  8-new  rules-correct  approach)
    [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC),  did not consider that there  were  particularly
    compassionate or compelling circumstances to require her to  carry  out
    an analysis under Article 8 ECHR having dismissed the appeal under  the
    Immigration Rules.  She acknowledged that  the  appellants  "have  each
    other to rely on for encouragement and  assistance  whilst  they  forge
    their careers and make their own way in life" [27].  She also  accepted
    that there had been "disruption and  change  in  the  fortunes  of  the
    family unit".  She believed, however, that family life  would  continue
    albeit at a distance between  the  appellants  and  their  parents  now
    living in the United Kingdom.  She also accepted  that  "life  for  the
    appellants in Pakistan is difficult and challenging".

 3. The question is whether those observations were adequate,  in  all  the
    circumstances, to enable the judge to make a sound decision as  to  the
    appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.   I  consider  that  they   were
    sufficient.  The judge was not being asked to determine this appeal  on
    Refugee Convention or Article 3 ECHR  grounds;  the  notice  of  appeal
    makes it clear that the appeal was brought under Article 8  ECHR.   The
    grounds of appeal make assertions  regarding  an  alleged  incident  in
    which the appellants were "subject to an attempted kidnapping."   These
    and other assertions in the grounds of appeal  are  nothing  more  than
    that; there was no  actual  evidence  from  the  appellants  themselves
    before the First-tier Tribunal regarding those alleged incidents and  I
    consider that there was no obligation upon the judge to  make  findings
    as to the  truth  of  the  assertions.   I  find  that  the  judge  has
    adequately considered the physical circumstances of the  appellants  in
    Pakistan; the judge's reference to those circumstances being "difficult
    and challenging" is clearly a reference to the difficulties of being an
    Ahmadi in a country where adherence of that faith may be viewed by  the
    majority with suspicion and hostility.  I find the judge has  done  all
    that was required of her in the Article  8  proportionality  assessment
    and that there was no basis in the evidence before her upon  which  the
    she could have found that the incidents described  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal actually took  place.   Having  properly  balanced  the  various
    factors in her analysis, I find that  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    conclude that the circumstances of these young adults  were  compelling
    or compassionate circumstances such  that  leave  to  enter  should  be
    granted to them outside the Immigration Rules.

 4. Before me, Mr Ghani, for the appellants,  submitted  the  judge  should
    also have made findings on all the elements of paragraph  352D  of  the
    Immigration Rules or  that  she  should  have  accepted  that  all  the
    requirements of that paragraph  (other  than  as  to  the  age  of  the
    applicants) have been accepted  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   I
    disagree.  Given the ages of the appellants, there was no need for  the
    Entry Clearance Officer to do more  than  to  reject  the  applications
    under the Immigration Rules on the basis that the applicants  were  too
    old.  I do not accept that the notices of refusal  of  entry  clearance
    expressly or implicitly acknowledge that the appellants  satisfied  the
    other requirements of the Immigration Rules or that the judge  arguably
    erred in law by failing to engage with paragraph  352D  other  than  to
    observe that the appellants were too old to qualify.

 5. I consider the judge has supported her analysis of Article 8 ECHR  with
    adequate reasoning and that  she  has  reached  a  decision  which  was
    plainly available to her on the evidence.  Her  conclusion  that  there
    were no special ties between the appellants and their  parents  in  the
    United Kingdom which would set this case apart  from  others  in  which
    adult children and their parents find themselves  living  in  different
    countries.

NOTICE OF DECISION

These appeals are dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 28 April 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



