
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04204/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th March 2015                            |On 26th March 2015            |
|Extempore Judgment                            |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          Mr Michael Anthony Koster
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Pal (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Not Present or Represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Entry Clearance  Officer
    in this case in relation to a Decision  and  Reasons  prepared  on  the
    papers by First-tier Tribunal Judge Roopnarine-Davies on  16th  October
    2014 and promulgated on 11th November 2014.

 2. The appeal concerned a South African man who had sought entry clearance
    under paragraph 194 of the Rules to join his work permit holder  spouse
    in the UK.  She had been issued with a work ancestry  visa  valid  from
    1st August 2010 to 1st August 2015.  The application had  been  refused
    by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  21st  February  2014  both  under
    paragraph 194 and under paragraph  320(7B).   320(7B)  is  a  mandatory
    ground of refusal where an applicant has previously breached  the  UK's
    immigration laws and was 18 or over at the  time  of  his  most  recent
    breach by

    (a)  overstaying;

    (b)  breaching a condition attached to his leave;

    (c)  being an illegal entrant;

    (d)  using deception in an application for entry  clearance,  leave  to
         enter or remain or in order to obtain documents from the  Secretary
         of State or a third party required in support  of  the  application
         whether successful or not,

    There are then various exceptions to that part.

 3. The particular offending behaviour by the Appellant in  this  case  was
    that he had overstayed his own work permit visa by a period  in  excess
    of 90 days.  His visa had expired on 1st August 2013 and he did not  go
    back to South Africa  until  January  2014.  His  explanation  was  not
    accepted, namely that he was saving up to pay the fare.

 4. Although a spouse paragraph 320(7B) can properly  be  applied  to  this
    application and  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  entitled  to  and
    properly refused the application on  that  basis.   Indeed  he  had  no
    choice Judge Roopnarine-Davies agreed with that. At paragraph 4 of  his
    decision he said that he was satisfied that  the  Respondent  correctly
    refused the application under paragraph 320(7B), which is  a  mandatory
    ground for refusal in which he did not have a discretion.

 5. However, having found  that  the  mandatory  refusal  under  the  Rules
    applied, what he should have done then in line with Nagre  [2013]  EWHC
    720 (Admin) , which  we  now  know  remains  good  law,  in  particular
    paragraph 30 thereof, and the most recent  case  of  Khalid  and  Singh
    [2015] EWCA Civ 74  the Judge should have then considered  whether  the
    Article 8 Rules could apply to this case in terms  of  Appendix  FM  or
    paragraph 276ADE.  In fact they do not.  However, what the Judge should
    have done was to consider that and then explain, if he was going to  go
    on to consider Article 8 under the ECHR, what the circumstances of  the
    case  were  that  were  not  covered  by  the   Rules   and   warranted
    consideration outside the Rules.  He did  not  do  so  but  immediately
    considered the ECHR.  That is an error of law.

 6. It is also an error of law, bordering on perversity, to  find  that  an
    Appellant who had overstayed, was subject to a mandatory  refusal,  had
    commenced a relationship whilst unlawfully in the UK with a woman  form
    the same country present in the UK  herself on a temporary basis should
    succeed on Article 8 grounds.  That is an error  of  law.   It  was  an
    error of law in allowing the appeal to fail to attach any weight to the
    320(7B) point and the fact that the Sponsor is in  the  UK  only  on  a
    temporary basis.

 7. He also failed to attach any significant weight to the fact  that  both
    the Appellant and the Sponsor are  South  African  nationals  and  that
    there is absolutely nothing to prevent the Sponsor, who was expecting a
    child, to travel to South Africa and have  the  child  there  with  the
    support of the Appellant.  The couple are known to have got married  in
    South Africa.

 8. All of the factors that weigh against the Appellant in this  case  were
    brushed over or quite simply ignored by the Judge.  All of these amount
    to errors of law of such severity given that they were determinative of
    the outcome, such to mean that the only thing for me to do  is  to  set
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision aside in its entirety.

 9. Having set the decision aside, I then have to decide what to do with it
    next.  There is no appearance by the Sponsor or by Representatives  for
    the Sponsor in front of me and indeed they  chose  not  to  attend  the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.  If there  was  any  attendance
    they may have been able to make better arguments in relation to Article
    8 but the fact is there is not.  There is no  reason  therefore  why  I
    should not go ahead today and redecide the appeal on the basis  of  the
    evidence that there is.

10. So, approaching this appeal in the order the Court of  Appeal  has  now
    indicated  to be correct, the Appellant  does  not  succeed  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  He cannot succeed  under  Appendix  FM.   Paragraph
    276ADE clearly cannot apply because he is outwith this country.

11. I then have to consider whether there is anything about the case  which
    warrants it being decided under the ECHR.  Looking at the facts of this
    case, it is difficult to say that Article 8 is even engaged.   For  the
    reasons that I have indicated above the Sponsor herself  is  only  here
    temporarily and indeed her leave runs out later this year.   She  is  a
    South African national.  The Appellant is  a  South  African  national.
    They got married in South Africa.  If they wish to have a  family  life
    together that should properly be in South Africa, the country of  which
    they are both nationals and where they chose to get married.

12. However, even if Article 8 was  engaged  and  the  issue  was  down  to
    proportionality, for the same reasons that  I  have  already  indicated
    refusal to allow the Appellant entry to the UK  on  a  temporary  basis
    would  be  entirely  proportionate.   It  is  arguable  also  that  any
    interference in their family life is of their  making,  not  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's making.  They are not living together  because  the
    Sponsor has chosen to come and work in the UK.

13. On that basis I dismiss the appeal.


Signed                              Date 25th March 2015


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
