
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04873/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 September 2016                        |On 16 September 2016             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           OLANREWAJO SUNDAY TAIWO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an  appeal  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (hereafter  the
    Respondent, as before the First-tier Tribunal) against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lagunju  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  29
    January 2016, in which he allowed the appeal of Mr Taiwo (hereafter the
    Appellant) under the Immigration Rules.

 2.  That  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  been   against   the
    Respondent's decision of 11 February 2015, cancelling  the  Appellant's
    existing leave and then in turn refusing  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom.  This decision was based on two grounds.  First, it  was  said
    that the Appellant had made false representations and/or had failed  to
    disclose material facts for the purposes of obtaining his  pre-existing
    leave.   Second,  it  was  said  that  there  had  been  a  change   of
    circumstances in the Appellant's case since the original grant of leave
    such that that leave should be cancelled.

 3. The relevant legal provisions relied upon were paragraph 2A(8)  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 and paragraph 321A(1) of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    The Appellant was subsequently removed to Nigeria, where as  far  as  I
    can tell he has resided ever since.  Nonetheless  he  appealed  against
    the Respondent's decision.  That appeal was initially struck out due to
    the  non-payment  of  the  requisite  fee.   However   that   fee   was
    subsequently  paid,  and  by  a  notice  issued  on  9  July  2015  the
    Appellant's appeal was reinstated.   The  Appellant,  having  no  legal
    representatives or Sponsor in the United Kingdom, sought  to  have  his
    appeal decided on the papers  alone  and  as  far  as  I  can  see  the
    Respondent did not object to this course of action.

 4.  So it was that on 11 December 2015 the  judge  considered  the  appeal
    without an oral hearing.

The judge's decision

 5. At paragraph 6 of his decision the judge states:

         "I have been provided with a bundle from the Respondent  containing
         the notice of appeal form and grounds  of  appeal,  the  notice  of
         decision, the Appellant's passport photocopies,  invitation  letter
         and  various  other  documents  relied  upon.   I  have   carefully
         considered all the documents  provided  even  if  not  specifically
         referred to in the decision."

 6. In terms of his findings, the judge concludes that  the  Appellant  did
    not employ false representations nor did he fail to  disclose  material
    facts in respect of the initial grant of leave made on 20 October  2014
    (see paragraphs 8  to  13).   In  respect  of  the  alleged  change  of
    circumstances since leave was initially  granted  the  judge  concludes
    that there were no such changes of circumstances such as to justify the
    cancellation of the existing leave.  He makes reference to the guidance
    provided by the  Respondent  in  respect  of  the  purposes  for  which
    business people  might  enter  the  United  Kingdom  and  concludes  at
    paragraph 17 that the Appellant had not suggested he required entry for
    any personal matters such as a family visit  or  for  tourist  reasons.
    The judge concludes that the reasons that had been provided all related
    to business.  As a result of this the appeal was duly allowed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The grounds of appeal are fairly lengthy but in essence rely throughout
    on what the Appellant is alleged to have  said  in  the  course  of  an
    interview with an Immigration Officer at Terminal 4 Heathrow Airport on
    or soon after 11 February 2015.  This is said to have been included  at
    Appendix D of the Respondent's  bundle.   Specific  answers  from  that
    record of interview are cited throughout the grounds  and  it  is  said
    that the judge had failed to have any or any  adequate  regard  to  the
    interview evidence when reaching his findings of fact.

 8. In granting permission to appeal on 18 July  2016  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Simpson observes that in her view the record of interview was not
    in fact provided to the First-tier Tribunal by the  Respondent.   Judge
    Simpson goes on to state that it appeared to her that  the  appeal  had
    been dealt with in the absence of any documentation from the Respondent
    and she refers back to the fact that the appeal  was  initially  struck
    out for want of payment of a fee and that as far as she could see there
    was no evidence on file to suggest that a Respondent's bundle had  ever
    been requested.  Judge Simpson was of the view that in light of this it
    was arguable that the judge  should  have  made  enquiries  as  to  the
    whereabouts of a Respondent's bundle before proceeding  to  decide  the
    appeal.

The hearing before me

 9. For obvious reasons there was no appearance by the Appellant before  me
    and he remains legally unrepresented.

10. I have to say that this case is to an extent somewhat  confusing.   The
    core question is whether or not that record of interview  was  in  fact
    before the judge when he made  his  decision  on  the  papers.   It  is
    correct that the appeal  was  initially  struck  out  but,  as  I  have
    mentioned already, that appeal  was  subsequently  reinstated.   Having
    looked at the Tribunal's  file  it  is  apparent  that  following  this
    reinstatement, notices (IA10, IA12 and IA35) dated 27 August 2015 and 8
    September 2015 were in fact sent out to the Respondent  requesting  the
    production of a bundle for the purposes of the  pending  appeal.   This
    contradicts the views of Judge Simpson in granting permission.   Having
    regard to the evidence on file I find that Judge Simpson was  wrong  in
    her conclusion that no bundle had been requested.

11. There is I should say no  Respondent's  bundle  on  my  file  which  is
    somewhat odd.  This is so because not only did Mr Kotas have a complete
    Respondent's bundle on his file (a copy of which has now been made  and
    is on the Tribunal's file) but also that the judge himself specifically
    refers at  paragraph  6  of  his  decision  to  a  Respondent's  bundle
    containing the various documents set out therein.  Doing the best I can
    I conclude that there was in fact  a  Respondent's  bundle  before  the
    judge at the time he made his decision on this appeal.  I find that the
    bundle contained a detailed explanatory statement and, importantly, the
    record of interview.  As is clear from that explanatory  statement  the
    answers given at interview were material to the issues  of  whether  or
    not the Appellant's leave fell to be cancelled as  a  result  of  false
    representations and/or a failure to disclose material  facts  and/or  a
    change of circumstances.

12. Turning back to the judge's decision I find that there  is  no  express
    reference to the record of interview whatsoever.  Furthermore, I see no
    implicit reference to the material evidence set out in that  record  of
    interview.  In my view it is inescapable that the judge for some reason
    has overlooked the interview evidence when assessing the  evidence  and
    reaching his findings in  the  Appellant's  case.   This  being  so,  I
    conclude that the judge has  committed  a  material  error  of  law  in
    failing to have regard to relevant evidence that  was  in  fact  before
    him.  Having looked at the interview evidence for myself  I  cannot  be
    satisfied that the judge's decision on the appeal would have  been  the
    same even  if  he  had  considered  the  interview  record  in  detail.
    Therefore the error was material and the judge's decision must  be  set
    aside.

Disposal

13. I considered whether  this  matter  could  be  retained  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal for a re-make decision.  However I have decided to remit  this
    case to the First-tier Tribunal having regard to  paragraph  7  of  the
    relevant Practice Statement.

14. Although I have had no further evidence from the Appellant,  given  the
    nature of the issues in this case it seems to me important and  in  the
    interests of justice to allow him an opportunity to be provided with  a
    copy of the Respondent's bundle, to be able to respond to  all  of  the
    issues, and for a First-tier Tribunal Judge to consider properly all of
    the evidence in this case.

15. The remitted appeal shall be decided without an oral hearing.

16. I would note that before me Mr Kotas confirmed that he was not pursuing
    any allegation of dishonesty on the Appellant's part.  Having regard to
    this, the fact that paragraph 321(A) refers  to  false  representations
    and/or a failure to disclose material facts, in  order  to  obtain  the
    leave (i.e. that leave granted on 20 October 2014) and with regards  to
    paragraphs 8 to 13 of the judge's decision, I conclude that  the  issue
    of paragraph 321(A) has been resolved in the Appellant's favour and  is
    no longer live.

17. Therefore, on deciding the  appeal  on  remittal,  the  sole  issue  is
    whether or not at  the  time  the  Appellant  arrived  at  Terminal  4,
    Heathrow Airport, and when the Respondent's decision  was  subsequently
    made, there had indeed been such a change of  circumstances  since  his
    leave was first granted that cancellation of his leave  was  justified.
    In addressing this issue the First-tier Tribunal will  of  course  have
    regard to all the evidence in the Respondent's bundle and any  evidence
    subsequently  adduced  by  the  Appellant.   I  will   issue   relevant
    directions below.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for a decision without  an  oral
hearing.

Directions to the parties:

       1.     This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal. The scope
          of the new decision on remittal is as set out in my error of  law
          decision;

       2.     The Respondent is to serve a copy of the appeal bundle on the
          Appellant no later than 21 days from  the  date  my  decision  is
          promulgated;

       3.   The Appellant is to send any evidence he wishes to rely  on  to
          the Respondent and First-tier Tribunal  no  later  than  21  days
          after he receives the Respondent's appeal bundle;

       4.   Both parties are to comply with any further  directions  issued
          by the First-tier Tribunal itself.

Directions to Administration

        1. This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal;

        2. The file shall be placed  before  a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
           (other than Judge Lagunju) at any appropriate hearing centre for
           a decision on the papers alone, not before 18 November 2016.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 16 September 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

