
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04097/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Bennett House,     |Determination Promulgated            |
|Stoke on Trent                       |                                     |
|On 5th October 2015                  |On 17th August 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                 LOUISA [L]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Accra
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Parke, Dicksons solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


    1. Ms [L] applied for and was refused entry clearance as the parent of a
       British Citizen child resident in the UK because she  had  failed  to
       provide evidence that she had sole responsibility for the  child  and
       alternatively she had failed to produce  court  documents  confirming
       access rights to the child. She was refused entry  clearance  because
       she did not meet all the requirements of EC-PT.1.1 of the Immigration
       Rules and  her  application  was  thus  refused  under  paragraph  E-
       ECPT.2.4. of Appendix FM. A review by  the  ECM  concluded  that  the
       evidence  produced  did  not  satisfy   him   that   she   had   sole
       responsibility. The ECM also concluded that the evidence provided did
       not show that she had been 'legally granted access rights'  and  that
       the parental responsibility form had not been completed.


    2. The appeal was determined on the papers. Included in the  papers  was
       evidence from the child's father that the child would live  with  him
       (as  he  has  been  doing)  and  that  Ms  [L]  did  not  have   sole
       responsibility.


    3. Ms [L] was granted permission to appeal on the grounds  that  it  was
       arguable that the First-tier Tribunal judge had failed to make  clear
       findings on the two live issues: whether the appellant  had  "access"
       rights and secondly whether she had and intended to  have  an  active
       role in the child's life.


       Background


    4. The child was born in the UK on [ ] 2004. His father (Mr [K])  -  who
       registered as a British Citizen on 3rd May 2013 having had indefinite
       leave to remain since 4th November 2010  -  is  named  on  the  birth
       certificate. His mother -  the  appellant  in  this  appeal  -  is  a
       Ghanaian citizen. Mr [K] and Ms [L] are  not  married  and  were  not
       married at the time of the birth of the child. Ms [L] has visited the
       UK on a number of occasions over the past  10  years.  There  was  no
       assertion that she had remained unlawfully  in  the  UK  or  had  not
       abided by the terms and conditions of her visas.


    5. The application the subject of the decision leading  to  this  appeal
       was for access rights to her child who has lived in the UK since  his
       birth with his father save for at least one visit  to  her  in  Ghana
       prior to the submission of the application.


    6. The ECO considered the application in accordance with Appendix FM. He
       decided


           "....You have provided evidence of your circumstances in  Ghana,
           including your business registration  certificate,  Form  A  and
           evidence of your income from your business. However you have not
           provided evidence that you have sole parental responsibility for
           [the child]. You have provided no evidence of contact with  your
           child since he left Ghana in 2005. Your child  has  been  living
           with his father in the UK. You have provided  no  evidence  that
           you have any input into his social, education or health  matters
           while he has been living with his father. You have  provided  no
           evidence that you have had any economic responsibility for  your
           child. You state you were visited by  your  child  in  Ghana  in
           2013, however you have provided no evidence of  this.  You  have
           provided an affidavit from your child's father, stating you will
           be allowed access to your child, however this also  states  that
           the child will be living with his father on school days (5  days
           a week). You have had previous visit visas to the  UK  but  have
           not indicated in previous applications that  you  were  visiting
           your child. I am therefore not  satisfied  that  you  have  sole
           responsibility for your child or  that  you  have  provided  any
           court documents confirming your access rights  to  the  child  I
           therefore refuse your application under Paragraph E-ECPT.2.4. of
           Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. I have  therefore  refused
           your application because I am not satisfied, that you  meet  all
           of the requirements of paragraph EC-PT.1.1  of  the  Immigration
           Rules."


       Error of law


    7. The relevant paragraphs of the Immigration Rules are as follows:


           E-ECPT.1.1. To  meet  the  eligibility  requirements  for  entry
           clearance as a parent all of the requirements in  paragraphs  E-
           ECPT.2.1. to 4.2. must be met.


           Relationship requirements


           E-ECPT.2.1. The applicant must be aged 18 years or over.


           E-ECPT.2.2. The child of the applicant must be-
              (a) under the age of 18 years at the date of application;
              (b) living in the UK; and
              (c) a British Citizen or settled in the UK.


           E-ECPT.2.3. Either -
              (a) the applicant must have sole parental responsibility  for
              the child; or
              (b) the parent or carer with whom the  child  normally  lives
              must be-
                  (i)  a British Citizen in the UK or settled in the UK;
                  (ii) not the partner of the applicant; and
                  (iii)    the applicant must not be eligible to  apply  for
                  entry clearance as a partner under this Appendix.


           E-ECPT.2.4.
              (a) The applicant must provide evidence that they have either-


                  (i)  sole parental responsibility for the child; or
                  (ii) access rights to the child; and
              (b) The applicant must provide evidence that they are taking,
              and intend to continue to take, an active role in the child's
              upbringing.


    8.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  considers  the   issue   of   sole
       responsibility at length. That is not the issue in this appeal  where
       the appellant is seeking entry clearance to  enjoy  "access"  to  her
       son.


    9. It is unfortunate that the Immigration Rules continue to use the term
       'access' to denote the contact that a  child  has  with  his  or  her
       parents. Contact orders themselves are, since 2014, no longer made in
       family proceedings. Child Arrangements Orders can be made  in  family
       proceedings and these orders can cover  all  matters  relating  to  a
       child including parental responsibility, with whom  the  child  lives
       and for what period of time. Fundamental to such proceedings  however
       is that an order will not be made unless there is a need  -  the  so-
       called 'no order principle'.  A  mother  automatically  has  parental
       responsibility unless it is removed from her by order of  the  court.
       Where the mother and father are not married, if both parents register
       a child born after 1st December 2003 then  the  father  has  parental
       responsibility. A parental  responsibility  agreement  is  signed  in
       circumstances where a father is seeking parental  responsibility  and
       doesn't have it.


   10. Mr [K] has parental responsibility; there is no requirement  for  him
       to apply to have parental  responsibility  and  the  signing  of  the
       agreement that is in the papers does not provide him  with  any  more
       rights than he already has. In circumstances where there is agreement
       between separated parents as to 'access' a Child  Arrangements  Order
       is neither necessary nor required and would not be made.


   11. The First-tier Tribunal judge found


            17. ... As the Entry  Clearance  Manager  pointed  out,  parties
                appear to have confused parental  responsibility  with  sole
                responsibility.  It  was  clear  to  me  on   the   evidence
                submitted,  there  was  little  evidence  other   than   the
                assertion of the child's father that  the  Appellant  played
                any part in the child's upbringing, let  alone  having  sole
                parental responsibility.
            18. Both Entry Clearance officers  were  correct  in  concluding
                that there was no evidence  of  access  rights  having  been
                granted by a competent court or authority, and the  unsigned
                document, coupled to the absence of  a  statement  from  the
                Appellant, did not satisfy me to the required  test.  I  was
                satisfied  that  the  application  failed  and  fell  to  be
                dismissed....


   12. In the Rule 24 response the respondent states:


           "It was not for the judge to delve into the complexities of  the
           Children's [sic] Act. It was the responsibility of the appellant
           to demonstrate that she had access rights to her son.
           It was open to the judge to conclude  on  the  limited  evidence
           before him that the appellant had not discharged the  burden  of
           proof that she had access rights.


   13. The documents before the ECO relevant to the issues  in  this  appeal
       included:


         . certified copy birth certificate
         . certified copy registration certificate of Mr [K]
         . certified copy child's British passport
         . certified copy ILR endorsement in Ghanaian passport  of  Mr  [K]
           and identity page of his Ghanaian passport
         . Affidavit of Mr [K] sworn 21st March 2014
         . Visa application form


   14. Mr [K]'s affidavit states that the appellant  has  played  an  active
       role in the child's upbringing; that he visited his mother  in  Ghana
       for the first time in 2013; that he and  the  appellant  have  agreed
       that the child will stay with him for most of his school days and the
       rest of the week with his mother; that the appellant has been  taking
       and will continue to take an active role in their son's upbringing.


   15. Documents submitted with the appeal include:

         . The passport of the child showing his departure  from  Ghana  in
           2013
         .  Information  sheets  from   Becket   solicitors   on   parental
           responsibility  and  an  (uncompleted)  Parental  Responsibility
           Agreement
         . Copies of phone cards


   16.  Contrary  to   the   respondent's   Rule   24   response,   parental
       responsibility is not a "complexity" of the  Children  Act;  nor  are
       issues as regards contact. To plead ignorance of a fundamental  piece
       of legislation as it affects children and families is no  excuse.  It
       was the  responsibility  of  the  representatives  to  bring  to  the
       attention of the judge matters of law of which he may not  have  been
       fully aware. The Immigration Rules and guidance  issued  pursuant  to
       those Rules are matters that should be in the minds of both those who
       take decisions and those who present cases. Immigration law does  not
       exist in a vacuum.


   17. The judge failed to  take  account  of  the  parental  responsibility
       vested in the father and that  'access'  does  not  require  a  court
       order. The entry clearance officer failed to take  a  decision  based
       upon the law - namely that 'access' does not require a court order.


   18. It is not clear from the papers whether the Entry  Clearance  Officer
       was satisfied that the appellant met the other  requirements  of  the
       Rules as  regards  entry  clearance  for  'access',  having  taken  a
       restricted view of the necessity for a court order.


   19. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal judge failed to  consider
       the decision of the respondent as it reflected the application  made.
       The judge  failed  to  consider  the  relevant  legal  provisions  as
       relating to Child Arrangements Orders and the 'no order principle'. I
       am also satisfied that the entry  clearance  officer  has  failed  to
       reach a lawful decision on the application before him.  I  allow  the
       appeal as not in accordance with  the  law  and  the  application  is
       therefore to be placed before  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  for  a
       lawful decision to be made.


   20. No doubt the appellant will submit further and up-to-date information
       as to her means and the anticipated future  arrangements  as  regards
       the child and her past involvement in the child's upbringing.


       Conclusions:


       The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the
       making of an error on a point of law.


       I set aside the decision and  direct  that  it  be  remitted  to  the
       respondent for a lawful decision to be made.


     Date 4th January 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
