
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04661/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke                   |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 4th July 2016                                |On 22nd July 2016          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                               MUHAMMAD RIZWAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Solicitor of Fountains Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. In this appeal the Secretary of State becomes the appellant.   However,
    for the avoidance of confusion and for the sake of consistency, I shall
    refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

Background

 2. On 9th May 2016 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  E  B  Grant  gave
    permission to the respondent to appeal against the decision of Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal McDade in which he allowed the  appeal  against
    the decision of the respondent Entry Clearance Officer to refuse  entry
    clearance as a partner in accordance with the provisions of Appendix FM
    of the Immigration Rules.  The appellant is a male citizen of  Pakistan
    born on 1st July 1990.

 3.  Judge  Grant  noted  that  the  grounds  argued  that  the  judge  had
    misdirected himself with regard to the application of Article  8.  This
    was because it was contended that the judge failed to consider  whether
    or not the circumstances of the claim were exceptional and the  outcome
    unjustifiably harsh, it being open to the  appellant  to  take  another
    English language test and make a further entry  clearance  application.
    The judge had also allegedly failed to acknowledge that,whilst the best
    interests of a child were a primary consideration, they  were  not  the
    only interests to consider  in  the  proportionality  assessment.   The
    judge should not have found that there were  exceptional  circumstances
    enabling him to allow  the  appeal.   Judge  Grant  thought  all  these
    matters were arguable.

Submissions

 4. Mr McVeety confirmed that the respondent relied upon the terms  of  the
    grounds of application and the grant.  He pointed out that a  grant  of
    leave under Article 8 would not, in any event, have been as valuable to
    the appellant as a grant of settlement under the Rules.  The  appellant
    could have come within the Rules if a fresh application had  been  made
    and a valid English language certificate submitted.

 5. In relation to the issue of finance also  raised  in  the  refusal,  Mr
    McVeety acknowledged that it had been accepted, before the judge,  that
    the sponsor was earning the required gross annual salary at the time of
    the decision.

 6. Mr McVeety also contended that it could not be a breach  of  Article  8
    if, as the judge had decided,  the  appellant  could  easily  meet  the
    requisite English language standard.  The appellant was living  outside
    the United Kingdom so  nothing  would  be  lost  by  making  a  further
    application.  He added that a 'near miss' did not strengthen the  human
    rights claim.  He  thought  that  the  judge  had  not  identified  any
    compelling circumstances  justifying  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.

 7. My attention was drawn to paragraphs 51 and 53 of the Court  of  Appeal
    decision in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 specifying that good  reason
    should be put forward to justify giving preferential  treatment  to  an
    applicant in relation to the supporting documentary  evidence  required
    under the Rules.  Further, as paragraph 58 of the same  decision  makes
    clear, an applicant is not entitled to apply for leave to  enter  at  a
    time when the requirements of the Rules are not satisfied, in the  hope
    that by the time  the  appellate  process  has  been  exhausted,  those
    requirements will be satisfied as that would be an illegitimate way  of
    trying to jump the queue for consideration.  Mr  McVeety  concluded  by
    indicating that he believed the  appeal  should  be  withdrawn  by  the
    appellant.

 8. Mr Howard relied upon the reply submitted under Rule  24  in  which  he
    also refers to the decision of the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) but on
    the basis  that  the  judge  had  carried  out  the  correct  test  and
    assessment.  He drew my attention to  paragraph  56  of  that  decision
    pointing out that a "near miss" may be a relevant  consideration  which
    tips the balance under Article 8.  The response also  argues  that  the
    judge had given clear and  cogent  reasoning  for  finding  there  were
    exceptional circumstances and so had directed himself properly.

 9. Mr Howard contended that it  was  in  paragraph  3  of  the  First-tier
    Judge's decision that the  compelling  circumstances  were  identified,
    particularly the need to require the appellant to sit  another  English
    language test, for the third time, when, had a second certificate  been
    with the Entry Clearance Officer at the time of his decision, a further
    application  would  not  have  been  required.    These   circumstances
    therefore affected the reunification of  the  appellant's  family,  the
    best interests of his child and the length of  separation.   All  these
    were factors considered by the judge.

10. Mr Howard indicated that, if an error was, however, found then the best
    interests of the appellant's child would need up-to-date  consideration
    with the provision of fresh evidence.  On that basis he suggested  that
    the matter should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Conclusions

11. After I had considered the matter for a few moments, I indicated that I
    was satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Judge showed material
    errors on points of law such that it should be set aside and the appeal
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.  My reasons for
    that conclusion now follow.

12. Although the main issue before the First-tier Judge was the appellant's
    failure to provide the appropriate English  language  test  certificate
    (it having been found that  the  appellant  could  meet  the  financial
    requirements of the Rules), the judge's approach  to  consideration  of
    human rights issues outside the Immigration Rules is flawed.  The judge
    thought that a relevant circumstance justifying  consideration  of  the
    Article 8 claim outside the Rules was because the appellant had sent to
    the Entry Clearance Officer a valid English language  test  certificate
    even if that did not arrive  before  the  refusal  decision  was  made.
    However, I note that the appellant claimed he had passed an  acceptable
    English language examination but applied for entry clearance before the
    certificate confirming his success was available.   That  situation  is
    dealt with by the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) in  paragraph  58,  the
    relevant part of which I have already summarised, above.  An  applicant
    should  not apply for leave to enter at a time when it was  known  that
    the requirements of  the  Rules  (particularly  documentary)  were  not
    satisfied.  Neither that circumstance nor the fact that  the  appellant
    was already separated from his family and, on the basis that  he  could
    comply with the Rules, was in a position to make a further, successful,
    application were factors considered by the judge before concluding that
    there were compelling circumstances.

13.  Additionally,  the  decision  does  not  show  that  the  judge   gave
    appropriate or any consideration to the public interest in  immigration
    control before  reaching  his  decision.   There  is  no  reference  to
    Sections 117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act
    2014 and it is not clear that the judge applied the principles relating
    to the public interest even if he did not  specifically  refer  to  the
    Sections.  The decision therefore shows a material error on a point  of
    law in this respect also.

14. As the re-making of the decision will require consideration of evidence
    to the date of hearing about the  best  interests  of  the  appellant's
    child in the United Kingdom in addition to the  basis  for  considering
    human rights outside the Rules, it  is  appropriate  that  this  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.  This
    accords with  the  Practice  Statements  by  the  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals of 25th September 2012 at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows an error on  a  point  of  law
such that if should be set aside and re-made by remittal to  the  First-tier
Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  nor  do  I
consider one appropriate in this case.

DIRECTIONS

15. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh on
    all issues.

16. The hearing will take place at the Stoke Hearing Centre on a date to be
    specified by the Resident Judge.

17. No interpreter will be provided for  the  hearing  unless  the  parties
    indicate to the contrary.

18. The time estimate for the remitted hearing is two hours.






Signed                              Date 22nd July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
