
OA 04214 2013
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 3 June 2014                                |On 04th June 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                 (New DELHI)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                RUPESH GURUNG
                       (Anonymity Direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble
For the Respondent:    Mr H Shoeb (Howe & Co)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer but I will refer  to
      the original appellant, a citizen of Nepal born on 12 July,  1989,  as
      the appellant herein.

   2. The appellant is the son of a former Gurkha soldier  who  applied  for
      settlement in the United Kingdom. The Entry Clearance Officer  refused
      the application on 3 January, 2013. The  appellant  appealed  and  his
      appeal came before First-tier Judge Tootell on 6 February, 2014.

   3. The judge noted that the appellant's father had been granted status as
      a result of his 19 years of service with the Gurkhas  and  his  mother
      who had also been granted settlement had returned to Nepal in order to
      await the outcome of the appeal. It was submitted that  the  appellant
      was not married nor leading  an  independent  life  and  was  entirely
      financially dependent on his father. Had the father been permitted  to
      settle in the United Kingdom following his discharge from the  British
      Army the appellant would have qualified for settlement  as  the  minor
      child of his father.

   4. The judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant's  father,  the
      sponsor. He had initially applied for  settlement  in  2006  but  this
      application had been refused. However he had appealed the decision and
      had been  successful  in  2009.  His  wife  had  subsequently  applied
      successfully for  settlement.  He  was  still  sending  funds  to  the
      appellant who was a student and who wished to continue his studies  in
      United Kingdom.

   5. In giving her decision the judge noted that it was common ground  that
      the appellant did not meet the requirements  of  appendix  FM  of  the
      immigration  rules.  She  accepted  the  submissions   made   on   the
      appellant's  behalf  that  there  were  compelling  circumstances  not
      recognised under the immigration rules which would justify a  separate
      or additional analysis of the application under  article  8,  applying
      Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  00640
      (IAC). She reminded herself of the questions identified  in  Razgar  v
      Secretary of State  [2004] UKHL 27.

   6. She found that Article 8(1) was engaged for the following reasons:

           47.   Having considered the evidence and  the  visa  application
           form,  the  entry  clearance  record,  the   sponsor's   witness
           statement and his oral evidence, I  accept  and  find  that  the
           appellant was living with both of his parents in Nepal prior  to
           his father's departure. I accept that the appellant's mother who
           was granted settlement after her husband, now divides  her  time
           between her husband in the UK and her son in Nepal.


           48.    I  accept  that  the  appellant   is   accommodated   and
           financially maintained solely by his parents. I accept  that  he
           has not formed his own separate family unit or independent life.
           I accept that it is his and his parents perception that he still
           forms part of their family unit and that the common intention is
           that he should continue to live with them upon  arrival  in  the
           UK.


           49.   The appellant has I find, been in full-time  education  up
           until now which has been fully sponsored by his parents.  It  is
           furthermore the common intention that  he  should  continue  his
           studies in the UK supported by his parents.


           50.   Finally, I  find  that  there  are  close  emotional  ties
           between the sponsor, his wife and his son."

   7. The judge found that the interference was in accordance with  the  law
      but having regard to  the  circumstances  in  which  the  Gurkha  Army
      veterans  found  themselves  the  respondent's  decision  was  neither
      necessary nor proportionate.

   8. In paragraph 55 of the decision the judge stated as follows:

           "To the factors which have  led  me  to  the  finding  that  the
           respondent's decision is disproportionate recited above,  I  add
           the following. It is part of the respondent's argument that  the
           sponsor and his wife can relocate to Nepal either temporarily or
           on a permanent basis. I find however that this would involve the
           sponsor and his wife's potentially  giving  up  their  grant  of
           settlement,  thereby  entirely  frustrating  the  long   delayed
           honouring of the Military Covenant and  the  redressing  of  the
           historic injustice to the sponsor."

   9. The judge also took into account that the sponsor and  his  wife  were
      now relatively elderly and "their ability to regularly travel  between
      Nepal and the UK and  adapt  to  changed  circumstances  in  order  to
      preserve family life, is more  limited  necessarily  than  in  younger
      persons."

  10. When all the factors were taken cumulatively the judge considered that
      the only country in which the appellant and his family  members  could
      meaningfully  enjoy  family  life  was  in  the  United  Kingdom.  The
      consequences of the historic injustice outweighed the  concerns  about
      immigration  control.  The   respondent's   decision   represented   a
      disproportionate and unlawful interference in the appellant's and  his
      family member's right to respect for their family light under  Article
      8. The appeal was accordingly allowed under Article 8,  it  not  being
      suggested that the appeal  could  be  allowed  under  the  immigration
      rules.

  11. The respondent applied for  permission  to  appeal  arguing  that  the
      immigration rules were a complete code, relying on MF (Nigeria) [2013]
      EWCA Civ 1192. Apart from Gulshan, reliance  was  placed  on  Nagre  v
      Secretary of State [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin). Exceptional  circumstances
      were circumstances where refusal would lead to an unjustifiably  harsh
      outcome.

  12. Inadequate reasons had been given for why the appellant  circumstances
      were either exceptional or  compelling.  Relationships  between  adult
      siblings or adult  children  and  their  parents  would  not  normally
      constitute  family  life  unless  there  were  special   elements   of
      dependency beyond normal emotional ties: Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31.
      The appellant had lived apart from his parents in a different  country
      when his mother had left to join  his  father  from  July  2011  until
      February 2012. Financial remittances were  insufficient  to  establish
      the  requisite  degree  of  dependency  which  had  to  be  more  than
      financial. The dependency was one of choice  and  not  necessity.  The
      appellant could support himself in Nepal having  been  educated  to  a
      high standard. The judge had had regard  to  immaterial  matters.  The
      appellant was aged 24 and could not meet the test in  Kugathas.  There
      was no evidence of any historical injustice in the absence of evidence
      that his father had intended to settle in the United Kingdom prior  to
      the appellant turning 18 years of age.

  13. Permission to appeal was granted by  Designated  Judge  Coates  on  23
      April, 2014. A response was filed to the grant of  permission  by  the
      appellant's representatives on 12 May, 2014. It was pointed  out  that
      this was not a deportation case unlike MF  (Nigeria).  The  corrective
      principle identified in Gurung [2013] EWCA Civ 8 [2013] I WLR 2546  at
      paragraph 42 already took into account the public interest:

           "It follows that we do not accept the submission of  Mr  Drabble
           that the weight to be given to the  historic  injustice  in  the
           Gurkha cases is just as strong as the weight to be given to  the
           injustice caused to the BOCs. The fact that the right to  settle
           enjoyed by Gurkhas is less secure than that enjoyed by the  BOCs
           is a relevant factor. But it also follows that we do  not  agree
           with  the  UT  that  the  weight  to  be  given   is   generally
           "substantially less" in the Gurkha cases. If a Gurkha  can  show
           that, but for the historic injustice, he would have  settled  in
           the UK at a time when his dependant (now) adult child would have
           been able to accompany him as a dependant child under the age of
           18, that is a strong reason for holding that it is proportionate
           to permit the adult child  to  join  his  family  now.  To  that
           extent, the Gurkha and BOC cases are similar.  That  is  why  we
           cannot agree that, as a general rule, the weight accorded to the
           injustice should be substantially different in the two cases."


  14. The judge's findings were consistent with the decision in Gulshan.

  15. In relation to the issue of dependency reference was made  to  Ghising
      [2012] UKUT 00160, approved in Gurung at paragraphs 44-46, as well  as
      RP (Zimbabwe) [2008] EWCA Civ 825 and AA  v  UK  8000/08  [2011]  ECHR
      1345. The appellant had not founded a  family  life  of  his  own  and
      continued to reside in the family home.

  16. It had been argued there was no evidence that the  appellant's  father
      intended to settle in  the  United  Kingdom  prior  to  the  appellant
      reaching the age of 18. In giving oral evidence the sponsor  had  made
      it clear that he had initially applied for settlement in 2006 and this
      application had been refused. He had successfully appealed in 2009.

  17. A point was taken on the sponsor's military history but no submissions
      had been advanced as to how this would adversely affect the merits  of
      the application.

  18. At the hearing Mr Bramble relied on the grounds of  appeal.  Mr  Shoeb
      referred to the response and submitted that the judge had not erred in
      law in finding that the appellant was dependent and this  was  a  case
      where there had been an historic injustice as the sponsor had  applied
      as early as 2006 under the policy. Mr Bramble made no response to  the
      submissions or to the response that had been filed.

  19. In my view the judge gave very careful attention to the issues in this
      case and directed herself correctly on the law. The findings  of  fact
      that she made were open to her.

  20. As was noted in Gurung at paragraph 45 "whether an  individual  enjoys
      family life is one of fact and depends on a careful  consideration  of
      all the relevant facts of the particular case."  I  am  not  satisfied
      that the judge arguably misdirected herself in concluding as she  did.
      The grounds go  no  further  than  expressing  disagreement  with  the
      judge's findings which were fully and cogently reasoned.

  21. In relation to  the  point  made  about  the  appellant  suffering  no
      injustice it is rightly pointed out that the  sponsor  initially  made
      his application for settlement in 2006 when the  appellant  was  still
      under 18. Accordingly the  appellant  can  bring  himself  within  the
      Gurung principle as set out in paragraph 42 which I have  referred  to
      above:

           "...If a Gurkha can show that, but for the  historic  injustice,
           he would have settled in the UK at a  time  when  his  dependant
           (now) adult child would have been able to  accompany  him  as  a
           dependant child under the age of 18, that is a strong reason for
           holding that it is proportionate to permit the  adult  child  to
           join his family now...."

  22. I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  approach  of  the  First-tier  Judge
      conflicted with the jurisprudence that has built up concerning the new
      rules and indeed it was perfectly compatible with Gulshan.

  23. The points made by the respondent in the grounds of  appeal  were  not
      developed by Mr Bramble. In my view the arguments were rebutted by the
      response filed on behalf of the appellant and  the  grounds  raise  no
      error of law on the part of the First-tier Judge.



Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               4 June 2014

