


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
OA/04894/2015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                          |           Decision          |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On: 5th December 2016                         |           On: 7th December  |
|                                              |2016                         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                           Master Sukrit Sukarint
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                      Entry Clearance Officer, Bangkok
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:      Mr McIndoe, Latitude Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Thailand.  He is a minor who seeks entry
    clearance to join his parents in the United Kingdom.    It  is  not  in
    dispute that both of his biological parents are present and settled  in
    the United Kingdom.






 2. When the Appellant sought entry clearance he was 15 years old. He  said
    that he was living with his grandparents but wanted to  come  and  live
    with his mother and father.

 3. The ECO considered the application with reference to paragraph  297  of
    the Immigration Rules. The application was refused on the 3rd  February
    2015 for two reasons. Firstly, the  ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    proposed  accommodation  was  adequate.  Secondly,  the  ECO  was   not
    satisfied that the Appellant's parent's had had  "sole  responsibility"
    for his upbringing, noting that  they  chose  to  leave  him  with  his
    grandparents in Thailand whilst they came to  the  United  Kingdom  and
    worked.

 4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and on the 12th April
    2016 the matter came before  Judge  Pickup.  Although  the  Appellant's
    parents attended the hearing, he was  not  legally  represented.  In  a
    determination dated 12th April 2016 the Tribunal held that the proposed
    accommodation was  adequate.  There  has  been  no  challenge  to  that
    finding. The Tribunal then turned  to  consider  sub-paragraph  (i)  of
    paragraph 297. It noted the evidence that the Appellant's  parents  had
    continued to have close contact with their son and that they  had  been
    involved in the decision-making  process  about  matters  such  as  his
    education, but found that there was no credible evidence that he  could
    not continue to live with his grandparents.  Finding that  the  parents
    had not had 'sole responsibility' the appeal was dismissed.



    Error of Law

 5. Paragraph 297(i) of the Immigration Rules reads as follows:

297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave to
enter the United Kingdom as a child of a parent, parents or relative
present and settled or being admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom
are that he:

        i) Is seeking leave to enter or accompany or join a parent, parents
           or a relative in one of the following circumstances:


           a) Both parents are settled in the United Kingdom; or
           b) Both parents are being admitted on the same occasion for
              settlement; or
           c) One parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and
              the other is being admitted on the same occasion for
              settlement; or
           d) One parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
              being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and the
              other parent is dead; or
           e) One parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
              being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has
              had sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or
           f) One parent or a relative is present and settled in the United
              Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement
              and there are serious or compelling family or other
              considerations which make exclusion undesirable and suitable
              arrangements have been made for the child's care;

 6. As can be seen from the structure of sub-paragraph  (i),  each  of  the
    requirements (a) to (f) are alternatives. An applicant is only required
    to show that he is  seeking  to  join  his  parent,  parents  or  other
    relative in one of the circumstances set out. He was  not  required  to
    show that he met all of them. In this case the  applicant  plainly  met
    the requirement at (i)(a). Both of his biological parents  are  present
    and settled in the United Kingdom. There was no need to consider  'sole
    responsibility' or the reasons why the Appellant has been  living  with
    his grandparents.


 7. That being the only matter  left  in  issue  following  the  Tribunal's
    resolution of the accommodation question, the appeal must be allowed.




    Decisions


 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and the decision is set aside  to  the  limited  extent  identified
    above.


 9. The decision is remade: the appeal is  allowed  under  the  immigration
    rules.

10. There is no direction for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             5th December
                                    2016




