

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
Appeal number: OA /04141/2015

                                                       OA/04145/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at                                      |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 12 July 2017                               |On 19 July 2017              |


                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                   Between

                         PARVEZ AHMED & RUMANA BEGUM
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And



                                  NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:  Anawar Miah
For the Respondent: Mr S Staunton

                            DECISION AND REASONS



       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Nathan Moxon), sitting at Hatton Cross on  15  November
    2016, to  dependent relative appeals by citizens of Bangladesh, born  4
    December 1997 and 1 January 1999. They had applied for  visas  to  join
    their father (the  sponsor),  who  came  here  in  2007,  and  has  had
    indefinite leave to remain  since  2009.  Visas  were  refused  on  the
    grounds that the entry clearance officer did not accept that

    a) they were related to the sponsor as claimed; or

    b) he had sole responsibility for them.

 2. The judge had refused a very late application  for  an  adjournment  to
    obtain DNA evidence. Permission to appeal was given on the  basis  that
    this was nevertheless disproportionate  to  the  overriding  objective,
    since the appellants were out of the country, and so the respondent had
    nothing to lose by an adjournment, while DNA was the only reliable  way
    of establishing the relationship.

 3. While the hearing judge  had  found  against  the  appellants  on  both
    grounds, the permission judge also  considered  it  arguable  that  the
    resulting  hearing  had  been  unfair  to  the  appellants,   Mr   Miah
    realistically conceded that the judge's findings on sole responsibility
    would  have  been  unchallengeable  without  his  refusal  to  adjourn.
    However, he clearly needed to show some kind of causal link between the
    two points.

 4.  DNA  evidence  has  now  been  obtained,  and  shows  an  overwhelming
    likelihood that the sponsor is the father of the  appellants.  I  agree
    that in the particular circumstances of this case it  might  have  been
    proportionate to wait for the results; but the question is whether  the
    judge's refusal to  do  so  unfairly  affected  his  findings  on  sole
    responsibility.

 5. These findings were not challenged on any point intrinsic  to  them  in
    the grounds of appeal; but Mr Miah argued that, because the sponsor had
    already applied for DNA testing before asking for the adjournment, more
    weight should have been given to his evidence on  sole  responsibility.
    Mr Miah said the sponsor had  taken  the  view  that,  because  he  had
    divorced the appellants' mother after her departure in 2005, since when
    they had been living with their paternal grandparents, now too  old  to
    look after them, there was no need to provide any further  evidence  to
    show sole responsibility.

 6. Conclusions     That decision was of course one for  the  sponsor.  The
    judge dealt with the evidence, or lack of it, in some detail, and  went
    on at paragraph 43:

       Even had positive DNA evidence been  adduced  to  show  paternity,  I
       would nevertheless not  be  satisfied  given  the  lack  of  evidence
       addressing the clear concerns of  the  Respondent,  and  which  could
       reasonably have been expected to have been obtained in the 22  months
       since the refusal,  the  Sponsor  has  sole  responsibility  for  the
       Appellants.

 7. It is quite clear from this finding that the judge did  not  close  his
    mind  to  the  evidence  on  sole  responsibility,   and   specifically
    considered it also on the basis  that  paternity  had  been  shown,  as
    indeed he did the appellants' human rights grounds: see paragraph 46. I
    do not accept that the judge's refusal to adjourn the hearing  for  DNA
    testing unfairly affected his sole responsibility findings, and  in  my
    view there was no arguable error of law in his decision.

Appeals
                               [pic]
                                   (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                               13.07.2017
