
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04478/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Taylor House                    |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                         |Promulgated                         |
|On 8 October 2015                        |             On 14 October 2015     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M LEWIS

                                   Between

                           MISS KALYANI SIVANATHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Pararajasingam of Freedman Alexander LLP
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The History of the Appeal

1.   The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka, appealed against the refusal  of
    the Respondent to grant her entry to the United Kingdom  on  the  basis
    that, although she had previously held a Tier 2 (General) UK  residence
    permit, her leave under it had been curtailed.  Her appeal was heard by
    Judge Richards-Clarke sitting at Hatton Cross on 29 January 2015.  Both
    parties were represented, the Appellant by  Ms Pararajasingam.   In  a
    decision of 7th, promulgated on 26th,  February  the  2015  appeal  was
    dismissed under the Immigration Rules and under Article 8 of  the  1950
    Convention.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted to the Appellant on 23  June  2015  by
    Judge Nicolson who, after extending the time for appeal, wrote:

         "5.  In this case the appellant had been  granted  a  Tier  2  visa
             valid until 10 July 2016 to work  as  a  business  development
             manager at the Fer View Residential Care Home.   The  evidence
             indicates that in August 2013 the respondent was  informed  by
             the residential care home that the appellant was not  employed
             there, that in December 2013 the appellant  travelled  to  Sri
             Lanka, that her leave was curtailed on 21 January 2014 to take
             effect on 22 March  2014  and  that  the  appellant  was  then
             refused leave to enter when she arrived back in the  UK  on  1
             February 2014 on the ground that she no longer  held  a  valid
             visa.  (The respondent's bundle includes a  second  notice  of
             refusal/cancellation of leave dated 25 March 2014 pointing out
             that she had never worked in the  employment  covered  by  the
             Tier 2 visa although that was not the decision under appeal).

         6.   The grounds contend that the respondent had failed to  provide
             evidence to show that the appellant had  not  worked  for  the
             care home.  However, there was ample evidence before the judge
             to show that the appellant had not worked for the care home  -
             the respondent's bundle included an immigration officer's note
             that the officer spoke to the care home owner,  who  said  she
             had never heard of the appellant, and an interview  record  in
             which the appellant admitted she had been working for  TK  Max
             because there was no work for her at the care home.

         7.   The grounds also contend that the judge  should  have  allowed
             the appeal against the decision of 1 February 2014,  taken  on
             the basis that the had had no leave, because  the  appellant's
             leave was extant when she arrived back in this country as  the
             respondent had failed to serve the notice  of  curtailment  on
             the appellant prior to her return.  It is concluded  that,  if
             nothing else, the decision of  1  February  2014  was  not  in
             accordance with the law.

         8.   The judge found at paragraph 23 that, since the appellant  was
             effectively seeking leave to enter for a  purpose  other  than
             that specified in her original entry clearance, section  89(1)
             of the 2002 Act (which excluded a  right  of  appeal  save  on
             human rights grounds) applied.  In the  light  of  R  (on  the
             application of Aiyegbei) v SSHD (2009) EWHC 1412  (admin)  the
             judge  arguably  erred   in   that   conclusion.    In   those
             circumstances, it is arguable that the  decision  taken  on  1
             February 2014 to refuse the appellant leave to  enter  on  the
             basis that  she  did  not  have  existing  leave  was  not  in
             accordance with the law because she did have  leave  as  there
             was no evidence the notice of curtailment had been served upon
             the appellant and, in any event,  the  notice  only  curtailed
             leave from 22 March 2014 anyway.

         9.   As evidence shows that the appellant entered the UK as a  Tier
             2 migrant with leave to do a specific job, that she did not do
             it, that she breached the terms of her visa in  doing  another
             job and that the basis of her original  entry  clearance/leave
             no  longer  exists,  the  appellant's  ultimate  prospects  of
             success appear to be very limited indeed.  Nonetheless,  since
             there was an arguable error of law in relation to the validity
             of the decision of 1 February, permission is  granted.   I  do
             not refuse permission on the remaining grounds  despite  their
             relative lack of merit."

3.   In a Rule 24 response of 7 July 2015 the Respondent submitted that  the
    decision should be upheld.  Under Section 8ZB, within paragraph  4,  of
    The Immigration (Leave to Enter and Remain) (Amendment) Order 2013  the
    curtailment notice, having been sent by post to  a  UK  address  on  21
    January 2014, was deemed, unless the contrary was proved, to have  been
    served two days later, and so on Thursday 23 January  2014.   Thus  the
    Appellant had no entry clearance or leave to remain under Article 13(3)
    of that Order when she attempted to re-enter the UK on 1 February 2014.

4.   The hearing before me took the form of submissions, which I have  taken
    into account.  I reserved my decision.

Determination

5.   In submissions both representatives accepted  that  the  matter  turned
    upon whether the notice curtailing the Appellant's leave to  remain  in
    the UK was served upon her.

6.   Being outside the UK, the Appellant did not attend the hearing.   I  do
    not observe within the evidence any statement from her.  There  was  in
    evidence before  Judge  Richards-Clarke  a  skeleton  argument  of  her
    solicitors.  This argues at paragraphs 13  and  14  that  although  the
    Refusal Letter states that the Appellant was informed on 27 August 2013
    that her employment  had  been  curtailed,  there  was  no  documentary
    evidence to support this, and that the Respondent  bore,  and  had  not
    discharged  the  obligation  of   evidencing   the   cancellation   and
    curtailment of her leave.  This skeleton argument is dated  27  January
    2015, which is two days before the  date  of  the  hearing,  so  it  is
    unlikely that the Respondent became  aware  of  this  issue  until  the
    hearing.

7.   At paragraph 13 of the decision the judge recorded  the  submission  on
    behalf of the Appellant that she did not know, when she returned to the
    UK on 1 February 2014 and was notified of it, that her leave  to  enter
    had been curtailed on 21 January 2014 with an  expiration  date  of  22
    March 2014.  At paragraph 14 he recorded the counterpart submission  of
    the Respondent that the curtailment of leave on 21 January 2014 was not
    in dispute.  This suggests that until hearing the submissions on behalf
    of the Appellant the Respondent had not been aware  that  this  was  an
    issue.

8.   At paragraph 22 the judge found  that  when  the  Appellant  sought  to
    enter the UK on 1 February 2014 she did not have a valid  UK  residence
    permit or visa as her leave had  been  curtailed.   On  that  basis  he
    upheld the Respondent's decision.  Thus he was impliedly rejecting  the
    submission on behalf of the Appellant that she had been unaware of  the
    curtailment of her leave.

9.   The judge did reach findings, at paragraph 21,  about  the  termination
    of the Appellant's employment.  However he did  not  give  reasons  for
    rejecting the submission on behalf of the Appellant that she  had  been
    unaware of the curtailment of her leave to remain.  He was entitled  to
    reject this submission, but was required to give reasons for so  doing.
    The omission to give reasons was an error of law, material  because  it
    was capable of affecting, as it did, the outcome  of  the  appeal.   On
    that basis I set the decision aside.

10.  At the error of law hearing, Mr Tarlow submitted  the  results  of  two
    searches which he had made the previous day.  One, on the  Home  Office
    system, shows a  curtailment  notice  having  been  despatched  to  the
    Appellant on 21 January 2014 with an expiry date of 22 March 2014.  The
    second, of the Royal Mail Track and Trace System,  shows,  against  the
    allocated reference number, which corresponds with  that  in  the  Home
    Office record, that the item, sent by Royal Mail  Signed  For  Service,
    was not recorded as having been signed for.

11.  These two items of evidence came into being after the hearing,  on  the
    initiative of Mr Tarlow.  They record the position at the date  of  the
    hearing.  They relate to an issue which arose only at the hearing.  The
    Respondent, who knew the allocated Royal Main reference number, did not
    know of the issue and so had no reason to initiate this  search  before
    the hearing.  The Appellant had no reason to initiate it, and  did  not
    know the reference number.  I accordingly admit this evidence, properly
    initiated by the Respondent, in fairness to the Appellant.

12.  The 2013 Order provides for deemed service two days after  despatch  by
    postal service unless the contrary is proved, which  I  find  from  the
    evidence that it is.  I accordingly find that  the  curtailment  notice
    had not at the date of the hearing, and has not still, been served upon
    the Appellant.  Hence it is for the Respondent  to  decide  whether  to
    serve a new notice.

Decision

13.  The original decision contained an error of law, and is set aside.

14.  The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.


Signed
    Dated: 13 October 2015



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Lewis
