

                                               [pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/04461/2013


                                           THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Determination promulgated|
|On August 21, 2014              |On August 26, 2014       |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                              MASTER XIMIN GUO
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Khan, Counsel, instructed by Haq
      Hamilton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, born January 6, 1996, is a citizen of China. On November
    5, 2012 he applied for entry clearance for the purposes  of  settlement
    as a child of a person settled in the United Kingdom.

 2. The respondent refused his application on January 11, 2013 on the basis
    he/she was not satisfied:

     a. The appellant was related as claimed.
     b. The father (sponsor) had sole responsibility for his upbringing and
        there were serious and compelling family  or  other  considerations
        which made his exclusion undesirable.
     c. There was adequate accommodation.

 3. On January 28, 2013 the appellant appealed under Section 82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The respondent  reviewed
    the application in light of further evidence on  August  28,  2013  but
    maintained the refusal.

 4. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Carroll
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on February 25, 2014 and  in  a
    determination promulgated on March 5, 2014 he dismissed the  appeal  on
    the sole ground he was not satisfied there was adequate  accommodation.
    He accepted the appellant was related as claimed and  as  both  parents
    were now living in the United Kingdom there was  no  longer  any  issue
    about the appellant's father having to have sole responsibility or  any
    need to find serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations
    which made his exclusion undesirable.

 5. The appellant appealed that decision on May  14,  2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  McDade  on  May
    22, 2014 as he found  it  was  arguable  the  FtTJ  had  erred  in  his
    assessment of the evidence relating to the accommodation.


 6. Having read the papers prior to the hearing I raised  with  Mr  McVeety
    whether he was objecting to the application because the FtTJ  had  made
    significant findings at paragraph [10] of his determination:

     a. He accepted the sponsor and his wife's evidence that only they  and
        their young son lived in the property.


     b. He accepted their evidence about how  many  bedrooms  were  in  the
        property.

     c. He had a report, albeit  undated,  that  confirmed  their  evidence
        about the size of the property.

 7. Mr McVeety accepted there was an error in law and that  there  were  no
    reasons to refuse this application in light of the FtTJ's  findings  of
    facts.

 8. In these circumstances I did not require Mr Khan to address me.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


 9. There was an error in law because the FtTJ had a report that  confirmed
    a physical examination of the property but  more  importantly  he  also
    found the sponsor and his wife to be credible and consistent  witnesses
    both with regard to  the  size  of  the  property  and  the  number  of
    occupants.

10. In those  circumstances  the  property  was  not  overcrowded  and  the
    appellant satisfied the Immigration Rules.

    DECISION


11. There is a material error of law.  I set aside  the  original  decision
    and I allow the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

12. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.

Signed:                           Dated:





Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award because this appeal succeeded following the
submission of further evidence and the oral evidence of the sponsor and his
wife.
Signed:                      Dated:



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
