
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/04858/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |           Decision & Reasons        |
|                                          |Promulgated                          |
|On 10th December 2015                     |           On 4th February 2016      |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                            mr Emmnel Seun Akinbo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Osifeso
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 19th May 1980  is  a  citizen  of  Nigeria.   The
    Appellant was represented by Mr Osifeso the Respondent was  represented
    by Ms Isherwood a Presenting Officer.

Substantive Issues under Appeal

 2. On 16th January 2014  the  Appellant  sought  entry  clearance  as  the
    dependent partner of a Tier 2 points-based system migrant for  a  three
    year period.  His application was refused on 28th February 2014 by  the
    Respondent because his Sponsor's entry clearance had  been  revoked  on
    31st January 2014 and accordingly as the Appellant's application had no
    basis that application was refused under paragraph  319C(b)(i)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Appellant appeals that decision and the  appeal
    was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Clough sitting at  Hatton  Cross
    on 13th February 2015.  The judge dismissed the appeal on all  grounds.
    Application for permission to appeal was  directed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and that application was initially refused on 16th  July  2015
    on the basis that there was no evidence the judge had taken account  of
    post-hearing evidence not available to her or the parties at  the  time
    of the hearing as asserted.   Application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and granted on 7th September  2015  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Grubb.  He noted he had some difficulty in understanding the background
    to the appeal noting some confusion in the background  of  the  Sponsor
    and further that the Entry Clearance Manager's decision may never  have
    been served on the Appellant and noted there was only a  limited  right
    of appeal on Article 8 grounds and noted that the parties should  serve
    evidence as to whether the ECM's decision was served on  the  Appellant
    or was or was not available at the hearing and on that basis permission
    was granted.

 3. The matter comes before me in accordance  with  directions  firstly  to
    decide whether an error of law had been made by the First-tier Tribunal
    in this case.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 4. Mr Osifeso on behalf of the Appellant renewed the matters raised in the
    Grounds of Appeal namely  that  documents  relied  upon  by  the  judge
    including the ECM review were not available  at  the  hearing  and  the
    Sponsor did not know about the  ECM's  decision  to  revoke  her  entry
    clearance until the judge's decision was promulgated  and  neither  did
    the Appellant.  In summary it was submitted that the judge had  made  a
    decision based on documents that she received post the hearing or  were
    not available to her or the parties at the  date  of  the  hearing  and
    therefore there had been no opportunity for that evidence to be tested.



Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 5. Ms Isherwood accepted  that  there  were  no  hearing  notes  from  the
    Presenting  Officer  available  and  that  having  asked  the  relevant
    Presenting Officer he had no memory of the case and  could  not  assist
    therefore in  terms  of  documentation  available.   It  was  submitted
    however that a Home Office bundle had been available and there  was  an
    Entry Clearance Manager review within the court bundle and  within  the
    documents at the time of hearing.

 6. At the conclusion of these submissions I reserved my  decision  on  the
    error of law which I now provide with my decision.

Decision and Reasons

 7. The Appellant in this case had sought entry clearance  as  a  dependent
    partner on a Tier 2 points-based system migrant to  the  UK  for  three
    years.  To that extent the outcome of his case was dependent  upon  the
    position of his partner.

 8. The circumstances relating to his partner seem a  little  confused  but
    appear to be as follows.  On 21st November 2013 the Appellant's partner
    namely his wife Mrs Babatunde had been issued with a Tier 2 Minister of
    Religion visa.  She had attempted to come to the  UK  on  25th  January
    2014 but had been denied boarding by Arik Airlines on  the  basis  that
    the person holding the passport looked considerably younger than the 30
    years of age which was recorded on the passport and  indeed  had  taken
    the view that she looked about 15 years of  age.   She  had  then  been
    interviewed by telephone by the Home Office  based  in  Lagos  and  was
    asked to attend the UK Embassy in Lagos for an interview.   It  appears
    however that she did  not  attend  that  interview  but  the  next  day
    travelled to the UK using a different airline and on arrival in the  UK
    was allowed to proceed because no alert had yet reached the  UK  border
    control.  On 27th January her case had been  referred  to  the  UK  for
    reconsideration of the original visa application with  the  authorities
    in the UK not aware that she had already travelled to and  entered  the
    UK.  On 31st January 2014 an email was received  in  the  UK  from  the
    officer in Lagos who had made telephone contact with the person holding
    the Sponsor's passport and the information would seem to  suggest  that
    the person that Lagos spoke to said that she had not applied for  a  UK
    visa was unaware of the request to attend an interview and did not have
    the middle name Rebecca which had been the middle name provided by  the
    Sponsor.  As a result of that information, seemingly still unaware that
    the Sponsor had entered the UK her visa was revoked and on  that  basis
    the application of the Appellant was refused.

 9. It was said in  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  review  letter  of  4th
    November 2014 that three attempts had been made to contact the  Sponsor
    in the UK to be interviewed but  that  there  had  been  no  successful
    communication with her.  The Entry Clearance Manager acknowledged  that
    the Sponsor had valid entry as her visa had  been  activated  when  she
    arrived in the UK but they were pursuing enforcement action against the
    Sponsor and in those circumstances found  it  was  not  appropriate  to
    issue the Appellant with entry clearance as a Tier 2 partner.

10. The submissions raised on behalf of the Appellant were essentially that
    the Entry Clearance Manager's decision as it related to the Sponsor was
    not served on the Appellant nor was it available at the hearing  before
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  accordingly  no  opportunity  had  been
    provided for the Appellant at that appeal  hearing  to  deal  with  the
    matters that were raised either as they directly or indirectly affected
    himself or  those  matters  raised  in  respect  of  the  circumstances
    regarding his wife who was now in the UK on a valid visa.

11. It is specifically averred in the grounds for  reconsideration  of  the
    application  which  was  granted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal   that   the
    Immigration Judge  relied  upon  matters  or  information  that  became
    available after the hearing namely the contents of the ECM letter.

12. It is clear from the decision promulgated on 24th April 2015  that  the
    judge had the Entry Clearance Manager letter as at paragraphs 5  to  12
    that letter was referred to extensively.

13. In response to questions that I raised it was confirmed by Ms Isherwood
    that she did not have any notes from the  Presenting  Officer  who  had
    been in attendance at the First-tier Tribunal hearing on 13th  February
    2015.  While she  had  fairly  and  properly  made  enquiries  of  that
    Presenting Officer he could not recall the case.

14. I note that at the hearing the Appellant and the Respondent  were  both
    represented.   The  Appellant's  representative  was  Mr  Osifeso   who
    appeared before me.  I further note that  at  the  hearing  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge evidence was heard both from the  Appellant's
    Sponsor and Reverend Stephen Oluwasola  who  stated  that  he  was  the
    employer of the Sponsor.  I  further  note  at  paragraph  17  that  Mr
    Osifeso had provided a skeleton argument to the judge in which  it  was
    submitted that the refusal  decision  was  unfair  as  the  Appellant's
    spouse had a legitimate  expectation  she  would  be  served  with  the
    relevant decision revoking her leave to  enter  the  UK  and  that  the
    Respondent had failed to comply with the common law duty to act  fairly
    in that decision making process.  The judge at paragraph  18  had  then
    specifically stated "the Appellant was notified in the Entry  Clearance
    Manager's review decision dated 4th November 2014 of  the  reasons  for
    upholding the refusal decisions."

15. I have also noted that in the Appellant's documents  that  were  before
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge there was a witness  statement  from  the
    Reverend Oluwasola who gave evidence.  He provided evidence  concerning
    an earlier decision relating to the Appellant's Sponsor.  It  is  clear
    from the documents that she had made an earlier application in  similar
    manner to come to the UK which had been refused on the basis of  income
    or employment but  that  decision  had  been  overruled  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager.  An entry clearance has been issued on 22nd November
    2013.  That appears to be agreed chronology.  However he also  provided
    evidence as to the circumstances surrounding the denial of the  Sponsor
    being allowed on the plane on 25th January 2014 and the fact  that  she
    then boarded another flight the next day.  He also  made  reference  to
    what may have been one of the telephone calls between Lagos and the  UK
    where enquiries were made as to whether the Sponsor was in  the  UK  or
    not.

16. The handwritten Record of Proceedings made by the judge in  the  First-
    tier Tribunal are difficult  to  read  but  note  that  the  Presenting
    Officer relied on the refusal letter and on the basis  that  revocation
    of the Sponsor's visa had been served.  In submissions on behalf of the
    Appellant it is recorded that it was submitted the Sponsor had not  had
    the opportunity to challenge the revocation.

17. It was said that the judge did not have a Home Office bundle before her
    at the hearing.  Firstly there is no indication that the judge  had  no
    bundle from the Home Office.  If that  were  the  case  and  given  the
    presence of a Home Office Presenting Officer at  the  hearing  I  would
    have expected some reference to that matter even if  it  was  that  the
    bundle was served at the time of  the  hearing.   Secondly,  the  judge
    clearly had before him the Entry Clearance Manager  refusal  letter  as
    the judge quoted extensively from that letter  and  that  letter  forms
    part of the documents on the file before myself.  Thirdly  the  witness
    statement of the Reverend Oluwasola appears to deal at  least  in  part
    with matters that are referenced within that  review  letter.   Finally
    the skeleton argument submitted on behalf of the Appellant was  on  the
    basis that the expectation was the Appellant's spouse would  be  served
    with the relevant decision revoking her leave to enter the UK and  that
    had not been done.  That  skeleton  argument  therefore  discloses  the
    knowledge and presumably within the knowledge of the Appellant and  his
    spouse that there were some difficulties  concerning  the  spouses  own
    entry.

18. It may well be that the difficulty  in  this  case  is  a  question  of
    semantics and interpretation.  I am satisfied on balance that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had before him the Entry Clearance Manager's review
    letter of 4th November 2014 which set out the chronology  and  concerns
    and action taken with regard to the Appellant's wife which  formed  the
    basis of the refusal of the Appellant's own entry clearance.  I  accept
    Mr Osifeso's submission both before myself and  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge that it does not appear that  he  or  the  judge  had  a
    decision revoking the Appellant's leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.   The
    chronology would indicate that the Home Office had attempted to  revoke
    her entry into the UK because of concerns as mentioned above.   However
    their actions were too late because the Appellant had  already  arrived
    in the UK and essentially therefore had a valid entry clearance.   That
    is accepted by the Entry Clearance Manager in their  review  letter  of
    4th November 2014.  It is also clear that at the date of  writing  that
    review letter the Home Office had not finalised or made a  decision  in
    terms of action against the Sponsor because the final paragraph of that
    refusal letter states that they are pursuing  enforcement  against  the
    Sponsor.  There does not appear to be on file  or  before  any  of  the
    parties any outcome or decision relating to action that may  have  been
    taken by the Home Office against the Sponsor postdating that letter  of
    4th November 2014.  That is consistent with paragraph 17 of the judge's
    decision in which she noted that Mr Osifeso on behalf of the  Appellant
    indicated that he had not  seen  any  relevant  decision  revoking  his
    wife's leave to enter or remain in the UK.  The judge in  the  decision
    did not make reference to any final decision  having  been  taken  with
    regard to the Appellant's wife.  That, is because I  suspect,  no  such
    document was available either to the judge or either party  and  indeed
    even at this stage it is not known what if any enforcement  action  has
    been taken against the Appellant's Sponsor or whether the  Home  Office
    have concluded that her leave to remain should be curtailed and removal
    instigated or alternatively having made enquiries they are satisfied as
    to her position in the UK.

19. Whilst no criticism can be raised against the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    and whilst I am satisfied  that  the  judge  had  available  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager review letter of 4th November 2014 in  the  interests
    of justice and procedural fairness it seems to me appropriate that  the
    Tribunal and both parties have clear knowledge of the Sponsor's current
    position, what action if any has been  taken  by  the  Home  Office  in
    respect of the Sponsor and what, if any final decision has been made by
    the Home Office in respect of the Sponsor.  If it be the case that  the
    Home Office have or are seeking to curtail  her  leave  to  remain  and
    enforce  removal  then  there  clearly  would  be  no  basis  for   the
    Appellant's application for entry clearance as  her  partner.   On  the
    other hand if having investigated  this  matter  more  fully  and  with
    greater time the Home Office have  concluded  that  initial  suspicions
    have been allayed and have not sought to enforce or curtail  her  leave
    to remain in the UK then that would on the face of it remove the  major
    concern raised against the Appellant's application for entry  clearance
    as her partner.  It seems to be necessary for  a  clear  answer  to  be
    known to the Tribunal and both parties on the position of  the  Sponsor
    wife prior to an Appellate judgment upon  the  Appellant's  application
    for entry clearance.  That uncertainty, whilst no fault of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge does raise a material error of law in that  neither
    the Tribunal or either party is able to properly  adjudicate  upon  the
    Appellant's position without clear knowledge of the status of his  wife
    in the UK.  It is for that reason alone I find the  material  error  of
    law was made and direct that the matter be returned to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as the proper forum  for  a  fact-finding  exercise  upon  all
    evidence and information available.

Notice of Decision

I find the reasons provided above that an error  of  law  was  made  by  the
judge in this case and direct that the decision be remade in the  First-tier
Tribunal.

Directions

 1) The parties in  this  case  are  to  submit  to  the  Tribunal  bundles
    consisting of all the documentary and witness  evidence  they  seek  to
    rely  upon.   In  particular  the  Respondent  is  directed  to   serve
    documentary and witness evidence concerning the status position and any
    action taken with regard to the Sponsor's wife.

 2) The parties need not  serve  documents  and  witness  evidence  already
    provided but should in any event provide a  properly  paginated  bundle
    for the Tribunal.

 3) No interpreter will be booked for the forthcoming hearing unless  there
    is a specific written request made not  later  than  seven  days  after
    these directions are sent.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

