
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/04528/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons  Promulgated    |
|On 19th January 2015                 |On 20th February 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Mrs Saiqa AMTAL
                        (NO Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None.
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless for the purposes of this decision I  shall  refer
    to the parties as they were described before the First  Tier  Tribunal,
    that is Mrs Amtal as the appellant and the Secretary of  State  as  the
    respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 3rd  February  1981  and
    she appealed against the respondent's decision dated 25th March 2014 to
    refuse her application for a family permit to the United Kingdom  under
    the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 as the spouse
    of a Greek national who was stated to be taking a holiday with her.

 3. In a determination dated 20th October 2014  Judge  of  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal C M Phillips allowed the appellant's appeal.

 4. An application for permission to appeal  was  made  by  the  respondent
    contending that  the  Tribunal  erred  in  allowing  the  appeal  under
    Regulations 7 and 12(a) of the EEA regulations as there  was  confusion
    in relation to the sponsors of which there were  two,  each  playing  a
    separate role.  A residence permit was issued to  Mr  Amtal  Aziz,  the
    appellant's husband in Greece, the EEA national and sponsor,  and  with
    whom she normally resided in Greece.  He became a Greek citizen on 27th
    September 2013.  However, the appellant intended to visit her uncle  Mr
    Muhammad Afzal.  It was contended that the appellant was not  a  family
    member of Mr Afzal.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on
    the basis that the appellant's uncle was not the spouse.

 6. At the hearing, Ms Isherwood conceded that  both  the  application  for
    permission to appeal and the grant of permission were misconceived. The
    appellant was accepted by the Greek authorities to be  the  spouse  and
    family member of an EEA national.  The marriage certificate and  family
    certificate showing that the appellant had been  registered  in  Greece
    was produced at the hearing. She was a family member under Regulation 7
    [17].   She does not need to be a family member of the sponsor or uncle
    in the United Kingdom.

 7. The judge accepted  that  there  was  unchallenged  evidence  that  the
    appellant's husband (the EEA national) had been granted a short  period
    of leave by his employer  for  the  purpose  of  visiting  the  UK  and
    appeared to  accept  that  the  appellant  and  her  husband  would  be
    travelling together. Further to Boodhoo (EEA Regs:  relevant  evidence)
    [2013] UKUT 00346 the judge was entitled to take note of this  evidence
    at the date of the hearing.   The  uncle  in  the  UK  was  the  person
    inviting the appellant and her husband for the purposes  of  a  holiday
    (and as pointed out by the  judge  the  husband  did  not  require  and
    invitation).  The judge addressed  the  question  of  the  omission  of
    tickets as 'not inherently incredible'.  The judge allowed  the  appeal
    under Regulation 12(a) of the EEA Regulations.

 8. I can accept that this was an appeal decided on the papers only and the
    ECO had not had sight of the marriage certificate but no challenge  was
    raised by the respondent that  an  oral  hearing  was  required  or  in
    relation to the documentation itself.

 9. In essence the judge accepted that the appellant was married to an  EEA
    national at the  date  of  decision  and  that  further  to  Regulation
    12(1)(a) they intended to travel to the UK within  six  months  of  the
    date of the application and would be residing in the UK  in  accordance
    with the EEA Regulations on arrival in the UK and (b) the family member
    would be accompanying the EA national to the UK.

10. The issue under the EEA Regulations is in relation to the appellant and
    her EEA national spouse, rather than the uncle in the  UK.    This  was
    addressed by the judge,.

11. I therefore find no error of law and the determination will stand.



Signed      Date 19th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

