
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04212/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 11th June 2014                               |On 3rd July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                                LORD MATTHEWS
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                       Entry Clearance Officer - cairo
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                              mr Fahmy Elgendy
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Saini, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT


 1. We begin by thanking both of the representatives for the helpful way in
    which they have made their  submissions  and  the  positive  discursive
    contributions to the hearing before us today.

 2. The Appellant in this appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and for ease of reference we refer to the parties as they were
    known there.

 3. The Respondent appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Cohen,
    promulgated on  10th  March  2014,  in  which  the  judge  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal against a refusal of entry clearance  on  Article  8
    ECHR grounds.

 4. The ground that the judge's decision is flawed for a  failure  to   set
    out reasoning consistent with the structure approved  in  the  case  of
    Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT  00640,
    an in country exposition of the  relationship  between  the  rules  and
    Article 8,  is without force.

 5. The First -tier judge noted, when considering  the  balancing  exercise
    within the approved structure of the case of Razgar v  SSHD  [2004]UKHL
    27, that the Entry Clearance Officer had failed to give any  individual
    consideration to the Article 8 position at all.   Mr  Tarlow  confirmed
    our understanding that in this case, contrary to the grounds, the judge
    was entitled to consider Article 8 ECHR provisions because this was  an
    out of country case where the discretion afforded in  in-country  cases
    and set out in EX.1 of Appendix FM was not applicable, and so the rules
    could not be said to  provide  a  comprehensive  consideration  of  all
    relevant Article 8 factors.

 6. The ground relying on the judge's consideration of  matters  raised  in
    the High Court case of MM and Ors v  SSHD  [2013]  EWHC  1900  (Admin),
    concerning the ability in an  Article  8  ECHR  consideration  to  take
    account  of  wider  evidence  as  to  finances  than  set  out  in  the
    Immigration Rules, is not capable of giving rise to any material  error
    of law. The judge found, contrary  to  the  Entry  Clearance  officer's
    view, that the financial requirements of the Rules were met as  at  the
    date of application and  decision.  That  is  a  finding  that  is  not
    challenged before us and is determinative.

 7. The remaining grounds of challenge address the judge's weighing of  the
    balance between the public interest in insisting on compliance with the
    strict requirements of the Rules as being directed  at  the  legitimate
    aim of the economic well-being of the country and the interests of  the
    individual family. The grounds  assert  that  the  judge,  contrary  to
    jurisprudence, allowed the Appellant  to  circumvent  the  Rules  using
    Article 8.

 8. We have already set  out  that  the  Judge  found  that  the  financial
    requirements of  the  rules  were  met,  and  the  grounds  are  simply
    misconceived in terms  of  circumvention  in  that  respect.    In  the
    context of the Rules that leaves the issue of the English language test
    certificate. The evidence was that the failure to meet the  rule  arose
    because the Appellant had misunderstood the requirements and provided a
    certificate of competence from a supplier who  was  not  approved.  The
    Judge  correctly  found  that  the  subsequent  provision  of  a   test
    certificate, from an approved supplier, obtained, it appears,  as  soon
    as reasonably practicable following the  refusal  and  which  made  the
    position clear came too late to satisfy the Rule, the requirement being
    that the certificate must be submitted with the application.

 9. Mr Tarlow accepted that it could not be said that the Appellant  should
    not have brought an appeal but should instead have reapplied, with  the
    newly obtained correct certificate,  because,  as  is  clear  from  the
    matters laid out above, the  Respondent's  erroneous  approach  to  the
    financial requirements required judicial correction  because  otherwise
    it would have operated  to  cause  a  wrongful  refusal  of  the  fresh
    application in any event.

10. We find that, it having been necessary for the judge  to  correct  that
    position on appeal, it cannot be said, as these grounds assert, that by
    allowing  the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds  the  rules  are   being
    circumvented. The judge having taken account of the  difficulties  with
    the entry clearance decision, which required the Appellant  to  appeal,
    noted the significant interference with family life that resulted  from
    the need to embark on  the  lengthy  appeal  process.  The  judge  took
    account  of  the  strength,  character  and  quality  of  the   marital
    relationship and found that further delay  to  satisfy  what,  in  this
    case, amounted to a procedural requirement to make a fresh  application
    abroad, was not, in the context of the particular circumstances of  the
    case, proportionate.

11. Looking at the decision as a whole, we are satisfied that the judge has
    given ample and  sufficient  reasons  to  explain  why  the  particular
    circumstances of this Appellant and his family  amount  to  exceptional
    compelling circumstances in  the  context  of  Article  8  and  we  are
    satisfied that the proportionality balance as drawn has paid due regard
    both to the public interest in the enforcement of the Immigration Rules
    and the particular and individual circumstances of the family rights in
    the context of that public interest. Following correct  self-direction,
    where the balance falls is a finding of fact to be made  by  the  judge
    hearing the evidence absent perversity. We  have  found  correct  self-
    direction. Mr Tarlow did not press any argument of  perversity  at  the
    hearing before us and we find no perversity. We pause to note  that  in
    the event that we were to  be  remaking  the  decision  we  would  have
    reached the same conclusion on the evidence.

12. Accordingly, we find that there is no material error of  law  requiring
    us to set the decision aside and the decision allowing the  Appellant's
    appeal against the refusal of entry clearance stands.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


