
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04422/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 September 2015                 |On 12 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CHENNAI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MAMALASSERIL KURIAN VINCENT
                        (anonymity direction NOt MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom whereby  he  allowed  Mr.  Vincent's
    appeal against the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision  to  refuse  to
    grant leave to enter the United Kingdom as the spouse of his sponsor.

 2. For the purposes of this decision I shall refer to the Entry  Clearance
    Officer as  the  Respondent  and  to  Mr.  Vincent  as  the  Appellant,
    reflecting their positions as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted as it was arguable  that  the  judge's
    decision that the Appellant's exclusion was not conducive to the public
    good was perverse and irrational.

 4. The Appellant's representatives wrote to the Tribunal  indicating  that
    they were not instructed  to  attend.   I  considered  it  was  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed with the  hearing  in  accordance  with
    rule 38 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  I heard
    submissions from Mr. Duffy.  I reserved my decision.

Submissions

 5. In the grounds the Respondent submitted that the judge  had  failed  to
    make material findings on the issue that  related  to  the  Appellant's
    suitability to enter the United Kingdom.  It was submitted that in  the
    absence of factual findings  in  respect  of  suitability  issues,  the
    conclusion of the judge that the Appellant's exclusion from the  United
    Kingdom was not conducive to the public good could  not  be  sustained.
    It was further submitted that in the absence of clear findings on  this
    issue the Respondent could not understand whether the Appellant  should
    be  refused  on  general  grounds  given  the  suggestion  that   false
    information may have been provided.  Further, it was submitted that  it
    was arguable that the judge should have taken  into  account  that  not
    everything the Appellant had said about the incident could be accepted.

 6. Mr. Duffy relied on the grounds of appeal.  Further he  submitted  that
    the refusal under the suitability criteria was a mandatory ground.   In
    order to avoid being refused under this mandatory ground, the Appellant
    would have to have shown that he was not guilty of the conduct, and the
    judge did not seem to accept that he was not.  He submitted that it was
    perverse and irrational  that  the  judge  should  not  find  that  the
    Appellant's exclusion  was  not  conducive  to  the  public  good:  the
    Appellant's character and conduct had to be found not to be what it was
    in order to avoid mandatory refusal.

Error of law

 7. I have carefully considered the decision.  I find that it  involves  no
    error on a point of law.

 8. The judge states in paragraph [22]:

         "Notwithstanding the fact I not  accept  everything  the  Appellant
         says about this incident, I do not regard his  continued  exclusion
         from the UK as being shown to be conducive to the public good.   It
         is an isolated incident and the prosecution was not pursued, albeit
         for reasons of pragmatism.  There is no evidence at all to  suggest
         the appellant has ever been involved in any other nefarious conduct
         or that he maintains associations which give rise to  concern.   He
         has no convictions.  The Thai  authorities  have  had  no  concerns
         about him.  I accept Mr Singer's point that I can  give  weight  to
         the sponsor's judgement that the appellant is a suitable stepfather
         for her children and husband for herself.  The refusal on conducive
         grounds is not justified."

 9. I find that the judge has given clear  reasons  for  why  he  does  not
    consider the Appellant's exclusion from the  United  Kingdom  as  being
    shown to be conducive to the public good.  He is clearly aware that the
    Appellant  attempted  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom   carrying   DVDs
    containing child pornography: he states "the uncontested  evidence  was
    that the Appellant attempted to enter the  UK  in  2007  carrying  DVDs
    containing child pornography" [18].  It is clear that he  is  aware  of
    what happened in 2007, hence he  stated  that  he  was  cautious  about
    accepting the claim that the Appellant had no idea  that  the  material
    was not "ordinary porn" [21].   However, as  he  states  in  [22],  the
    prosecution was not pursued.  It was an isolated incident.   The  judge
    finds that there is no evidence that the Appellant has been involved in
    anything like this since 2007, or that he "maintains associations which
    give rise to concern" [22].

10. The judge took into account all of the evidence before  him.   He  gave
    weight to the evidence of the sponsor, which he was entitled to do.  He
    noted that she  was  a  person  with  valuable  life  experience.    He
    regarded her as a witness of truth and "more importantly, a person  who
    was not likely to embark on a second marriage  without  giving  careful
    consideration to the character of the man  who  would  be  joining  her
    household" [19].

11. The judge also took into account  the  evidence  from  The  Royal  Thai
    Police Special Branch,  and  the  Kozhikode  Regional  Passport  Office
    confirming that there was no information held suggesting the  Appellant
    was not a man of good character [20].

12. Refusal under the suitability requirements is mandatory,  but  only  if
    any of paragraphs S-EC.1.2 to 1.8 apply.  The relevant paragraph in the
    Appellant's case was paragraph S-EC.1.5.  The  judge  found,  and  gave
    reasons for his finding, that this  paragraph  did  not  apply  to  the
    Appellant.  Therefore, refusal was not mandatory.  This conclusion  was
    open to him having taken into account all of the evidence.

13. I am mindful  of  the  case  of  Mukarkar  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045,  in
    particular paragraph 40.

         "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy,  but  they  are
         not  made  easier  or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
         analysis. It is of the nature  of  such  judgments  that  different
         tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may reach different
         conclusions on the  same  case  [....].  The  mere  fact  that  one
         tribunal has reached what may seem an unusually  generous  view  of
         the facts of a particular case does not mean that it  has  made  an
         error of law, so as to justify an appeal under the old  system,  or
         an order for reconsideration under the new.  Nor does it create any
         precedent, so as to limit the Secretary of State's right  to  argue
         for a more restrictive approach on a similar case  in  the  future.
         However, on the facts of the particular case, the decision  of  the
         specialist tribunal should be respected."

14. I find that the decision is not  perverse  or  irrational.   The  judge
    considered all of the evidence before him, and  gave  reasons  for  his
    findings.  The fact that another judge  might  have  made  a  different
    decision does not amount to an error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 9 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

