
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/04340/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 31 January 2017                        |On 7 February 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                              Fatou Njie Darboe
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fenoughty which was promulgated on 4 July 2016.   The  matter  concerns
    the appellant who is a citizen of Gambia, born on 7 December 1972.  She
    appeals the refusal of an Entry Clearance  Officer  (made  in  February
    2005) in relation to her claim under the spousal category in  paragraph
    352A of the Immigration Rules.  The matter is factually complex in that
    the appellant and sponsor were married, then divorced, and subsequently
    remarried.  At the time the application for entry clearance was made, I
    understand  that  there  were  coterminous  applications  made  by  the
    couple's children.  I  am  informed  today  by  counsel  for  the  Home
    Secretary that each of  the  children's  applications  were  successful
    under the prevailing Rules.

2.   Be that as it may, the manner in which the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    dealt with this assessment was on any account less  than  satisfactory.
    In particular, the discussion of the best interests of the children  as
    is required by Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration
    Act 2009 is cursory to say the least and does not comply with the clear
    guidance prescribed by the Upper Tribunal in Mundeba v Entry  Clearance
    Officer - Nairobi [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC).  It is  fairly  conceded  by
    Miss Fijiwala, on behalf  of  the  Home  Secretary,  that  there  is  a
    deficiency in the decision in relation to this.

3.   In the circumstances, the proper course is to set  aside  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and remit the matter to be reheard de novo.

4.    I  noted  in  passing  that  I  do  not  consider  that  the   judge's
    interpretation of Rule 352A(ii) is necessarily correct and  the  points
    made in paragraphs 27 and 28 of the decision may properly be revisited.
    Miss Fijiwala for the Home Secretary quite rightly  states  this  point
    was not taken in the notice of appeal, but to my mind it is obvious  on
    a reading of the judgment, and as this matter is to be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing, then justice requires that  it  is
    looked at afresh. It may be that the disposal under the Rules  will  be
    the same, but the narrowness by which the appellant fails to  meet  the
    Rules might be a factor in the Article 8 determination.  But  as  there
    is to be a rehearing, it would  be  inappropriate  for  me  to  comment
    further.

5.   In conclusion, I find a material error of law in the narrow  discussion
    of family life and the failure properly to have regard Section  55.   I
    therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and require
    the matter to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  the  decision
    to be remade by a judge other than Judge Fenoughty.



Notice of Decision

Appeal allowed. Decision of the First-tier Tribunal set aside.

Matter remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be remade  by
a judge other than Judge Fenoughty. No findings of fact preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill QC                   Date     6 February 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
