
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05948/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th May 2015                         |On 22nd May 2015                     |
|                                         |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                                 MUNAWAR ALI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     The sponsor, Nokhez Anjum
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. On 15th April 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grant-Hutchison
    gave permission to the appellant to  appeal  against  the  decision  of
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Obhi in which she dismissed the appeal
    on immigration and human rights grounds against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to  refuse  entry  clearance  as  a  returning  resident  in
    accordance with the provisions of paragraphs 18(ii) and 320(9)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 2. The grounds do not take issue with  the  judge's  conclusion  that  the
    appellant could not comply with the provisions of sub-paragraph (ii) of
    paragraph 18 of the Immigration Rules because he had been away from the
    United Kingdom for over six years when  the  Rule  only  permitted  two
    years' absence. However, it was contended that the appellant had strong
    family ties with his wife and children living in the United Kingdom  in
    his property in Derby.  It was also stated that he had  been  away  for
    over two years because of the illness of his mother.  He asked that his
    Article 8  claim  should  be  considered  compassionately  taking  into
    consideration the documentation and evidence  supporting  his  original
    application and the sponsor's oral evidence.

 3. Although the grounds do not point to any arguable error in the decision
    Judge Grant-Hutchison thought that -

         "Although the judge dismisses the appeal on  human  rights  grounds
         the appellant's circumstances were not considered under  Article  8
         and arguably could be material to the outcome".

 4. In a response sent on 20th April 2014 under  Rule  24,  the  respondent
    referred to paragraph 15 of the decision in which the judge found  that
    the appellant's circumstances were neither exceptional nor  compelling.
    The respondent thought that the findings were adequately  reasoned  and
    any further consideration of Article 8 factors in the appellant's claim
    would not result in a different outcome.

Error on a point of law

 5. At the hearing  before  me  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  sponsor  was
    unrepresented.   I  therefore  explained  to  her  the  nature  of  the
    proceedings and particularly the need for the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Judge to show an error on a point of law if that decision were  to
    be overturned.  The sponsor  spoke  good  English  and  said  that  she
    understood the explanation.  With the decision in front of her, I  drew
    her attention to paragraphs 14 and  15  in  which  the  judge  set  out
    reasons  for  concluding  there  were  no  exceptional  or   compelling
    circumstances in the appellant's case and no evidence  of  any  ongoing
    relationship between the appellant  and  his  wife  or  children.   The
    sponsor indicated that she had no further comment to make on that  part
    of the decision. She also accepted that the appellant  could  not  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration Rules as he had  been  outside  the
    United Kingdom for over two years.  After Ms Johnstone had  made  brief
    submissions based upon the response, I asked the sponsor if she had any
    further comment to make and she said she did not.

 6. At the end of submissions and after considering the matter  for  a  few
    moments I indicated that I was not satisfied that the  decision  showed
    an error on a point of law for the reasons which follow.

Conclusions

 7. The decision shows that the judge considered the  evidence  put  before
    him including the oral testimony of the sponsor.  The  judge  evidently
    noted the reasons given for the appellant's  absence  from  the  United
    Kingdom but was entitled to reach the conclusion that it had  not  been
    shown what was actually wrong with the appellant's mother or  that  her
    state of health had altered in the time that he was away.  Noting  that
    the appellant had other siblings in Pakistan who could have  cared  for
    his mother and no reason had been given for the appellant not returning
    to the United Kingdom even to visit  his  family,  the  judge  properly
    concluded that there was no ongoing relationship between the  appellant
    and his wife or children and that it  was  difficult  to  see  how  the
    refusal decision had  interfered  with  any  family  life  between  the
    parties.  On this basis the judge was entitled  to  dismiss  the  human
    rights appeal having examined the circumstances in  which  the  parties
    came to separate, the length of that separation and the  communications
    between them in the interim.  Any fuller consideration of these  issues
    by, for example, specifically going through the Razgar five stage tests
    and more extensive examination of the best interests  of  the  children
    would not have produced a  different  result.   No  material  error  is
    shown.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show an error  on  a  point
of law and shall stand.

Anonymity

Anonymity was not requested  nor  do  I  consider  it  appropriate  in  this
appeal.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt


