
[pic]
IAC-PE-AW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05264/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th July 2015                    |On 10th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                        Mr Christopher Craig johnson
                          (ANONYMITY not retained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McIndoe
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on 22nd January 1996 is a citizen  of  Jamaica.   He
    had applied for entry clearance to settle in the United  Kingdom  as  a
    dependent child  of  the  Sponsor.   The  Respondent  had  refused  the
    application under paragraph 296 of the Immigration Rules. The Appellant
    had appealed that decision and  his  appeal  was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Law at Stoke on 30th October 2014.   The  judge  allowed
    the appeal under both the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. The Respondent had appealed that decision on the basis that  the  judge
    had failed to  consider  anywhere  in  the  determination  whether  the
    Appellant's biological father played any role in the Appellant's care.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on
    5th January 2015 on the basis that it was arguable that there had  been
    no reference to the Appellant's father, an  issue  which  needs  to  be
    addressed.  Directions were issued for the  Upper  Tribunal  to  decide
    first of all whether an error of law had been made and the matter comes
    before me in accordance with those directions.

The Proceedings - Introduction

 4. Mr McVeety on behalf of the Home Office conceded that  on  reading  the
    evidence it is clear that the Appellant's biological father had in fact
    left the Appellant's mother (the  Sponsor)  at  a  time  when  she  was
    pregnant.  His name does not  even  appear  on  the  Appellant's  birth
    certificate.  The issue of whether the father had any responsibility at
    any stage was not raised within the Entry Clearance  Officer's  refusal
    and it is further clear when reading  the  judge's  decision  that  the
    evidence disclosed that the Sponsor had had sole responsibility of  the
    Appellant from when he was born and for the first  four  years  of  his
    life until she came  to  the  UK  and  the  Appellant  lived  with  her
    relatives.  Mr McVeety conceded that the issue raised in the Grounds of
    Appeal was not a point that had ever been in issue given  the  accepted
    evidence that the Appellant's biological father had  never  played  any
    part in the Appellant's life from the time of the Sponsor's  pregnancy.
    It is understandable therefore that there is no specific  reference  to
    the natural father within the judge's decision as his situation in  the
    Appellant's life had never featured nor hitherto been  a  consideration
    in the case.  It is regrettable that the Home Office Appeals  Unit  had
    nothing more, it would seem than the judge's decision in this case  as,
    had they had the bundle of evidence it would have become clear that the
    Appellant's biological father had never featured  at  any  stage  in  a
    consideration of the evidence in this case.

Decision

 5. There was no error of law made by the judge in this case and  I  uphold
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. Anonymity is not retained.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
