
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05061/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16 June 2015                      |On 21 July 2015                      |
|Determination prepared 16 June 2015  |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Mrs Shakuntala Pandey
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    None


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a citizen of India born on 10 September  1940,  appealed
    against a decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated 28  March  2014
    who refused her entry clearance as an adult  dependent  relative.   Her
    appeal was allowed in the First-tier but when the matter came before me
    sitting with The Honourable Mr Justice McGowan on 28 April 2015 we  set
    aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  ordered  that  the
    appeal proceed to a hearing afresh.

2.   The appellant's  representatives  thereafter  sought  to  withdraw  the
    appeal but as this was an appeal in the Upper Tribunal they were unable
    to do so.

3.   I now formally dismiss the appellant's appeal as I  consider  that  she
    has not proved, on the evidence before the Entry Clearance Officer when
    the application was made,  that she qualified for leave to enter  under
    the terms of the Immigration Rules.

4.   It appears that since  the  application  was  refused  the  appellant's
    health and circumstances  have  considerably  deteriorated  and  it  is
    appropriate that the appellant's circumstances, as they  are  now,  are
    considered by the Entry Clearance Officer when  he  considers  a  fresh
    application.

5.   As it is, however, the determination of the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal having been set aside I formally dismiss this appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.



Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

