
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/05709/2013
                                                               OA/06094/2013
                                                               OA/06096/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 May 2014                                 |On 27th May 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                    Miss Nyasha kambari (first appellant)
             mr marshall muzanenhamo Mubaiwa (second appellant)
                    miss memory kambari (third appellant)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms S Hall, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellants are citizens of Zimbabwe.   The  first  appellant,  Miss
    Nyasha Kambari, was born on 29 June 1993.   The  second  appellant,  Mr
    Marshall Muzanenhamo Mubaiwa was born on  17  March  1995.   The  third
    appellant, Miss Memory Kambari was  born  on  15  February  1999.   The
    mother of the appellants died on 18 June 2000 in Zimbabwe.  On  22  May
    2012,  their  sponsoring  guardian  Mrs  Nyasha  Gwatidzo  obtained   a
    Certificate of Guardianship from the High Court in Zimbabwe making  her
    responsible for the appellants.  Mrs Gwatidzo has been described as the
    aunt of the appellants.  At the time she obtained  the  Certificate  of
    Guardianship, the first appellant was not a minor.  She  was  over  18.
    Although the sponsor has been described as an aunt she is a  cousin  to
    the mother of the appellants.

2.   On 4 October 2012 the appellants applied for entry clearance to  settle
    in  the  UK  with  the  aunt  and  guardian.   The  first   appellant's
    application was considered and  refused  under  paragraph  317  of  the
    Immigration Rules because the ECO was  not  satisfied  that  the  first
    appellant was wholly or mainly financially dependent on the sponsor  or
    that she was living in the most exceptional compassionate circumstances
    in Zimbabwe.  The applications of the second and third appellants  were
    considered and refused under paragraph 297  because  the  ECO  was  not
    satisfied that one parent was present and settled in  the  UK  and  the
    other parent was dead  and  that  there  were  serious  and  compelling
    circumstances which made the exclusion of the appellants  from  the  UK
    undesirable.

3.   The appeals of the appellants were  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Beach.

4.   The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant's  sponsor  Ms  Nyasha
    Gwatidzo.  She found the sponsor a credible witness and accepted all of
    her evidence.  The sponsor's position was that the appellants were left
    in the care of her mother who was capable of looking after them at that
    stage but her mother's health has deteriorated and she believed that it
    was in the best interests of the appellant to be with her  in  the  UK.
    She accepted that she did not formalise the guardianship until sometime
    after she had taken on responsibility for  the  appellants.   She  also
    accepted that the appellants  have  family  in  Zimbabwe  and  live  in
    comfortable circumstances.

5.   The judge noted that the  respondent  accepted  that  the  sponsor  had
    provided some money  transfer  receipts  but  stated  that  these  were
    addressed to her mother and it was impossible to state what  proportion
    of these money transfers were  for  the  first  appellant.   The  judge
    accepted that the sponsor took on the guardianship  of  the  appellants
    when her cousin died in 2000.  There was evidence of money transfers to
    the sponsor's mother with whom the first appellant lives and she  found
    that it is more likely than not that the first appellant also benefited
    from these money transfers and that she was at least mainly financially
    dependent on the sponsor.

6.   The judge however found that the difficulty  for  the  first  appellant
    was that she could not fulfil the Immigration Rules because she is  the
    niece of the  sponsor  and  this  is  not  covered  by  paragraph  317.
    Secondly the judge found that the first appellant could not  show  that
    she is living in the most exceptional  compassionate  circumstances  in
    Zimbabwe.  She is living in a substantial property with  her  sponsor's
    brother and sponsor's mother.  The sponsor stated that her brother  was
    living there temporarily but she  also  accepted  that  he  would  feel
    compelled culturally to look after the first appellant if required  and
    said  that  her  brother  provides  emotional  support  to  the   first
    appellant.  The first appellant is currently retaking O levels  and  it
    is hoped that she will continue  to  college  which  the  sponsor  will
    finance.  The letter from the sponsor's mother's GP only states that it
    is not advisable for her to look after small children.  The judge found
    that the first appellant is not a small child.  She would  be  able  to
    continue to live in Zimbabwe  at  the  sponsor's  mother's  house  with
    emotional support from her family in Zimbabwe,  with  visits  from  the
    sponsor as well as communication  by  phone  and  email  and  continued
    financial support from the sponsor.  In  the  circumstances  the  judge
    found that it cannot be said that the first appellant  lives  alone  in
    the most exceptional compassionate circumstances.

7.   With regard to the second and third appellants, the  judge  noted  that
    they were both under 18 and so could potentially, fit within  paragraph
    297 of the Immigration Rules albeit they are not the birth children  of
    the  sponsor.   She  had  already   found   that   the   sponsor   took
    responsibility for the appellants when her cousin  died  and  that  she
    provided financially for them.  The first  appellant  when  interviewed
    did not mention having any contact with her father and the judge  found
    that the appellants' father was not involved in their lives.  This  was
    also consistent with the sponsor's evidence and there was no suggestion
    that the appellant's father had been involved in the applications or in
    applying for a passport which one  would  expect  to  see  if  he  were
    involved in their lives.

8.   The judge said she must therefore consider whether  there  are  serious
    and compelling family or other considerations which make it undesirable
    for the second and third appellants to be excluded from the UK.

9.   The judge found that the second and third appellants  live  with  their
    sister (first  appellant),  the  sponsor's  mother  and  the  sponsor's
    brother.  The sponsor was open in stating that her family  in  Zimbabwe
    would not leave the appellants to care for themselves on their own  and
    was also open in stating that her brother provided emotional support to
    the appellants.  The appellants are all studying.  The second and third
    appellants were 17 and 13 at the time of the applications.   There  was
    nothing to suggest that they could not continue  to  live  in  Zimbabwe
    with the financial support provided by their sponsor and the  emotional
    support of the family in Zimbabwe as well as visits from  the  sponsor.
    The sponsor may prefer the appellants to be in the UK but this  is  not
    enough  to  show  that  there  are  serious   and   compelling   family
    considerations  which  make  the  appellants'  exclusion  from  the  UK
    undesirable.  The second  and  third  appellants  live  in  comfortable
    circumstances and receive income and support from their sponsor.  There
    was no suggestion that this support would stop if  the  appellants  did
    not come to the UK.  There was a suggestion that the sponsor's business
    was suffering as a result of frequent visits to Zimbabwe but there  was
    no evidence to support this contention and the sponsor has  her  mother
    in Zimbabwe in any event and so would still be likely  to  visit.   The
    letter from the sponsor's mother's GP does  not  suggest  that  she  is
    incapable of providing support to teenagers but states simply  that  it
    is not advisable for her to have the care of  small  children.   Taking
    all the circumstances into account, the  judge  found  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to show that there  are  serious  and  compelling
    family or other considerations which mean the exclusion of  the  second
    and third appellants from the UK was undesirable.

10.  The grant of permission stated that it is arguable that the judge  made
    an error of law in treating Miss Nyasha Kambari only as  the  niece  of
    the sponsor for the purpose of paragraph 317 of the Immigration  Rules,
    when the judge found that the sponsor had assumed guardianship  of  the
    appellants in 2000.  It is also arguable that after  finding  that  the
    sponsor was the guardian of the appellants and their financial support,
    the judge failed to make any decision in regard  to  human  rights  (in
    particular in regard to Article 8 of the ECHR, although the  judge  has
    stated that Article 8 was relevant to the appeals).

11.  After hearing submissions from both parties, I found in respect of  the
    appeals under the Immigration Rules that the judge did not err  in  law
    for the reasons given below.  I shall  come  to  the  Article  8  issue
    later.

12.  Counsel conceded that as the niece of the sponsor, the first  appellant
    could not bring herself within the  Immigration  Rules.   However,  the
    nature of the relationship between the fist appellant and  her  sponsor
    is changed as a result of the Certificate  of  Guardianship  and  which
    brings her within the Immigration  Rules  as  an  adult  child  of  the
    sponsor. Counsel submitted that as such all  three  appellant  are  the
    children of the sponsor as was found by the judge.   I  combed  through
    the determination but could not find a specific finding  by  the  judge
    that the appellants are the children  of  the  sponsor.   I  find  that
    whilst the Certificate of Guardianship gives  the  sponsor  full  legal
    powers over the three appellants, she is not their natural mother.  The
    first appellant is not the daughter of  the  sponsor  and  consequently
    cannot bring herself within paragraph 317(f) of the Immigration  Rules.
    I  accept  that  the  second  and  third  appellants  come  within  the
    Immigration Rules under paragraph 297(i)(f) as relatives of the sponsor
    who were under the age of 18 at the date of application.  As the  first
    appellant's application could not be considered under  the  Immigration
    Rules, her only option was for her application to be  considered  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.  In this regard the judge  failed  to  make  any
    Article 8 findings in respect of all three  appellants,  which  was  an
    error of law.

13.  With regard to the second and third appellants, I do not find that  the
    judge erred in law in finding that there are no serious and  compelling
    family or other considerations which make their exclusion  undesirable.
    The judge considered all the evidence  before  her  and  made  findings
    which were sustainable and open to her.

14.  I find that in respect  of  the  Immigration  Rules  that  the  judge's
    findings disclose no arguable error of law and her decision  dismissing
    all three appeals shall stand.

15.  With regard to Article 8 ECHR, it was accepted by  Mr  Avery  that  the
    judge did not consider  or  make  any  findings  on  this  issue.   His
    argument was that Article 8 was not  raised  in  the  original  grounds
    against the ECO's decision.  He was right.  However, the judge  herself
    said at paragraph 4 that Article 8 was also of relevance.  At paragraph
    19 the judge recorded Mr Chisthi's brief submissions, which  were  that
    if the younger appellants were granted entry clearance then  the  first
    appellant would be left alone and this would be a breach of Article  8.
    He also said that the first appellant had a good relationship with  the
    sponsor and had not formed any independent life in Zimbabwe.  Mr  Avery
    submitted that these brief submissions if considered,  would  not  have
    made a material difference to the judge's decision.  Whilst I find that
    might be the case, the judge nevertheless erred in law  in  failing  to
    consider Article 8 at all when she herself had  said  that  it  was  of
    relevance.  I therefore held that the judge erred in law in failing  to
    consider Article 8.

16.  I heard oral evidence from  the  sponsor  in  order  to  determine  the
    Article 8 appeals of the appellants.

17.  The sponsor relied on her updated statement dated 10 April  2014.   She
    said  the  first   appellant   is   repeating   her   O   levels.    In
    November/December she took her exams  and  passed  two  subjects.   She
    needs to resit five more.  She was disturbed by the  judge's  decision.
    The decision has affected all the appellants academically.   They  keep
    hoping they would join her in the UK.

18.  She said that Marshall is 19 years old and is sitting his O  levels  in
    November.  Memory is now 15 and has just started her O  level  options.
    All three appellants go  the  local  school  which  is  within  walking
    distance.  Their grandmother supports them with  their  homework.   She
    used to attend sports days and open evenings but is no longer  able  to
    do so because her knees are deteriorating.  Their grandmother went into
    hospital yesterday for tests on her heart and  hearing.   The  children
    are living alone whilst their grandmother is in hospital, but they  can
    look after themselves.  They can cook.  Their uncle is no longer living
    in the house with them.  She said that  the  appellants  are  concerned
    about their grandmother who has  aged  considerably  in  the  last  six
    months.  The children are now looking after  their  grandmother.   They
    help her to walk and accompany her to church.

19.  The sponsor said that she returned only recently from Zimbabwe after  a
    three to four week visit.  She runs an  independent  fostering  agency.
    It is her own business.  She employs lots of administrators and  social
    workers.  She started the business eighteen years ago.  The business is
    dependent on her.  She has not been going to work much in the last year
    and works as little as she can  from  home  because  she  suffers  from
    arthritis.  She has three children of her own who are aged 26,  20  and
    18.  The 20 year old is at Sussex University.  The 18 year old is about
    to start his A levels.  The 26 year old is studying law.  She has a son
    who is  5  years  old  and  therefore  the  appellant  as  the  child's
    grandmother looks after him a lot especially at weekends.

20.  Mr Avery submitted that the sponsor is not the parent of the  children.
     She is their guardian.  They are her nieces and nephew.   These  facts
    do not establish a protected Article 8 right.  The children  live  with
    their grandmother and the sponsor visits them.  The first appellant  is
    no longer a minor.  The sponsor provides them with  financial  support.
    The  decision  of  the  ECO  does  not  interfere  with  or  break  the
    established family life  they  have.   The  decision  only  breaks  the
    continuity of the family life they would like to establish in  the  UK.
    The children have a degree of independence and can  cope  with  limited
    support.  Maintaining the ECO's decision is the right course of action.

21.  Counsel submitted that the children  have  established  a  family  unit
    with the sponsor.  Although  the  sponsor  does  not  reside  with  the
    appellant she has maintained emotional and financial support for  these
    children.  She has also maintained  regular  communication  with  them.
    Despite the sponsor's ill health, she has visited the appellants  on  a
    regular basis in order to reassure them of her support.  The  sponsor's
    mother is ailing and is not able to support the children  in  light  of
    her current medical condition.  The children  would  benefit  by  being
    with the sponsor in the UK.

22.  I find that whilst the sponsor does not live with the  appellants,  she
    has maintained some sort of  family  life  with  the  appellants.   She
    supports them financially and emotionally and has made  regular  visits
    to Zimbabwe to see them.  They are nieces and nephew and she  is  their
    guardian.  I accept Mr. Avery's submission  that  these  facts  do  not
    establish a protected article 8 right.  The appellants are now  20,  19
    and 15.  The first two appellants are no  longer  children  or  minors.
    The third appellant is still a minor but, it appears that  even  though
    their grandmother is currently in hospital, the  three  appellants  are
    able to cope on their own.  They can cook and  look  after  themselves.
    Indeed from what the sponsor was saying the children are in a  position
    to even offer help to their grandmother who is in  poor  health.   They
    live in comfortable circumstances.  I am not persuaded that the limited
    family life they have with the sponsor would be interfered  with  as  a
    result of the respondent's decision.  Other than a desire  to  be  with
    the sponsor in the UK, there appears to  be  no  urgent  need  for  the
    appellants to discontinue the family and  private  life  they  have  in
    Zimbabwe.

23.  In terms of proportionality, I accept  that  their  grandmother  is  in
    poor health.  The sponsor herself is also not well  and  has  not  been
    working for a while because she has arthritis.  While  she  offers  the
    appellants emotional  and  financial  support,  that  evidence  is  not
    sufficient to show that the ECO's decision would be a  disproportionate
    interference in the limited family life they have with the sponsor.

24.  Accordingly the Article 8 appeals of the appellants are dismissed.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

