
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05632/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 3rd October 2014                             |On 16th October 2014       |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     JP
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIJING
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter of Counsel instructed by Maxwell Alves
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a determination of Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Broe promulgated on 1st May 2014.

 2. The Appellant is a Chinese citizen born 13th October 1995  who  applied
    for entry clearance to enable him to settle with  his  mother  YC  (the
    Sponsor) in the United Kingdom.

 3. The application was refused on 7th January 2013.  In brief summary  the
    Respondent did not accept that the Appellant and Sponsor  were  related
    as claimed.

 4. It was not accepted that the Sponsor had had  sole  responsibility  for
    the Appellant's  upbringing,  nor  that  there  were  any  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which made exclusion  of  the
    Appellant undesirable, and it was not accepted that the  Appellant  was
    not leading an independent life.  The application was therefore refused
    with reference to paragraph 297(i)(e), (f), and (iii).

 5. In giving reasons  for  this  decision  the  Respondent  noted  limited
    evidence had been provided as to  contact  between  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor since she left China in 2003.   The  Appellant  had  failed  to
    submit any evidence to show who he resided with in China and there  was
    no confirmation as to who was his guardian.  His father had  written  a
    letter to state that he and the Sponsor separated in 2001 and  that  he
    was happy for the Appellant to travel to the United  Kingdom  and  live
    with the Sponsor.

 6. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal, and the  appeal  was
    heard by Judge Broe (the judge) on 25th March 2014.   The  judge  heard
    evidence from the Sponsor and took  into  account  DNA  evidence  which
    proved the relationship between the Sponsor and Appellant.

 7. The judge found that the Appellant was  leading  an  independent  life.
    The judge found that the Appellant was at boarding  school  during  the
    week, and lived alone at weekends.

 8. Having found that the Appellant was living  an  independent  life,  the
    judge did  not  go  on  to  make  any  findings  in  relation  to  sole
    responsibility.  The judge did consider Article 8 of the 1950  European
    Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention) and found that refusal
    of entry clearance did not breach Article 8 of the 1950 Convention.

 9. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and at a hearing before me on 31st July 2014 I found that the judge had
    erred in law and that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  must  be
    set aside with no findings preserved, with the exception of the finding
    that DNA evidence proved that the Appellant and Sponsor were related as
    claimed.  Full details of the application for permission, the grant  of
    permission, and my reasons for finding an error of law are contained in
    my written decision promulgated on 8th August 2014.

10. The hearing on 31st July 2013 was adjourned so  that  further  evidence
    could be given and the decision re-made by the Upper Tribunal.



The Upper Tribunal Hearing

Preliminary Issues

11. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely and each party had served the other  with  any
    documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.

12. I had received the Respondent's bundle which is attached  to  an  Entry
    Clearance Manager review dated 2nd  December  2013.   I  also  received
    witness statements from the Appellant, the Sponsor  and  the  Sponsor's
    sister all dated 30th September 2014.  A bundle  comprising  458  pages
    was submitted on behalf of the Appellant.

13. Both representatives indicated that they  were  ready  to  proceed  and
    there was no application for an adjournment.

The Sponsor's Evidence

14. The Sponsor adopted her witness statement dated 30th September 2014  as
    her evidence.   She  gave  her  evidence  with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter in Mandarin.  Both the Sponsor  and  interpreter  confirmed
    that there were no difficulties in communication.

15. The Sponsor was questioned by both representatives and I have  recorded
    all questions and answers in my Record of Proceedings  and  it  is  not
    necessary to reiterate them here.  I will refer to them if necessary in
    my findings and conclusions.

16. In summary the  Sponsor's  account  is  that  she  separated  from  the
    Appellant's father in 2001.  She left China in 2003  and  travelled  to
    the United Kingdom.  She claimed asylum which was not granted, but  she
    was eventually granted indefinite leave to remain and is now a  British
    citizen.

17. The Sponsor left the Appellant to be looked after by her sister and her
    mother and between 2003 and 2011 the Appellant lived with the Sponsor's
    sister.

18. The Sponsor had sole responsibility for him.  The  Appellant's  father,
    although he lived in the same area, did not have any responsibility for
    his upbringing.  The Sponsor kept in regular contact with the Appellant
    and following a grant of indefinite leave,  has  visited  him  on  four
    occasions in China.   The  Sponsor  has  been  sending  him  money  and
    presents and has been in touch with his teachers and has taken all  the
    important decisions in the Appellant's life.

19. In September  2012  the  Appellant  started  boarding  school,  and  at
    weekends started living at 21 ZZD, on his own.  The property  is  owned
    by his paternal grandfather.  The Sponsor's  sister  and  mother  would
    visit him because  they  lived  nearby,  and  would  cook  for  him  at
    weekends.



The Respondent's Submissions

20. Mr Melvin relied upon the refusal decision dated 7th January  2013  and
    the Entry Clearance Manager's  review  dated  2nd  December  2013.   Mr
    Melvin described the Sponsor's evidence as vague and  inconsistent  and
    noted that the Sponsor blamed previous legal  representatives  for  the
    lack of evidence submitted to the Entry Clearance Officer,  and  before
    the First-tier Tribunal, although no  formal  complaint  against  those
    representatives had been made.

21. I was asked to  conclude  that  having  considered  the  evidence,  the
    Appellant's circumstances in China were entirely unclear.  I was  asked
    to note that in the Visa Application Form in answer to questions 19-26,
    the Appellant had indicated that his address was 21 ZZD and that he had
    lived at that address since 27th March 1996.  This conflicted with  the
    Sponsor's evidence that the Appellant had lived at a different  address
    between 2003 and 2011, as he had been living with her sister.

22. I was asked to note that the Appellant's father's address was  also  21
    ZZD, exactly the same address as the Appellant.  This was  referred  to
    in the DNA evidence, a separation agreement between the father and  the
    Sponsor which was dated 3rd March 2014, and in a letter written by  the
    father to the Entry Clearance Officer dated 15th May 2012.  I was asked
    to find that the Appellant's father was still living with the Appellant
    in China and that the Sponsor  had  given  misleading  evidence  in  an
    effort to indicate otherwise.

23. In relation to the three witness statements that had been submitted  at
    the hearing on behalf of the Sponsor, the Appellant and  the  Sponsor's
    sister, Mr Melvin pointed out that the Sponsor had admitted in her oral
    evidence that she had given evidence to the Appellant's  solicitors  on
    behalf of the Appellant and her sister so that the statements could  be
    prepared, and the Sponsor had admitted the solicitors who prepared  the
    statements had  had  no  direct  contact  with  the  Appellant  or  the
    Sponsor's sister.

24. I was asked to dismiss the appeal under the Immigration  Rules  because
    insufficient evidence had been submitted to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof.

25. Mr Melvin did not address Article 8,  as  it  was  understood  from  Mr
    Slatter, that the appeal was not being pursued on Article 8 grounds.

The Appellant's Submissions

26. Mr Slatter confirmed that the appeal was pursued under the  Immigration
    Rules that being paragraph 297, and not under Article 8.

27. Mr Slatter submitted that the main issue in the appeal related  to  the
    credibility of the Sponsor.  I was asked to find her a credible witness
    and that her evidence could be relied upon.  I was asked to accept that
    previously there had been poor legal representation.

28. I was asked to accept that at the date of  application,  and  decision,
    the Appellant was at a boarding school, and that he lived at 21 ZZD  at
    weekends, and that he was visited at  that  address  by  his  aunt  and
    grandmother on occasions.

29. Mr Slatter submitted that if I accepted the Sponsor's evidence, then it
    was clear that the Appellant was not leading an independent life.

30. In relation to sole responsibility, Mr Slatter submitted that the issue
    was whether I was prepared to accept that the  Appellant's  father  was
    not involved in his upbringing.  I was asked to find that the Sponsor's
    evidence was consistent, and to accept that the Appellant's father  was
    not involved in his upbringing.  I was referred to paragraph 49  of  TD
    Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049, and asked to note that this stated that where
    one  parent  had  disappeared  from  a  child's   life   or   abdicated
    responsibility, the starting point was that it was the remaining active
    parent who has sole responsibility for the child.  The  fact  that  the
    remaining active parent is in the United Kingdom makes no difference to
    this.  I was asked to  accept  that  the  important  decisions  in  the
    Appellant's life had been made by the Sponsor, and  therefore  she  had
    sole responsibility for him, and paragraph 297(i)(e) was satisfied.

31. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

32. In considering the Immigration Rules, I  take  into  account  that  the
    burden of proof is on the  Appellant,  and  the  standard  of  proof  a
    balance of probability.

33. As this is an entry clearance case, I must consider  the  circumstances
    appertaining at the date of refusal of entry clearance, that being  7th
    January 2013.

34. I have considered the evidence in the round, and taken into account all
    the evidence, both oral and documentary placed before me.  I have  also
    taken into account the submissions made by both representatives.  If  a
    particular piece of evidence is not referred to,  this  does  not  mean
    that it has not been considered, as it is not possible, or appropriate,
    to refer to every single piece of evidence.

35. The relationship between the Sponsor and Appellant has been  proved  by
    DNA evidence.  The Sponsor is the Appellant's mother.

36. The Sponsor came to the  United  Kingdom  in  2003.   She  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain on 13th June 2011.  She is therefore settled
    in this country, and she is now a British citizen.

37. In considering sole  responsibility  I  have  taken  into  account  the
    principles in TD Yemen  and  set  out  below  the  head  note  to  that
    decision;

    Sole responsibility is a factual matter to  be  decided  upon  all  the
    evidence.  Where one parent is not involved in the  child's  upbringing
    because he (or she) had  abandoned  or  abdicated  responsibility,  the
    issue may arise between the remaining parent and others who have day-to-
    day care of the child abroad.  The  test  is  whether  the  parent  has
    continuing  control  and  a  direction  over  the  child's  upbringing,
    including making all the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.
    However, where both parents are involved in a  child's  upbringing,  it
    will be exceptional that one of them will have sole responsibility.

38. I agree with Mr Slatter that a very  important  issue  in  this  appeal
    relates to the credibility of the Sponsor.  I did not find her to be  a
    credible witness in all respects.

39. The Visa Application Form was completed when the Appellant was 17 years
    of age.  In that form his address was given as 21 ZZD which the Sponsor
    accepts was his address at weekends  when  the  application  was  made.
    However the application form indicated that he had  lived  there  since
    1996 and there was no  indication  that  he  had  lived  at  any  other
    address.  A landline telephone number was given for the Appellant at 21
    ZZD.

40. I do not accept that the Appellant's father has had no  involvement  in
    his upbringing.  I reject the Sponsor's evidence on this point.  It  is
    accepted on behalf of the Appellant that his father lives near to  him.
    It is clear that the father has been contacted about  this  application
    because he has written letters consenting to the  Appellant  travelling
    to the United Kingdom and he has co-operated  in  filing  a  separation
    agreement between himself and the Sponsor, and he  has  co-operated  in
    the provision of DNA evidence.

41. The DNA evidence is contained within a bundle submitted  on  behalf  of
    the Appellant by his previous  representatives,  and  this  bundle  was
    placed before the First-tier Tribunal.  The address  of  the  Appellant
    and his father is exactly  the  same  in  the  sample  collection  form
    contained within the DNA evidence.  They also give the  same  telephone
    number, and this is the same telephone number as  listed  in  the  Visa
    Application Form as being the landline for 21 ZZD.

42. A separation agreement was entered into between  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant's father on 3rd March 2014.  The address of  the  Appellant's
    father listed in that agreement is 21 ZZD, the same address as  in  the
    DNA evidence, and the Visa Application  Form.   A  translation  of  the
    agreement is at page 97A of the Appellant's bundle.

43. At page 98 of the Appellant's bundle  is  a  translation  of  a  letter
    written by the Appellant's father dated 15th May 2012.  In that  letter
    he gives his address as 21 ZZD, the same address as  contained  in  the
    separation agreement, the DNA evidence, and the Visa Application Form.

44. These matters were specifically put to the Sponsor when she was  cross-
    examined.  She could give no satisfactory explanation  as  to  why  the
    address of the Appellant's father was given in three separate pieces of
    evidence, as being 21 ZZD, the same  address  as  the  Appellant.   The
    Sponsor said that the Appellant's father did not live at that  address,
    but could give no further adequate explanation.

45. The Sponsor when cross-examined, did not directly answer  a  number  of
    questions.  She blamed the Appellant's previous representatives  for  a
    lack of information in the original application,  and  for  a  lack  of
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Sponsor did accept, quite
    frankly, that she had given  the  Appellant's  solicitors  evidence  on
    behalf of her sister and the Appellant, so that the witness  statements
    could be completed.  She said that the solicitors did not  have  direct
    contact with either the Appellant or her sister.

46. It may be that the Sponsor is mistaken on this, as the  statements  are
    signed by the  Appellant  and  the  Sponsor's  sister,  and  contain  a
    statement of truth that the statement has been read to them in  Chinese
    by the solicitors.

47.  I  do  however  accept  the  Sponsor's  evidence  that  she  did  give
    information to those solicitors on behalf  of  the  Appellant  and  her
    sister, as I can see no reason why she would say that  if  it  was  not
    true.  The statements are very similar in content, and as the  evidence
    of the  Appellant  and  Sponsor's  sister  was  not  tested  by  cross-
    examination, I place very limited weight on their written statements.

48. As previously indicated, I do not regard the Sponsor as credible in all
    respects, and I find it  relevant  that  she  was  unable  to  give  an
    explanation as to why the  Appellant  and  his  father  have  the  same
    address.  The circumstances of the Appellant in China are not  entirely
    clear.  In paragraph 22 of the  Sponsor's  statement  she  states  that
    since her departure from China the  Appellant  has  been  living  in  a
    boarding school  from  Monday  to  Friday.   That  contrasts  with  her
    evidence that between 2003 and 2011 the Appellant was living  with  her
    sister.  It also conflicts with paragraph 17 of her statement in  which
    she confirms that it was September 2012 when the Appellant started high
    school and was boarding at a school while living at 21 ZZD at weekends.

49. The Appellant in paragraph 22 of his witness statement makes a  similar
    comment, that since his mother's departure he  has  been  living  in  a
    boarding school from Monday to Friday and that he started living at  21
    ZZD at weekends since December 2011.  It is therefore not clear if that
    is correct, where he was living in the weekdays between December  2011,
    and starting boarding school in September 2012.

50. I do not accept that the evidence produced on behalf of  the  Appellant
    has produced an accurate or comprehensive account of his  circumstances
    in China.  I do accept the Appellant was attending a boarding school at
    the date of refusal, and I accept that the Sponsor has sent  money  not
    only to the Appellant but also to other family members in China, and  I
    accept that she has been in contact with the Appellant, and in  contact
    with his school.  I also accept that she  has  visited  China  on  four
    occasions after she was granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom.

51. That however does not prove that she has had  sole  responsibility  for
    the Appellant, and I do not accept  that  the  Appellant's  father  has
    abdicated  all  responsibility  for  him.   In  my  view  the  evidence
    indicates that the Appellant and his father had been living at the same
    address and that the  father  has  been  involved  in  the  Appellant's
    upbringing.  As stated in paragraph 52(4) of TD Yemen, "if both parents
    are involved in the upbringing of the child, it  would  be  exceptional
    that one of them will have sole responsibility."

52. I do not find this to be one of those exceptional cases, and I conclude
    that the burden of proof has not been discharged and it  has  not  been
    proved that the Sponsor has had sole responsibility for the Appellant's
    upbringing.

53. I next consider paragraph 297(i)(f), and I do not find that  there  are
    serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  make
    exclusion of the Appellant undesirable.   The  Appellant  is  attending
    school in China.  When not at boarding school, the  evidence  indicates
    that he lives with his father.  He also has contact  with  other  close
    family members.  There are no relevant medical issues.   The  Appellant
    is not living in poverty or in overcrowded conditions.  In addition  to
    family support he has financial support from the United  Kingdom.   The
    appeal cannot succeed with reference to paragraph 297(i)(f).

54. I then consider paragraph 297(iii) and whether the Appellant is leading
    an independent life.  I find that he is not.  I have taken into account
    the principles  in  NM  Zimbabwe  [2007]  UKAIT  00051.   Although  the
    Appellant is living away from his family home in the week, he is  at  a
    boarding school and this does not mean he  is  leading  an  independent
    life.  The Appellant, in my view, has not formed an independent  social
    unit separate from his parents' family unit.  I find that the Appellant
    is supported  both  emotionally  and  financially  by  his  family  and
    therefore is not leading an independent life.

55. I do not go on to consider Article 8, because Mr Slatter confirmed that
    the appeal was not pursued on Article 8 grounds.

Decision

The Determination of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and
was set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

An anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal as the  Appellant
was a minor when his application was made.  I continue that direction  under
rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed                              Date 8th October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.






Signed                              Date 8th October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


