
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05558/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 September 2013                          |On 11 October 2013           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                              khadra abdi jama

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ADDIS ABABA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia who was born on 1  January  1985.
    On 4 January 2011, she  applied  for  entry  clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom as the spouse of a refugee under para 352A of  the  Immigration
    Rules (HC 395).  On 5 January 2011,  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  at
    Addis Ababa refused the appellant's application on the  basis  that  he
    was not satisfied: (1)  of  the  appellant's  identity;  (2)  that  the
    parties' marriage  was  subsisting  and  that  they  intended  to  live
    together permanently; and (3) that they  had  ever  lived  together  as
    husband and wife.

 2. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 21 June 2011, Judge L Murray dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  Judge Murray was not satisfied that the appellant and  sponsor
    were married as claimed.  On 27  July  2011,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Davey) granted the appellant permission to appeal to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge had  arguably  made  contradictory
    findings in relation to the evidence  of  a  witness,  Mr  Bashir  Nur,
    having accepted his evidence that the appellant and sponsor had  become
    engaged in 1992 but rejecting his evidence that they  married  in  1999
    (as the appellant claimed) on the basis that he was a relative and  not
    an independent witness.

The UT Appeal

 3. Following a hearing on 11 January 2012, the Upper Tribunal (DUTJ Bowen)
    concluded that Judge  Murray  had  erred  in  law  on  the  basis  that
    permission to appeal had been granted.  Judge Bowen's reasons  are  set
    out in his decision of that date which I do not repeat here.

 4. The appeal was initially relisted for a resumed hearing on  28  January
    2013 before DUTJ J F W Phillips.  That  hearing  had  to  be  adjourned
    because an interpreter was not available.  However, at that hearing the
    appellant's then representative (Mr S Chelvan) invited DUTJ Phillips to
    remit the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Some  discussion  took
    place and the Presenting Officer (Mr I  Richards)  confirmed  that  the
    respondent no longer challenged the  appellant's  identity.   It  would
    appear that discussion took place as to whether any of  Judge  Murray's
    findings should  be  preserved.   The  judge's  Record  of  Proceedings
    records the discussion but not the outcome.

 5. Before me, Mr Bazini referred to a note of the proceedings prepared  by
    Mr Chelvan which records that Judge  Phillips  declined  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal, retaining it in the  Upper  Tribunal
    but preserving Judge Murray's finding in para 34 of  her  determination
    that the appellant and sponsor were engaged in 1992.  Mr Richards,  who
    appeared for the respondent before me (as  he  had  done  before  Judge
    Phillips) was  unable  to  recollect  what  had  been  Judge  Phillips'
    decision in relation to the preserved facts, if any, of Judge  Murray's
    determination.   The Home Office file also did not record  the  outcome
    of Judge Phillips' decision.

 6. Having heard from both Mr Bazini and Mr Richards, I indicated that  the
    best contemporaneous note was that of  Mr  Chelvan  and  I,  therefore,
    accepted that Judge Phillips had indicated that the positive finding in
    Judge Murray's determination that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  became
    engaged in 1992 should be preserved.  I note that Judge Bowen in para 6
    of his decision  in  January  2011  indicated  that  no  findings  were
    preserved but, in my judgment, in accordance with  the  view  of  Judge
    Phillips, the error identified  by  Judge  Bowen  does  not  taint  the
    positive finding in favour of the appellant  in  paragraph  34  of  the
    determination.  Consequently, the appeal before  me  proceeded  on  the
    basis that that finding was preserved.

The Evidence

 7. It was accepted by both representatives that  the  sole  issue  for  me
    under para 352A was whether the appellant and sponsor were  married  as
    they claimed.  Mr Richards accepted that if I found in the  appellant's
    favour on this issue then the appeal should be allowed under para  352A
    of the Rules.

 8. At the hearing, the sponsor Mustafa Sharif gave  oral  evidence  before
    me.  He adopted his statements dated 24 May 2011 (at pages 1-3  of  the
    bundle) and 22 January 2013 (at page  F  of  the  bundle).   In  cross-
    examination, he confirmed that he had married the sponsor in 1999.   He
    confirmed the name of his wife and that when they got married  she  was
    around 14 years of age.  It was put to him that when he claimed  asylum
    the sponsor had said in his statement that he had married the appellant
    in early 1992.  He said that he did not know how that had happened  and
    he had married the  appellant  in  1999.   He  said  that  he  did  not
    understand the difference between engagement  and  marriage.   He  said
    that he had made a mistake and he was confused between the  two  dates.
    He said that after he and the appellant were married in 1999 they lived
    together for five to six  months.   During  that  time  living  on  the
    sponsor's family farm, they had had difficulties with the  militia  who
    had taken over the farm.  He confirmed that those  problems  had  begun
    before the marriage.  He was  asked  why  the  appellant's  family  had
    agreed to the marriage at that time if there were these problems.   The
    sponsor said  that  there  were  difficulties  at  that  time  but  the
    situation in the country was better than it had been before.

 9. The sponsor was asked about  Mr  Bashir  Nur  (his  first  cousin)  and
    whether he attended the wedding.  The sponsor  said  that  he  was  not
    present but his siblings were.  Mr Nur stayed  in  his  shop  to  sell.
    When asked who attended from Mr Nur's family, the sponsor said  it  was
    his father and his sister whose name was Kaltun.  He said that  as  far
    as he could remember those were the only two although  there  may  have
    been others.  He was asked why there was such a long period between the
    engagement in 1992 and the marriage in 1999.  The sponsor said that  at
    the beginning the situation in Somalia was  very  bad  and  the  second
    reason was that the appellant was very young.  He said she was  between
    14 and 15 in 1999.  He could not  remember  the  exact  date  of  their
    marriage but he said it was around June in 1999.  He said that he  left
    at the end of that year - the last month of the year.  He said that the
    militia took over his farm in 1992.  It was put to him that although he
    became engaged in 1992 he had in fact never married the appellant.  The
    sponsor said that was not right.  The situation was very difficult  and
    that was how things went.

10. Mr Bashir Nur also gave oral evidence.  He adopted his statement  dated
    24 May 2011 (at pages 4-5 of the bundle).  He confirmed that he was the
    cousin of the sponsor.  He said that  he  had  attended  the  sponsor's
    engagement in 1992.  However, he said that  he  had  not  attended  the
    wedding but members of his family went there.  When he was asked  which
    members of his family, Mr Nur replied that it was his father and  "some
    of my siblings".  When he was further asked how many of his siblings he
    replied that it was one person and that it was his sister Kaltun.

11. Finally, Ahmed  Abdi  Ibrahim  gave  oral  evidence.   He  adopted  his
    statement of 24 June 2013 (at A23-A24 of  the  bundle).   He  confirmed
    that he had taken $800 at the sponsor's request to the appellant in May
    2012.  He had flown  to  Djibouti  and  two  days  later  had  met  the
    appellant whom he had contacted by phone.  He said that they met  in  a
    Somali restaurant in Ethiopia (in his statement he says he went to Dira
    Dawa on the Djibouti/Ethiopian border).  He said that they met  and  he
    gave her the money.  He said that they sat and talked and the appellant
    told him about the condition of her mother and the situation  that  she
    lived in.  The appellant asked about the sponsor, how he  was  and  his
    situation.  He was asked whether he had been told what the $800 was  to
    be used for and he said  he  was  told  that  it  was  to  finance  the
    appellant's mother's hospital.

The Law

12. The burden of proof in this appeal is upon the appellant  to  establish
    on a balance of probabilities that she meets the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules, namely para 352A.  The sole  issue  is  whether  the
    appellant has established on a balance of probabilities  that  she  and
    the sponsor are married as claimed.

The Submissions

13. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards invited me to conclude on  the
    totality of the evidence that the marriage had never taken  place.   He
    pointed out that the sponsor had  made  a  very  clear  statement  when
    making his asylum claim that he  had  married  in  1992.   Mr  Richards
    submitted that that was not a confusion between the date of  engagement
    and marriage because the sponsor says that the appellant came  to  live
    with him and his family.  He reminded me that in 1992 the appellant was
    approximately 7 years of age.  He accepted that it  was  possible  that
    there was some sort of engagement in 1992 with a view to marriage at  a
    later  date.   Mr  Richards  submitted  that  given  the  deteriorating
    situation in Somalia between 1992 and 1999, it was not  plausible  that
    the appellant would leave her family home at the age of  14  and  marry
    the sponsor and live on his family farm occupied by  the  militia.   He
    submitted that the appellant had failed to establish on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that the marriage ever took place.

14. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Bazini submitted that  it  was  a  short
    step once it was accepted that this was  an  arranged  marriage  within
    Somali traditions to find that the appellant and sponsor had married in
    1999 having become engaged  in  1992.   He  reminded  me  that  in  his
    screening interview (at 4.1), the sponsor had said  he  was  "married".
    Mr Bazini submitted that the sponsor had given  this  detail  from  the
    outset.  He also pointed out that it was  recorded  in  that  interview
    that the sponsor became upset  when  referring  to  his  marriage.   Mr
    Bazini submitted that it was not believable that the sponsor would make
    up his marriage in 2009 at his  screening  interview  and  feign  being
    upset at a time when that issue was not central to his claim.

15. Mr Bazini also referred me to the statement of Derek McConnell dated 20
    May 2011 who  is  the  solicitor  having  conduct  of  the  appellant's
    application for entry clearance.  He drew my attention to the  copy  of
    the application form as originally drafted which had "1999" crossed out
    and replaced by  "1992".   Mr  Bazini  referred  me  to  the  sponsor's
    explanation of this in para 6 of his statement dated 24 May 2011  where
    he explains that he had not noticed that during his asylum claim it was
    recorded that he had married in 1992.  That was wrong, he  was  engaged
    in 1992.  He explains that the application by the appellant  originally
    said "1999" but was "scored  through"  and  changed  to  "1992".   That
    occurred because he decided to stick with the date originally given for
    the wedding when he first came to the UK.  He said he was simply trying
    to be consistent with what he had said before.  He regrets that he  did
    not at an earlier time deal with the fact that the date of his marriage
    was initially wrongly recorded.

16. Mr Bazini relied on the evidence of Mr Bashir Nur.  He  submitted  that
    his evidence was consistent with that of the sponsor.   In  particular,
    Mr Nur had been accepted as credible in his asylum claim.  His evidence
    that the parties became engaged in 1992 had been accepted  and  in  his
    oral evidence he had agreed with the sponsor as to which members of his
    family had attended the appellant's wedding.  He had not  attended  but
    his father and sister, Kaltun, had done so.  Mr Bazini  submitted  that
    there was no reason to disbelieve Mr Nur that the  marriage  had  taken
    place in 1999.

17. Mr Bazini also relied upon the evidence of  "intervening  devotion"  in
    the form of a  number  of  remittances  made  by  the  sponsor  to  the
    appellant (at pages 46-56 of the bundle) beginning in  2010.   He  also
    relied upon the evidence concerning the $800 taken by Mr Ibrahim in May
    2012.

18. Mr Bazini submitted that, contrary to Mr Richards' submission,  it  was
    not implausible that the appellant's marriage should go ahead,  despite
    the prevailing situation in Somalia.  He submitted that that suggestion
    failed to understand human nature in awful situations where life simply
    had to carry on.  He submitted that the appellant was as much in danger
    if she stayed at her family home as she was living with the  appellant.
    He submitted that it was not implausible that the appellant would marry
    at the age of 14.

19. Mr Bazini submitted that,  in  effect,  the  only  matter  against  the
    appellant was the reference to "1992" as being the date of his marriage
    in his initial asylum claim.  The remaining evidence was in his  favour
    and he had offered an explanation as to  that  mistake.   He  submitted
    that on a balance of probabilities the appellant had  established  that
    she was married to the sponsor and therefore met  the  requirements  of
    para 352A.

Discussion and Findings

20. In reaching my decision, I have considered all the evidence to which  I
    was referred and which was relied upon by the parties in this appeal.

21. First, having heard both the sponsor and Mr Nur give evidence, I formed
    the clear view that they were  seeking  to  tell  the  truth.   In  one
    material respect, their oral evidence concerning the  claimed  marriage
    of  the  appellant  and  sponsor  in  1999  was  challenged  in  cross-
    examination.  That was in relation  to  who  attended  the  appellant's
    marriage ceremony.  The evidence, set out in the witness statements, is
    that the marriage took place in Afgoye.  Both the sponsor  and  Mr  Nur
    independently confirm that Mr Nur had not attended but both  identified
    two members of Mr Nur's family, namely his father  and  sister  Kaltun,
    who had done so.  In giving those answers,  both  witnesses  in  cross-
    examination  left  me  with  the  certain  impression  that  they  were
    recalling this information  from  their  memories  of  the  time.   The
    credibility of Mr Nur and indeed the sponsor, have both been previously
    accepted in their asylum claims.

22. Secondly, there is evidence of "intervening devotion" in  the  form  of
    payment made by the sponsor to the appellant including a  sum  of  $800
    taken by Mr Ibrahim in May 2012.  Mr Ibrahim, of course, gave  evidence
    that he met the appellant and that the whole context of the meeting was
    that he was carrying money from the appellant's husband to her in order
    to pay her mother's hospital bills.  Mr Ibrahim also told me  that  the
    appellant asked about her husband, the sponsor.   Mr  Ibrahim  was  not
    cross-examined  by  Mr  Richards  and  his  evidence   is,   therefore,
    unchallenged.

23. Thirdly, as regards the sponsor's statement in his asylum claim in 2008
    that he had married in "1992" rather than as he now claims in  1999,  I
    accept Mr Bazini's submissions based on the  evidence  of  the  sponsor
    himself and of Mr McConnell that this was indeed a  mistake  which  the
    appellant sought to perpetuate (although initially in  the  appellant's
    application form 1999 was included) in order to  maintain  consistency.
    That was, obviously, a somewhat foolish course of action as the current
    appeal demonstrates.  However, it has to be seen in the  light  of  the
    fact that the sponsor has always claimed that he was married.  That was
    said in his initial screening interview as Mr Bazini pointed out to me.
     I do not accept that having given the interviewer that information the
    sponsor would feign distress such that the interview had to be  paused,
    if it was not the fact that he was indeed married as he said.

24. Fourthly, I see nothing implausible in the claimed circumstances of the
    appellant's marriage.  Those were that she became engaged in 1992 as  a
    result of an arrangement between her and the sponsor's family at a time
    when she was 7 years  of  age.   Seven  years  later  she  married  the
    claimant and moved to live with him on  his  family  farm.   I  do  not
    accept Mr Richards' submission that that is  simply  implausible  given
    the deteriorating situation in Somalia that she should move to  a  farm
    which the sponsor claims was controlled by the militia.  As  Mr  Bazini
    submitted, in effect, 'life goes on' in dreadful  situations  including
    those of conflict such as existed in Somalia.  Indeed, the risk to  the
    appellant of living with her husband's family would not necessarily  be
    so different from that of living with her own family as to dictate that
    no rational person would, despite being engaged, choose  to  marry  and
    live with her husband.

25. I have set out above the substance of  the  submissions  made  by  both
    representatives.  No other submissions were made relying on any further
    inconsistencies (if any) in the evidence.

26. For the above reasons, I accept the evidence of the sponsor and Mr Nur,
    and also that of Mr Ibrahim which was unchallenged.  On  the  basis  of
    the evidence before me, I find that  the  appellant  and  sponsor  were
    married in Somalia in 1999 and that they lived together for a period of
    some five to six months in 1999 before being separated.

27. It being accepted that this was the only issue in  dispute  under  para
    352A, I find that  the  appellant  has  established  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities that she meets the requirements  of  para  352A  and  the
    appeal is allowed on that basis.

Decision

28. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration Rules involved the making of an  error  of
    law and is set aside.

29. I remake the decision allowing the appellant's appeal under  para  352A
    of the Immigration Rules.






                                                                      Signed


                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
