

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05635/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|                                             |On 7 March 2018               |
|On 5 June and 24 October 2017                |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                      AISHA AHMED FAWZI RAGAB BEN KATO
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                  ISTANBUL

                                                                  Respondent
Representation
For the appellant:     Mr Mohammed Al-Rashid, Counsel instructed by Carlton

                  Law Chambers
For the respondent:    Mr Stephen Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer,
                  at the hearing on 5 June 2017 and Mr Peter Deller, a
Senior Home
                  Office Presenting Officer, at the hearing on 24 October
2017


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against the respondent's decision  on
   13 March 2015 to refuse her an EEA family  permit  to  enter  the  United
   Kingdom based on her derived right of residence, pursuant to the decision
   of the Court of Justice of the European Union in Zambrano,  now  provided
   for by Regulation 15(A)  of  the  Immigration  (European  Economic  Area)
   Regulations 2006 (as amended).  The  appellant's  husband  is  a  British
   citizen and thus an exempt person for the purposes of the Regulations.

2. The appellant has not made any  application  for  entry  clearance  under
   Article 8 ECHR within  the  Immigration  Rules  HC395  (as  amended),  or
   outside the Rules.  It is her case that the EEA Regulations  entitle  her
   to a family permit and that  she  should  not  be  required  to  make  an
   application for entry clearance under the Rules. In his submissions of  5
   January 2018, Mr Al-Rashid confirmed that Article 8 ECHR 'has no  present
   applicability as the children are living with both their parents'.

Procedural matters

3. This appeal was heard in the  Upper  Tribunal  on  5  June  2017  and  24
   October 2017.  At the  hearing  on  24  October  2017,  I  received  oral
   submissions on the basis of the evidence  and  the  authorities  as  they
   stood.  It is common  ground  that  this  appeal  turns  on  whether  the
   appellant is entitled to be treated as the primary carer of her children,
   for EEA purposes.

4.  On  24  October  2017,  the  meaning  of  'primary  carer'   was   under
   consideration in a number of conjoined cases in the Court of Appeal.  The
   Court of Appeal's decision  in  those  appeals  was  handed  down  on  13
   December 2017 and is reported as Patel v The Secretary of State  for  the
   Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 2028.

5. By agreement, I directed that  the  remaking  of  the  decision  in  this
   appeal stand adjourned to await the decision of the Court  of  Appeal  in
   Patel.  The parties were then given an opportunity  (if  so  advised)  to
   serve and file supplemental submissions, following which I indicated that
   I would either proceed to remake the decision, or reconvene  the  hearing
   for further oral argument.   Both parties made submissions: neither asked
   for a further oral hearing and I do not consider that one  is  necessary.
   The decision is therefore remade as set out below.

Background

6. The factual matrix in this appeal is not contentious.  This appellant  is
   a Libyan citizen married to a British citizen, who  works  for  a  Libyan
   company, sometimes in Libya and sometimes in Turkey.  The  appellant  was
   last in the United Kingdom with leave as an EEA spouse, for 2 years  from
   31 August 2007 to 31 August 2009.  The couple had a child,  born  in  the
   United Kingdom in September  2008,  who  is  a  British  citizen.   Since
   leaving the United Kingdom in December 2009 for the  appellant's  husband
   to take up his post in Libya, they have had a further two  children,  who
   are also British citizens.

7. The appellant remains a Libyan citizen and has no other nationality.   At
   present, the family all live together, but it is the  parents'  intention
   that the appellant and the children should come and live  in  the  United
   Kingdom.   No  Article  8  ECHR  application  has  been  made,  nor   any
   application for leave to enter outside the Rules.  In  December  2011  at
   the latest, the appellant had been out of the  United  Kingdom  for  more
   than 2 years and her EEA spouse leave has lapsed: she cannot re-enter the
   United Kingdom without her husband, who remains in Libya/Turkey, save  by
   way of an EEA family permit.

8. In August 2014, the husband's work took  the  family  to  Turkey.   On  2
   October 2014, the appellant applied for a  visit  visa  to  come  to  the
   United Kingdom for a 2-month visit, but the Entry  Clearance  Officer  in
   Islamabad refused because he was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  was
   lawfully in Turkey, or that her husband still had employment there.   The
   husband's payslips indicated that he had last been paid on 20  July  2014
   and might no longer be in the employment on which the parties rely, as an
   obstacle to his living with his children in the United Kingdom.

9. On 21 February 2015, the appellant made the present  application  for  an
   EEA family permit to enable her to accompany her children to  the  United
   Kingdom.  Her British citizen children were then 7, 6 and 3 years old but
   would now be 9, 6 and 5 years old respectively.  The family  were  living
   together in Turkey and being supported by the husband's  employment:  the
   husband did not intend  to  travel  with  his  family.   He  intended  to
   continue working in Turkey, and support his  family  financially  in  the
   United Kingdom.  Once she reached the United Kingdom, the appellant would
   therefore have to raise the children alone.

Entry Clearance decision

10. The Entry Clearance Officer refused the EEA  family  permit  application
   because he was not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  was  the  children's
   primary carer, since the family were still living together in Turkey. The
   respondent considered that the appellant's British citizen husband  could
   return to the United Kingdom and care for his  children  here  and  that,
   therefore, failure to admit the appellant to the United Kingdom would not
   result in the children being unable to enjoy the full substance of  their
   rights as European citizens while growing up  in  the  country  of  their
   nationality, the United Kingdom.

11. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

Entry Clearance Manager review

12. Following receipt of the grounds of appeal, an Entry  Clearance  Manager
   reviewed and upheld the Entry Clearance Officer's decision.  The husband,
   as a British citizen, was an exempt person under section  15A(6)  of  the
   Rules.  The Entry Clearance Manager was not satisfied that the  appellant
   could meet Regulation 15A(4A) of the 2006 Regulations, either by  showing
   that she had primary responsibility for her children's care at  the  date
   of application, or that she shared equally  that  responsibility  with  a
   person who was not an exempt person.   Accordingly,  applying  Regulation
   15A(2)(b), the Entry Clearance Manager was satisfied that this  appellant
   did not qualify for derivative residence status.

13. The Entry Clearance Manager considered that section 55 of  the  Borders,
   Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 did not apply as the  children  were
   outside the United Kingdom.  The respondent had no obligation to consider
   their best interests if they were not in the United Kingdom.   The  Entry
   Clearance Manager commented that wilfully to split the family as proposed
   was probably not in the children's best interests.

14. The Entry Clearance Manager maintained the  refusal,  stating  that  the
   Entry Clearance Officer's  decision  respected  the  family's  Article  8
   rights as they stood.    The Entry Clearance Manager considered that  the
   appellant should seek entry clearance under the Article 8 ECHR provisions
   of the Immigration Rules.

First-tier Tribunal decision

15. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross considered the  reasoning  of  the  Upper
   Tribunal in MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside the EU) Iran  [2013]
   UKUT 380.  He did not accept that Regulation 15(2A) covered the situation
   where the parent was not yet in the  United  Kingdom  with  the  European
   Union citizen children and was not their primary carer in the  place  and
   at the time where the entry clearance application was made.

16. The First-tier Tribunal concluded that this appellant not being  an  EEA
   national,  'consequently the Entry Clearance Officer was not  obliged  to
   issue her with a derivative residence card under Regulation  18A  of  the
   Regulations'.  The Judge dismissed the appeal under what he described  as
   the 'Immigration (EEA) Regulations 1986'. The appellant appealed  to  the
   Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

17. The grounds of appeal raise two  issues.   First,  the  appellant  says,
   supported by a witness statement from Mr Al-Rashid, that at  the  end  of
   the First-tier Tribunal hearing the Judge  gave  an  indication  that  he
   would allow the appeal, and she complains  that  the  decision  does  not
   explain why he went on to dismiss it, having given that  indication.

18. Second, in relation to the substance  of  the  decision,  the  appellant
   argues that the operation of Regulations  12(1A)  and  Regulation  11(5),
   which together govern the issue  of  an  EEA  family  permit,  is  to  be
   analysed as though the appellant and her children  were  already  in  the
   United Kingdom, and that the question for the Tribunal is:

         "If the 3 British citizen children aged 3, 6, and 7, who are now in
         Libya, were to be present in the UK, would they be able  to  reside
         here (i.e. enjoy the benefits of their  citizenship)  if  P  (their
         mother and appellant)  were  not  to  be  permitted  entry/was  not
         permitted to reside in the UK with them, in the  absence  of  other
         family members or close relatives in the  UK  who  could  care  for
         them."

19. The appellant contends that the First-tier Tribunal failed  properly  to
   apply the guidance of the Upper Tribunal in MA and SM at [44]  such  that
   the 'primary carer' criteria in Regulation 15A should be considered based
   on the situation as it would be if the appellant were  allowed  to  enter
   the United Kingdom with her children, not  as  it  presently  stands,  in
   circumstances in which she  lives  with  her  husband  and  her  children
   together, in Turkey or Libya.

20. It is the appellant's case that there are no  other  family  members  in
   the United Kingdom who could care for the children and that it  would  be
   unreasonable to expect them to go to boarding school, especially  as  the
   youngest was only 3 years old at the date of decision.

Rule 24 Reply

21. The respondent filed a Rule 24 Reply on 4 May 2017.  It  is  of  limited
   assistance to me since at [3] the respondent stated that, having not been
   provided with Mr Al-Rashid's witness statement, she was unable to comment
   on the allegation therein that the First-tier Tribunal Judge said  during
   the hearing that he would allow the appeal.  At [4], the respondent  says
   that the present shared responsibility for the children is fatal  to  the
   appeal and that such finding was open to the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

22. That is the basis on which this appeal came before me.

Error of law decision

23. There is no explanation for the difference between  what  the  appellant
   says was the orally announced outcome of  the  appeal,  and  the  written
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The question has not  been  put  to
   the First-tier Tribunal Judge and the record of proceedings on  the  file
   does not assist me. At a hearing on 5 June 2017, I found an error of law,
   both on that point and in relation to the Judge's self-direction  on  the
   Regulations.  I therefore  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal, and the decision in this appeal will be  remade  in  the  Upper
   Tribunal.

24. There is no challenge to the findings of fact  and  credibility  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal.

Remaking the decision

Appellant's submissions

25. For the appellant, Mr Al-Rashid in his skeleton  argument  set  out  the
   history of this family and the birth of the children.  Article  20(1)  of
   the Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European Union ('the  Charter'),
   established citizenship of the  European  Union  and  that  every  person
   holding nationality of a Member State was also a citizen  of  the  Union,
   which citizenship was additional  too,  but  did  not  replace,  national
   citizenship.  Article 21(1) of the Charter  gave  every  citizen  of  the
   European Union the right of free movement.   He  then  set  out  the  key
   findings of the Court of Justice in Zambrano, and  the  guidance  of  the
   Upper Tribunal in MA and SM:

         "(1)   In EU law  terms  there  is  no  reason  why  the  decision
         in Zambrano could not in principle be relied upon by the parent, or
         other primary carer, of a minor EU national living outside  the  EU
         as long as it is the intention of the parent, or primary carer,  to
         accompany the EU national child to his/her country of  nationality,
         in the instant appeals that being the United Kingdom.  To  conclude
         otherwise would deny access,  without  justification,  to  a  whole
         class of EU citizens to rights they are entitled to  by  virtue  of
         their citizenship.

         (2)   The above conclusion  is  fortified  by  the  terms  of  The
         Immigration (European Economic Area) (Amendment) (No.2) Regulations
         2012  (SI  2012/2560),   brought   into   force   on   8   November
         2012. Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Schedule to the  Regulations  give
         effect to the CJEU's decision in Zambrano by amending regulations
         11 and 15A of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations
         2006 in order to confer rights  of  entry  and  residence  on  the
         primary carer of a British  citizen  who  is  joining  the  British
         citizen in, or accompanying the  British  citizen  to  [regulations
         11(5)(e) and 15A(4A)], the United Kingdom and where the denial  of
         such a right of residence would prevent the  British  citizen  from
         being able to reside in the United Kingdom or in an EEA State."

26. The appellant would rely on  the  decision  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
   Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i) (f)) Democratic Republic  of  Congo  [2013]
   UKUT 88 (IAC) that:

          "...Although the statutory duty under s.55  UK  Borders  Act  2009
         only applies to children within the UK, the broader duty  [to  have
         due regard to the provisions of the UN Convention on the Rights  of
         the Child] doubtless explains why  the  Secretary  of  State's  IDI
         invites Entry Clearance Officers to consider the statutory guidance
         issued under s.55."

27. After setting out the applicable 2006 Regulations, Mr  Al-Rashid  argued
   that once in the United Kingdom (if admitted) this appellant would not be
   sharing responsibility for the children with  any  other  person  in  the
   United Kingdom.  The respondent's continued  refusal  to  admit  her  was
   contrary to European Union law and the Regulations.  Regulation 11(5) was
   a forward-looking provision, envisaging that the factual matrix should be
   considered 'as if' the British  citizen  children  were  already  in  the
   United Kingdom, and should be so interpreted.   On  that  basis,  it  was
   clear that the children would be unable to reside here, if  their  mother
   could  not  accompany  them.    The  question  to  be  considered   under
   Regulation 15A(4A) was also whether, if the appellant were in the  United
   Kingdom, she would be the children's primary  carer,  and  that  question
   must be resolved in her favour.  The wording of Regulation  11(5)(e)  was
   based upon an artificiality, but in the appellant's favour.

28. Nor was it appropriate to  treat  the  appellant  as  having  sought  to
   circumvent the Rules, or that she was required to make an entry clearance
   application thereunder.  The appellant  manifestly  could  not  meet  the
   requirements   of   sub-paragraphs   E-ECP.2.1(a),   E-ECP.2.10   or   E-
   ECPT.2.2.(b), which respectively required the appellant's partner  to  be
   in the United Kingdom, the couple to intend to live together  permanently
   in the United Kingdom, and the children  to  be  already  in  the  United
   Kingdom.  The appellant could  not  lawfully  enter  the  United  Kingdom
   within the Rules.   The respondent should have had  regard  to  the  best
   interests of these British citizen children  and  the  appeal  should  be
   allowed.

29. In oral submissions, Mr Al-Rashid summarised  the  argument  above.   If
   the right question were asked, the answer followed.  The decision  in  MA
   and  SM  did  not  greatly  assist  since  it  was  decided  before   the
   introduction of Regulation 11(5)(e) and 15(4A).  Nor was there  any  need
   to exhaust the Article 8 ECHR options under the Rules before  relying  on
   Zambrano derivative status.

30. The Tribunal should not rely on the husband's choice to remain in  Libya
   or Turkey:  suppose the appellant had been a widow, the husband had  been
   the subject of an exclusion order preventing his  return  to  the  United
   Kingdom, or he were seriously  physically  incapacitated  and  unable  to
   travel with his family. In those circumstances, would the appellant still
   be unable to apply to travel with her children to the United Kingdom?  Mr
   Al-Rashid submitted that the husband should not be  penalised  for  being
   employed outside the United Kingdom: the Regulations did not require  the
   Tribunal to understand the husband's motives for  remaining  outside  his
   country of nationality without his family members.

31. Mr Al-Rashid made written submissions on Patel.  He set out the  factual
   history, and the issue in relation to the meaning of Regulation 11 of the
   Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (as  amended).   He
   argued that Patel was not of assistance in this appeal, since  the  issue
   in Patel was whether a British citizen would be compelled  to  leave  the
   United  Kingdom/European  Union  if  their  primary  carer  was  removed.
   Regulation 11(2) was not in contention.  Mr Al-Rashid observed  that  the
   legal test in Patel is set out at [77]-[78] thus:

         "77. ...The  correct  approach  would  have  been  to  ask  is  the
         situation of the child or children such that, if the non-EU citizen
         parent leaves, the British citizen will be unable to care  for  the
         child or children, so that the latter will be compelled  to  leave.
         In so doing, the Tribunal must  pay  regard  to  all  the  relevant
         circumstances indicated by  the  CJEU  in  Chavez-Vilchez,  and  in
         particular in paragraphs 70 to 72 quoted above.

         78.  I would wish to emphasise that consideration  of  the  respect
         for family life (whether considered under Article 8 ECHR or Article
         7 of the Charter), although a relevant factor, cannot  be  a  trump
         card enabling a court or tribunal to conclude that a child will  be
         compelled to leave because Article 8 (or Article 7) are engaged and
         family life will be diminished by  the  departure  of  one  parent.
         Family life will be diminished by the departure of  one  parent  in
         the great majority of cases.  The  question  remains  whether,  all
         things considered, the departure of the parent will mean the  child
         will be compelled to follow."

32. At [14]-[15] in his further submissions, Mr Al-Rashid said this:

         "14. In the instant appeal, the continued refusal of the  admission
         of their mother denies these British children  their  Art  20  TFEU
         rights. It is no answer to say they can enter  the  UK  and  reside
         here with their father, as he has made no attempt to enter  the  UK
         to care for his children since 2009 when he left  the  UK.  In  the
         instant appeal, such an approach (i.e.  giving  precedence  to  his
         conduct) can amount to gender  discrimination  as  it  invests  the
         patriarchy with disproportionate authority over the future  of  the
         children. The Tribunal is invited to adopt an approach that favours
         neither parent  above  the  other,  but  assesses  the  appellant's
         application through the prism of the children's best interests; the
         law clearly mandates such an approach.

         15.   In  respect  of  the  assertion   that   the   appellant   is
         circumventing Immigration Rules (per ECM), or that  an  application
         for EC under Appendix FM (per  respondent's  skeleton  #28),  those
         positions are plainly unsustainable.  Para  E-ECP.2.1.(a)  requires
         the appellant's British citizen partner to be "in the  UK,"  (which
         he is not), and para E-ECP.2.10. requires them to "intend  to  live
         together permanently in the  UK"  (which  he  does  not).  Para  E-
         ECPT.2.2.(b) requires the child to be "living  in  the  UK"  (which
         they do  not).  The  Immigration  Rules  are  therefore  manifestly
         inapplicable/ unhelpful to the appellant in her attempt to lawfully
         accompany her children into the UK."

33. Mr Al-Rashid accepted that Article 8 ECHR was inapplicable,  as  refusal
   to allow the appellant to leave Libya or Turkey and come  to  the  United
   Kingdom did not affect their family life in those countries, because  the
   children were living with both parents at present.  He submitted that, on
   the proper interpretation and application of the law to the facts in this
   appeal, including the best interests of the British citizen children,  as
   a primary consideration, the appeal should be allowed.

Respondent's submissions

34. For the respondent, Mr Deller in  his  skeleton  argument  set  out  the
   history.  He did not dispute that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had given
   the oral indication upon which Mr Al-Rashid relied.   Mr Deller  set  out
   the applicable  law,  and  the  ratio  decidendi  of  Ruiz  Zambrano  and
   subsequent decisions, all of which are based on a  factual  matrix  where
   the caring parent, or both parents, are already in the country where  the
   derivative residence permit is sought.

35. Mr Deller set out the guidance of the  domestic  Courts  before  Chavez-
   Vilchez, in  Harrison v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2-
   12]EWCA Civ 1736 and in Hines v Lambeth LBC [2014] EWCA Civ 660, both  of
   which took a restrictive view of the Zambrano principle.   None of  those
   decisions, nor the decisions of the Court of Justice relied  upon,  deals
   with a fact set where by  the  parents'  choice,  both  parents  and  the
   children are living outside the European Union. Mr Deller submitted  that
   the Court's references to the Charter which, he contends, is not  capable
   of creating new residence rights which did not previously exist.

36. An application for a family permit on the basis of  a  derivative  right
   of residence was distinct from an application for entry  clearance  under
   the Immigration Rules or Article 8 ECHR (Amirteymour v Secretary of State
   for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 353 at [31]-[36] in the  judgment
   of Lord Justice Sales, with whom the Senior President  of  Tribunals  and
   Lord Justice Beatson agreed).

37. In this appeal, the proposal was that  the  children,  by  operation  of
   their rights as British citizens, would return to the United Kingdom as a
   matter of their parents' choice, not necessity.   The  Immigration  Rules
   provided for circumstances in which a parent  wished  to  return  to  the
   United Kingdom as the primary carer of her children.  Mr Deller  accepted
   that the application should be treated as if the children were living  in
   the United Kingdom, since  that  was  their  entitlement.   On  a  proper
   analysis, the appellant was their joint carer, not their sole carer,  and
   the appeal should be dismissed.

38. In oral submissions, Mr Deller distinguished the decision of  the  Upper
   Tribunal in  MA  and  SM,  which  was  based  on  section  82(2)  of  the
   Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  as  it  then  stood,  which
   included a right of appeal on EEA grounds.  The law had moved on: section
   82 at the date of decision excluded any consideration of  EEA  decisions,
   the appeal structure for  which  was  contained  within  the  Regulations
   themselves.  The present decision pre-dated the further reforms  in  2014
   and section 85A(1)  was  inapplicable.  The  children  were  all  British
   citizens, thus European Union nationals, and it was right that they could
   not live in the United Kingdom if their primary carer could not accompany
   them here.  Mr Deller  conceded  that  if  the  proper  approach  was  to
   consider the children's virtual presence in the United Kingdom as  having
   the effect of separating  them  from  the  'primary  carer'  parent,  the
   nuances of the 'compulsion to leave the European  Union'  arguments  were
   overridden by the operation of the 2006 Regulations.

39. In Chavez-Vilchez and Others (Union citizenship  -  Article  20  TFEU  -
   Access to social assistance and child benefit  conditional  on  right  of
   residence in a Member State : Judgment) [2017] EUECJ C-133/15, the  Court
   of Justice held that the children's ties to both the EEA national and the
   non-EEA parent must be assessed as part of a factual analysis whether the
   child would in reality be forced to leave the European Union if the  non-
   EEA parent was removed.  It was to be hoped that  the  cases  before  the
   Court of Appeal on the question as to who is a 'primary carer'  would  be
   of assistance (the Patel decision)  and  Mr  Deller  would  make  further
   submissions once the outcome of that appeal was known.

40. In written submissions following  the  Patel  decision  on  13  December
   2017, Mr Deller said this:

         "Although this represents no concession in respect of any of Mr  Al
         Rashid's points or in the appeal generally, I have no further  very
         detailed submissions to make on Patel and  simply  ask  that  Judge
         Gleeson takes the judgment into careful consideration  in  reaching
         her decision. My position is  that  the  Court  has  ruled  on  the
         question of constructive denial of rights on the Zambrano principle
         (where a person's residence here is necessary for a  Union  citizen
         to enjoy rights conferred by TFEU) and that no material  difference
         arises whether the affected British citizens are  currently  within
         or outside the United Kingdom.

         So far as paragraph 35 of  Patel  is  concerned  no  challenge  was
         brought in the Court  of  Appeal  proceedings  to  the  First  tier
         Tribunal's findings that Mr Shah was  the  primary  carer  in  that
         case. That does not represent a general  concession  and  does  not
         dispose of  the  separate  "required  to  leave"  (remain  outside)
         question. Where the question of "primary  carer"  is  not  resolved
         below it remains at large. It may  well  follow,  as  Mr  Al-Rashid
         suggests, that what the situation would be were the  appellant  and
         her children in the United Kingdom and the husband/father not, must
         dictate the "primary carer" requirement.

         I would be amenable to a further hearing should  it  be  considered
         necessary, but do not request one."

41. The following is my reserved decision,  with  the  benefit  of  all  the
   facts, matters and argument now before me.  I am grateful both to Mr  Al-
   Rashid and Mr Deller for the assistance given to me in their skeleton and
   oral arguments, and in their response to the Patel judgment.

MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside EU) Iran 2013 UKUT 00380 (IAC)

42. In MA and SM, the Upper Tribunal gave the following guidance:

         "(1)   In EU law terms there is  no  reason  why  the  decision  in
         Zambrano could not in principle be relied upon by  the  parent,  or
         other primary carer, of a minor EU national living outside  the  EU
         as long as it is the intention of the parent, or primary carer,  to
         accompany the EU national child to his/her country of  nationality,
         in the instant appeals that being the United Kingdom.  To  conclude
         otherwise would deny access,  without  justification,  to  a  whole
         class of EU citizens to rights they are entitled to  by  virtue  of
         their citizenship.

         (2)   The above  conclusion  is  fortified  by  the  terms  of  The
         Immigration (European Economic Area) (Amendment) (No.2) Regulations
         2012 (SI  2012/2560),  brought  into  force  on  8  November  2012.
         Paragraphs 2 and 3 of the Schedule to the Regulations  give  effect
         to the CJEU's decision in Zambrano by amending regulations  11  and
         15A of the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 in
         order to confer rights of entry and residence on the primary  carer
         of a British citizen who is joining  the  British  citizen  in,  or
         accompanying the  British  citizen  to  [regulations  11(5)(e)  and
         15A(4A)], the United Kingdom and where the denial of such  a  right
         of residence would prevent the British citizen from being  able  to
         reside in the United Kingdom or in an EEA State."

43.  In that decision, the Tribunal also dealt  with  Article  8  ECHR,  but
   that is no longer good law following  Amirteymour  &  Ors  (EEA  appeals;
   human rights) [2015] UKUT 466 (IAC), which held that Article 8  can  only
   be relied upon in an in-country EEA Regulations appeal if the failed  EEA
   application may place an appellant  at  risk  of  removal  (see  also  JM
   (Liberia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
   1402).  That is also clearly set out in paragraph 5  of  the  Immigration
   Rules:

         "Save where expressly indicated, these Rules  do  not  apply  to  a
         European Economic Area (EEA) national or the family member of  such
         a national who is entitled to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
         by virtue of the provisions of the Immigration  (European  Economic
         Area) Order 1994. But an EEA national or his family member  who  is
         not entitled to rely on the provisions of that Order is covered  by
         these Rules.

         Save where expressly indicated, these Rules do not apply  to  those
         persons who are entitled to enter or remain in the  United  Kingdom
         by virtue of the provisions of the 2006  EEA  Regulations  But  any
         person who is not entitled to  rely  on  the  provisions  of  those
         Regulations is covered by these Rules."

   I do not approach the present appeal on the basis that  I  am  seised  of
   anything other than the EEA family permit issue.

Chavez-Vilchez and Others (Union citizenship - Article 20 TFEU -  Access  to
social assistance and child benefit conditional on right of residence  in  a
Member State: Judgment) [2017] EUECJ C-133/15

44. In these conjoined appeals, the judgment on which was handed down on  10
   May 2017, the Court of Justice of the European Union considered whether a
   mother could be the primary  carer  of  her  children  in  a  variety  of
   circumstances in which the father was not living with  the  family.   The
   relevant national law considered  was  that  of  the  Netherlands,  which
   contains a similar provision to that in Regulation 15(4A).

45. The circumstances underlying the reference by the Netherlands Courts  to
   the Court of Justice in Chavez-Vilchez was not properly  comparable  with
   those of this appellant, in that all 8 of the mothers  whose  cases  were
   referred were already living apart from the fathers  of  their  children,
   who were citizens of the Netherlands.  All the children  in  those  cases
   were already in the European Union, living  with  their  mothers  in  the
   Netherlands, and in each case, at least one child was a  citizen  of  the
   Netherlands.

46.  The  principal  applicant,  Ms  Chavez-Vilchez,  was  living   in   the
   Netherlands after living together with her  former  partner  in  Germany.
   She had been compelled to leave the family home there and return with her
   child to the Netherlands: she  was  caring  for  the  child  without  any
   contribution from the father.   That is the closest fact set to  that  of
   this appellant, save that in this appeal, the children  are  not  in  the
   United Kingdom, and a joint family  decision  has  been  taken  that  the
   appellant should leave her husband in Turkey  or  Libya,  and  bring  the
   children to live in the United Kingdom.  The  factual  matrices  for  the
   other seven applicants in the Chavez-Vilchez case all related to  fathers
   who did not contribute much, if  anything,  financially,  and  who  lived
   apart  from  their  former  partner  and  child,  but  still  within  the
   Netherlands.

47. The Grand Chamber gave guidance to the national Court that:

         "1.      Article 20 TFEU must be interpreted as  meaning  that  for
         the purposes of assessing whether a child who is a citizen  of  the
         European Union would be compelled to leave  the  territory  of  the
         European Union as a whole  and  thereby  deprived  of  the  genuine
         enjoyment of the substance of the rights conferred on him  by  that
         article if the child's third-country national parent were refused a
         right of residence in the Member State concerned, the fact that the
         other parent, who is a Union citizen, is actually able and  willing
         to assume sole responsibility for the primary  day-to-day  care  of
         the child is  a  relevant  factor,  but  it  is  not  in  itself  a
         sufficient ground for a conclusion that there is not,  between  the
         third-country national parent and the child, such a relationship of
         dependency that the child would indeed be so compelled  were  there
         to be such a refusal of a right of residence.  Such  an  assessment
         must take  into  account,  in  the  best  interests  of  the  child
         concerned, all the specific circumstances, including the age of the
         child, the child's physical and emotional development,  the  extent
         of his emotional ties both to the Union citizen parent and  to  the
         third-country national parent, and the risks which separation  from
         the latter might entail for the child's equilibrium."

The Patel decision

48.  The  effect  of  Chavez-Vilchez  on  the  United  Kingdom's  2006   EEA
   Regulations was considered by the Court of Appeal in Patel.  The judgment
   of the Court was given by Lord Justice  Irwin,  with  whom  Lady  Justice
   Thirlwall and Lord Justice Lindblom agreed.   In  a  footnote,  Irwin  LJ
   noted that as the judgment was in  a  final  state  of  preparation,  the
   Court's attention had been drawn  by  Counsel  to  the  decision  of  the
   Supreme Court in R (HC) v Secretary of State for Work  and  Pensions  and
   others [2017] UKSC 73, the approach in that case being  consistent  with
   the Court of Appeal's analysis in Patel.

49. The Court held  that  the  decision  in  Chavez-Vilchez  represented  no
   departure from the Zambrano principle, but constituted  a  reminder  that
   the Zambrano principle must  be  applied  with  careful  enquiry,  paying
   attention to the relevant criteria and considerations, and  focusing  not
   on whether the European Union citizen child or dependant could remain  in
   the Union in legal theory, but whether they  could  do  so  in  practice.
   English reported cases implementing  Zambrano,  which  pre-dated  Chavez-
   Vilchez remained good law.

50.  The core of the Court's judgment is at [76]-[79]

         "76. Quite a number of years ago, Parliament chose to abrogate  the
         historic approach that marriage to a British citizen  would  bring,
         in effect automatically, residence in Britain for  the  spouse.  No
         such automatic consequence now follows, see s.6(2) of  the  British
         Nationality Act 1981 and s.2 of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002.  Those  who  marry  a  British  citizen  and  have
         children, without having (or acquiring) leave to remain, do  so  at
         the risk that they may be compelled to leave  the  country,  facing
         the real quandary that arises  for  these  families.  The  Zambrano
         principle cannot be regarded as a back-door route to  residence  by
         such non-EU citizen parents.

         77.  I would allow the Secretary of State's  appeals  in  Shah  and
         Bourouisa. In each case, it seems to me, the Tribunal started  with
         the desirability of maintaining the family life, and jumped to  the
         conclusion that there was the requisite compulsion on the child. In
         my view, that was an error. The correct approach would have been to
         ask, is the situation of the child or children such  that,  if  the
         non-EU citizen parent leaves, the British citizen will be unable to
         care for the  child  or  children,  so  that  the  latter  will  be
         compelled to leave. In so doing, the Tribunal must  pay  regard  to
         all the relevant circumstances indicated by  the  CJEU  in  Chavez-
         Vilchez, and in particular in paragraphs 70 to 72 quoted above.

         78.  I would wish to emphasise that consideration  of  the  respect
         for family life (whether considered under Article 8 ECHR or Article
         7 of the Charter), although a relevant factor, cannot  be  a  trump
         card enabling a court or tribunal to conclude that a child will  be
         compelled to leave because Article 8 (or Article 7) are engaged and
         family life will be diminished by  the  departure  of  one  parent.
         Family life will be diminished by the departure of  one  parent  in
         the great majority of cases.  The  question  remains  whether,  all
         things considered, the departure of the parent will mean the  child
         will be compelled to follow.

         79.  In these two cases, the question of compulsion did not  really
         even arise, in my view. If one parent  left,  each  British  parent
         would have been perfectly capable of looking after the child. There
         was no real evidence to the contrary. There would have been a  loss
         of earnings, a diminution in material things and an important  loss
         of two parents  living  together  with  their  child,  but  as  the
         evidence stood, it seems to me, there was no  proper  basis  for  a
         finding of compulsion. In Shah, a claim under Article 8 has already
         been rejected. In Bourouisa, it  has  not  been  made.  That  is  a
         separate matter legally. I should not be understood  to  close  off
         such a claim, in theory or in practice."

51. The Court gave no  general  guidance  as  to  the  meaning  of  'primary
   carer': the thrust of the judgment is that whether a  person  is  another
   person's 'primary carer' is a question of fact in  each  case,  the  more
   important question being whether a child will  be  forced  to  leave  the
   United Kingdom, if leave to remain is not given to such carer.

Discussion

52. The appellant's application is for a family  permit  to  enable  her  to
   accompany her EEA national children to the  United Kingdom.  There is  no
   intention for the appellant and her husband to enter the  United  Kingdom
   together.  The effect of the issue of a family permit would be to  create
   the situation where this appellant would become  the  children's  primary
   carer, and would be able carry out the couple's joint decision  that  she
   should bring up the children  here,  with  her  husband  supporting  them
   financially from Libya/Turkey.

53. Regulation 12(1A) requires a person applying abroad for  an  EEA  family
   permit to show that when they first intend to use the EEA  family  permit
   to enter the United Kingdom, they:

         "12(1A) ...(a)    would be entitled to be admitted  to  the  United
         Kingdom by virtue of   regulation 11(5); and
             (b)  will ... be accompanying to, or joining  in,  the  United
             Kingdom any person from whom his right to be admitted  to  the
             United Kingdom under regulation 11(5) will be derived. ..."

   This appellant would be accompanying her children, from  whom  any  right
   she has under Regulation 11(5) would be derived.

54. Regulation 11(5)(e) sets  out  the  circumstances  in  which  a  non-EEA
   national is entitled to derivative residence:

         "Right of admission to the United Kingdom

         11 ...(5) A person ("P") meets the criteria in this paragraph where-
         ...
             (e) P is accompanying a  British  citizen  to,  or  joining  a
             British citizen in, the United Kingdom and P would be entitled
             to  reside  in  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to regulation
             15A(4A) were P and the British citizen  both  in  the  United
             Kingdom."

         18A.     Issue of a derivative residence card

         (1)  The Secretary of State must issue a person with  a  derivative
         residence card on application and on production of- ...
             (b)  proof that  the  applicant  has  a  derivative  right  of
             residence under regulation 15A. ..."

55. Regulation 15A sets out the circumstances in which a person is  entitled
   to a derivative right of residence, applying the decision of the Court of
   Justice of the European Union in  Ruiz  Zambrano  (European  citizenship)
   [2011] EUECJ C-34/09 (08 March 2011):

         "15A. Derivative right of residence
         ...(4A)  P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if-
                  (a)  P is the primary carer of  a  British  Citizen  ("the
                  relevant British citizen");
                  (b)  the relevant  British  citizen  is  residing  in  the
                  United Kingdom; and
                  (c)  the relevant  British  citizen  would  be  unable  to
                  reside in the UK  or  in  another  EEA  State  if  P  were
                  required to leave. ...

         (6)  For the purpose of this regulation- ...
             (c)  "an exempt person" is a person-
                   (ii)    who has a right of abode in the United Kingdom by
                  virtue of section 2 of the 1971 Act; ...

         (7)  P is to be regarded as a "primary carer" of another person if
             (a)  P is a direct  relative  or  a  legal  guardian  of  that
             person; and
             (b)  P-
                  (i)  is the person who has primary responsibility for that
                  person's care; or
                  (ii)      shares  equally  the  responsibility  for   that
                  person's care with one other person who is not  an  exempt
                  person. ...

56. It is not disputed that the children, who are all minors, are too  young
   to live here without a parent or carer. The appellant is  her  children's
   direct relative.  As a British citizen, the  appellant's  husband  is  an
   exempt person.  The appellant's husband being an exempt  person,  if  the
   situation is assessed at the date of application, the  evidence  is  that
   she shares care equally with him, and thus falls outside  the  definition
   of 'primary carer' in Regulation 15A(7)(ii).

57. The question, therefore, is  whether  Regulation  11(5)(e)  enables  the
   appellant to make an application on the basis that if she were  to  reach
   the United Kingdom, she would then be the children's primary carer.    In
   the event, as both Counsel accepted in  their  written  submissions,  the
   decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Patel  does  not  assist  with  this
   question.

58. It is settled law that section 55 does not apply to children who do  not
   live in the United Kingdom.  I am not required to  consider  whether  the
   respondent erred in assessing the situation as  one  where  the  proposed
   separation would be likely to be  contrary  to  the  children's  interest
   thereunder.

59. I have considered whether MA and SM avails  the  appellant,  that  being
   the strongest  indication  of  the  possible  existence  of  a  right  to
   derivative  residence  exercisable  before  the  European  Union  citizen
   reaches the United Kingdom.  The guidance there given is that  'there  is
   no reason why the decision in Zambrano could not in principle  be  relied
   upon by the parent or other primary carer of a minor EU  national  living
   outside the EU, as long as it is the intention of the parent, or  primary
   carer,  to  accompany  the  EU  national  child  to  his/her  country  of
   nationality'.

60. The difficulty here is that the appellant is not her children's  primary
   carer, and will become so only if this appeal succeeds and she enters the
   United Kingdom with them.  Nor is MA and SM capable of assisting  on  the
   interpretation of Regulation 11(5)(e) and  15(4A),  both  of  which  were
   introduced into the Regulations after MA and SM  had been decided.

61. The reality in this appeal is that the children are outside  the  United
   Kingdom because their father, who is a British citizen and a joint  carer
   with their mother, is not prepared to return here  with  them.   On  that
   basis,  I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  linguistic  infelicity  of  the
   Regulations is sufficient to enable the appellant to rely on her putative
   future status as their primary carer, when that is not her status now and
   she still lives in the same household as their father.

62. It  follows  that  this  appeal  cannot  succeed  and  I  remake  it  by
   dismissing the appeal on all grounds.

DECISION

a) For the foregoing reasons, my  decision is as follows:
    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.   I set aside the previous decision.   My  decision  is
    that the appeal is dismissed.

Date:     5 March 2018          Signed: Judith A J C Gleeson
                                    Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


