
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/05463/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Belfast                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 June 2015                      |On 8 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                               mr walid hamdi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P McNally Counsel instructed by Elliott-Trainor
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Tunisia born on 5  October  1983.   On  6
    November 2012 he made an application for a family permit as the  spouse
    of an EEA national  exercising  Treaty  rights.   The  application  was
    refused in a decision dated 26 November 2012.

 2. His appeal against that decision came before First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Fox on 16 June 2014 whereby  the  appeal  was  dismissed.   The  appeal
    before the First-tier Tribunal proceeded on Article 8 grounds only.

 3. Permission to appeal against that decision was granted by  a  Judge  of
    the Upper Tribunal on limited grounds.  Thus, the appeal  comes  before
    me.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. Having recorded the concession that  the  appellant  was  not  able  to
    succeed under Regulation 12 of the Immigration (European Economic Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations")  the  First-tier  Judge  noted
    that no application had been made by the appellant for admission  under
    the Immigration Rules as a spouse.  There was no explanation for him as
    to why such an application was not or could not have been made.

 5. Judge Fox noted that there was no issue as to the fact of the  marriage
    between the appellant and the sponsor, Mrs Beattie-Hamdi  (they  having
    married on 31 December 2010).

 6. Consideration was given by Judge Fox  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    sponsor's daughter, C, who was then aged 11 years.  He noted  that  C's
    father no longer lives with the sponsor and although there was evidence
    from the sponsor that he has regular contact with  her,  there  was  no
    evidence of any court orders prohibiting the child's travel out of  the
    United Kingdom.  Similarly, he concluded that there was no evidence  of
    any animosity between the child's parents that could interfere with any
    travel plans i.e. in terms of C travelling to Tunisia.   It  was  noted
    that C had travelled to Tunisia in the past with the sponsor.  C's best
    interests were found to be in remaining with the sponsor  who  appeared
    to be the primary carer.

 7. Importantly, for the purposes of the appeal  before  me,  he  concluded
    that there was no evidence from C's father indicating any objection  to
    his daughter moving to Tunisia, or elsewhere.  It  was  concluded  that
    there was no evidence that would suggest that  there  are  difficulties
    "insurmountable or otherwise" that would prevent C returning to the  UK
    to visit her father if  she  were  to  relocate  to  Tunisia  with  the
    appellant and her mother.

 8. At [17] there is reference to the sponsor's  health,  although  it  was
    concluded that her  medical  conditions  had  not  prevented  her  from
    travelling abroad, having visited the appellant in Tunisia on a  number
    of occasions and resided with him there for reasonable periods of time.
     On one occasion in Tunisia she had to go to hospital and  he  assisted
    her with that.  There was no evidence before the  First-tier  Judge  to
    the effect that the medical facilities there would not be available  to
    the appellant's wife should they be required.  The medication that  she
    requires, according to background information, was all available to her
    in Tunisia.

 9. At [19] it was concluded that the appellant and C had been able to live
    in Tunisia on the occasion of their visits "and to get by".   Reference
    is made to the apparent lack of effort on behalf of the  appellant  and
    the sponsor to have considered where  they  would  enjoy  their  family
    life, suggesting that they were happy with the status quo at that time.



10. There was an analysis of the extent to which C would be able to live in
    Tunisia, attend school there and maintain contact with friends  in  the
    UK.

11. At [21] it was found that the appellant would  probably  have  to  have
    recourse to public funds if he were admitted to  the  UK,  the  sponsor
    being in receipt of state benefits and there being no suggestion of any
    possibility of employment for either of them in the near future.

12. It was concluded that the respondent's  decision  was  a  proportionate
    response to the legitimate aim of maintaining immigration control.

    The grounds and submissions

13. The grounds of appeal assert firstly that insufficient weight had  been
    given to C's life in  the  UK,  including  the  relationship  with  her
    biological father, family and friends.  Similarly, it is asserted  that
    insufficient weight had been given to the fact that C  does  not  speak
    the primary language of Tunisia and has  never  lived  in  the  country
    except for on holidays.

14. The second ground of appeal asserts that the judge had failed  to  take
    into account evidence that the child's  father  objected  to  C  moving
    permanently to Tunisia with the sponsor.  It is said that  the  sponsor
    gave oral evidence which was not refuted or challenged at the  hearing,
    to the effect that C's father would not allow her to  move  to  Tunisia
    permanently.

15. A separate part of the second ground was  an  alleged  failure  by  the
    judge to consider the evidence from the sponsor's mother that she would
    support the appellant so that he  does  not  have  recourse  to  public
    funds.

16. As already indicated, permission to appeal was granted only in relation
    to the second of the grounds.  That is to say,  in  terms  of  evidence
    apparently given that C's  father  would  not  allow  C  to  leave  the
    country.  Mr McNally, although referring to his own notes  of  evidence
    at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal and the  notes  taken  by
    his instructing solicitor's representative at that hearing having  also
    been checked, he was unable to put before me anything to establish that
    the evidence said to have been given by the sponsor at the hearing  was
    in fact given.  Mr Matthews did not have available to him any notes  of
    evidence taken by the Presenting Officer at the time.   The  First-tier
    Judge's Record of Proceedings do not illuminate matters in this respect
    either.

17. Mr McNally submitted that regardless of the fact  that  no  application
    was made under the Immigration Rules, the Article 8 ground  was  before
    the First-tier Tribunal  and  it  needed  to  be  considered.   It  was
    submitted that there is evidence to the effect that  C's  father  takes
    his responsibilities towards her seriously,  in  terms  of  maintenance
    payments (reference being made to page 34 of the  appellant's  bundle).
    Not  allowing  the  appellant  to  enter  the  UK  would   affect   her
    relationship with her father.  It was conceded however, that there  was
    no written evidence from C's father in terms of  his  unwillingness  to
    let her leave the country.

18. Under the Immigration Rules, in particular Appendix FM, applying  EX.1,
    there are insurmountable obstacles to family life between the appellant
    and the sponsor outside the UK.  Because the sponsor is on benefits  it
    is difficult for her to travel to Tunisia to  be  with  the  appellant.
    Similarly, there are difficulties for C moving to  Tunisia,  given  her
    age.

19. Mr Matthews submitted that on the basis on which permission  to  appeal
    was granted, the appeal must fail.  There is  no  evidence  to  support
    what is said about the evidence given at the hearing about  C's  father
    not being willing to allow her to leave the country to live in Tunisia.
     At [15] the judge had said that there was no evidence in terms of  any
    court orders prohibiting the child's travel out of the United  Kingdom.
    Similarly, it was noted that there was no  evidence  of  any  animosity
    between  C's  parents  that  could  interfere  with  any  travel  plans
    considered for her.  On the contrary, C had been allowed to  travel  to
    Tunisia with her mother.  It was again noted that there was no evidence
    before him from the father indicating any  objection  to  his  daughter
    moving to Tunisia.

    Conclusions

20. I deal with the appeal before me on the basis of the grounds  on  which
    permission to appeal was granted.  That is ground 2 only.  This ground,
    as previously indicated consists of two parts, the  first  relating  to
    evidence apparently to the effect that the father of C would not  allow
    her to move to Tunisia permanently.  However, the fact is that there is
    nothing to support that assertion made in the grounds.   On  behalf  of
    the appellant I was not directed to any note of evidence taken  at  the
    hearing of the First-tier Tribunal which reveals that any such evidence
    was given.  Certainly, there is no written  evidence  from  C's  father
    indicating  that  he  would  not  allow  her  to  leave   the   country
    permanently.  Although Mr McNally  explained  that  there  is  in  fact
    animosity between the sponsor and her ex-husband, this is a matter that
    could have been the subject of  evidence  in  the  form  of  a  witness
    statement,  including  any  notes   of   communications   between   the
    appellant's representatives and C's father.  Although I was referred to
    the sponsor's witness statement which suggests that she was the  victim
    of domestic violence at the hands of C's father,  and  the  appellant's
    skeleton argument at [13] suggested that C's father may try to  prevent
    the sponsor taking  her  to  Tunisia,  there  is  no  support  for  the
    proposition that he has or would object to such a move.

21. At [15] of the determination Judge Fox was clear in stating that  there
    was no evidence  from  C's  father  indicating  any  objection  to  his
    daughter moving to Tunisia or elsewhere.  There is no basis from  which
    his finding in that respect can be undermined.

22. The other aspect of ground 2 is to the effect that the judge had failed
    to consider the evidence that the sponsor's mother  would  support  the
    appellant so that he would not have to have recourse to  public  funds.
    However, in my judgement the judge was entitled to conclude  that  with
    there being little prospect of any employment either for the  appellant
    or the sponsor who is in receipt of state benefits, the probability was
    that he  would  have  recourse  to  public  funds  in  the  absence  of
    employment for himself or the sponsor if admitted to the UK.

23. The source of the evidence in terms of 'third party support' appears to
    come from a letter at page  52  of  the  appellant's  bundle  from  the
    sponsor's mother.  It states that she could provide for  the  appellant
    as she has no mortgage and her house is  bought  outright.   It  states
    that she works full-time and that she could help out the appellant  and
    her daughter at any time.  However, although Judge Fox did not refer to
    this evidence directly, it does not appear that  the  sponsor's  mother
    attended to give evidence before the First-tier Tribunal.  Furthermore,
    there is no detail as to what her  income  is  or  what  her  financial
    commitments are.  In terms  of  evidence  of  her  ability  to  provide
    support to the appellant and the sponsor, it  could  not  have  carried
    much weight at all.

24. Furthermore, under the Article 8 Immigration Rules, third party support
    is not permitted.  Thus, in terms of the Article 8 assessment, the fact
    that the appellant would not in  this  respect  be  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules was a relevant matter.

25. Although it was submitted before me on behalf of the appellant that  in
    terms of paragraph EX.1 of the rules the appellant  would  be  able  to
    succeed, this is not a matter on which permission to appeal was sought,
    namely  the  suggestion  that  the  appellant  was  able  to  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

26. Furthermore, Section EX relates to exceptions  to  certain  eligibility
    requirements for leave to remain as a partner or parent, not  leave  to
    enter.  In addition, under Section EC-P.1.1.(b) a valid application for
    entry clearance as a partner must have been made.  That was not done, a
    matter referred to in general terms by the First-tier Judge.

27. Although not advanced in argument on behalf of the  appellant,  I  have
    considered the point made in  the  grant  of  permission  in  terms  of
    whether the First-tier Judge considered  whether  Article  8  would  be
    breached if the sponsor and her daughter remained  in  the  UK.   On  a
    careful examination of the determination it seems to me that Judge  Fox
    did consider this issue.  At [19] he stated that  it  appears  that  no
    consideration had been given between the appellant and his wife  as  to
    where they might plan to reside.  He noted that they met  in  September
    2010 and married in December 2010 but the  application  under  the  EEA
    Regulations was not made until 2012.  He pointed  out  that  Article  8
    does not provide a basis for choosing where to enjoy and exercise one's
    right to family life.  He went on to state that:

         "If the Appellant and his wife had given any consideration to  this
         aspect, the lack of endeavour to find a  resolution  suggests  that
         they were  happy  with  this  situation  as  it  existed  then  and
         presumably now."

28. At [20] he stated that there would be no compulsion for  the  appellant
    and her child to go to Tunisia.   I  do  not  consider  that  it  could
    realistically be said that the First-tier Judge failed to consider  the
    question of whether there would  be  a  breach  of  Article  8  by  the
    appellant and C remaining in the  UK  with  the  sponsor  remaining  in
    Tunisia, which is how they have conducted their relationship  up  until
    now.  Whilst it is true that a fuller articulation of  that  aspect  of
    Article 8 would have been beneficial, I do not consider that  there  is
    any error of law in this respect.

29. Even if it could be said that the judge erred in law  in  that  regard,
    again noting however that the point was not advanced on behalf  of  the
    appellant in the  grounds  or  in  submissions  before  me,  I  am  not
    satisfied that it is an error of law that is material to the outcome of
    the appeal.  The judge took into account the best interests of C, which
    would be unaffected by her remaining in the UK because she would remain
    with her mother, her primary carer.  The appellant is  unable  to  meet
    the requirements of the Immigration  Rules,  in  respect  of  which  no
    application has been made.  The judge  took  into  account  the  public
    interest in the economic wellbeing of the country expressed through the
    maintenance of an effective immigration control.  I cannot see that the
    outcome of the appeal, even accepting that there was an error of law in
    terms of Article 8, could have been any different.

30. Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appeal must stand.

    Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point  of  law.   Its  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal
    therefore stands.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek

