
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05300/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 4th April 2017                     |On 12th May 2017                      |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI

                                   Between

                                 IqRA Afzal
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Alim of Counsel, RC Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Turquet dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse entry clearance as the partner of a British  citizen
    pursuant to Appendix FM and Article 8  ECHR.   The  Appellant  appealed
    against that decision and was granted permission  to  appeal  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Kebede.  The grounds upon which permission  was  granted
    may be summarised as follows:

         "There is arguable merit in the assertion in the grounds  that  the
         judge arguably failed to take account of evidence showing that  the
         telephone number called by the Sponsor was the Appellant  and  thus
         arguably erred  in  her  assessment  of  the  contact  between  the
         Appellant and Sponsor, which then arguably infected her findings on
         the relationship between the Appellant and  Sponsor.   The  grounds
         are arguable."

    I was provided with a Rule 24 response from the  Respondent  which  was
    considered by all parties before the hearing commenced.

Error of Law

 2. At the close of submissions, I indicated I found an error of  law  such
    that the decision should be  set  aside,  but  that  my  reasons  would
    follow, which I shall now give.

 3. The grounds are somewhat verbose in their nature and craftsmanship  but
    in essence the complaint boils down to the lawfulness of the First-tier
    Tribunal's assessment of whether the relationship between the Appellant
    and   Sponsor   was   genuine   and   subsisting.    The    Appellant's
    representatives rely upon the authority of Goudey (subsisting  marriage
    - evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC) which confirms as follows  in
    the first three headnotes:

         "i)  GA ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana * [2006]  UKAIT  00046  means
             that  the  matrimonial  relationship  must  continue  at   the
             relevant time rather than just the formality  of  a  marriage,
             but it does not require the production of particular  evidence
             of mutual devotion before entry clearance can be granted.

         ii)  Evidence of telephone cards is capable of being  corroborative
             of the contention of the  parties  that  they  communicate  by
             telephone, even if such data  cannot  confirm  the  particular
             number the sponsor was calling in the country in question.  It
             is not a requirement that the parties also write or text  each
             other.

         iii) Where there are no countervailing factors generating suspicion
             as to the intentions of the  parties,  such  evidence  may  be
             sufficient to discharge the burden of proof on the claimant."

 4. As may be seen from  those  headnotes,  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and Sponsor would need to be more than a mere formality of  a
    marriage and does not require the production and particular evidence of
    mutual devotion before entry clearance can be granted.  To that  extent
    I note the First-tier Tribunal's criticism  of  the  lack  of  evidence
    produced by the Appellant. However,  that  criticism  is  not  entirely
    correct given that there are photographs which I have been shown in the
    Appellant's bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal  which  do  in  fact
    demonstrate the Appellant and Sponsor  being  seen  together  at  their
    marriage and at the time of their reception and also  at  the  time  of
    their first child being but a baby (all of which may be seen  at  pages
    294 through to 304 of the Appellant's bundle).  I  note  in  particular
    that there is a photograph of the Appellant and the Sponsor  and  their
    young child at pages 299 in the  bottom  left  hand  corner  (which  is
    upside down unfortunately) and also, for example, on page 300 and  301.



 5.  Whilst  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  criticised  the  Appellant's
    evidence for  not  showing  that  calls  were  made  to  the  Appellant
    specifically, there was also evidence in the Appellant's bundle in  the
    form of a "chat history" at pages 178 to 292 which, to my view, is more
    informative and of greater assistance than a list of phone  records  as
    it shows typical conversations between  the  couple,  and  reveals  the
    mutual affection and devotion between the Appellant and Sponsor not  to
    mention the usual "ups and downs" one might expect to see of  a  couple
    living their first few years of  their  marriage  in  a  long  distance
    relationship by virtue of their circumstances.  I also  note  that  the
    chat contains photos of the Appellant's and Sponsor's child  that  were
    taken and sent to the Sponsor in the UK, including sentiments  such  as
    the Appellant saying she misses the Sponsor and vice versa.

 6. I also note that there were four visits made  by  the  Sponsor  to  the
    Appellant after his marriage to the Appellant which were  reflected  in
    the chronology at the start of the Appellant's bundle  which  was  also
    before the First-tier Tribunal and indicate that the visits  were  made
    on 5th October 2013 (for an unknown duration), 2nd July 2014 through to
    7th August 2014, 26th June 2015 through to 23rd July 2015  and  finally
    from 5th June 2016 through to  12th  June  2016.  Albeit  these  visits
    preceded the  visa  application  and  were  not  post-decision  visits,
    nonetheless they do go towards whether the marriage is one of more then
    mere formality.

 7. I do pause to note however that the presentation of this appeal by  the
    former representatives is far from what one would expect  of  an  entry
    clearance appeal where important issues of family  life  are  at  stake
    including the entry of the  parent  to  a  British  child  whom,  as  I
    understand, remains in Pakistan.  I note these concerns  as  ultimately
    in my view, it is only after being taken carefully to the  material  in
    the Appellant's Bundle to determine omissions made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal - for which I would not lay any blame - am I able to find that
    there is a material error of law.

 8. Consequently, the matter will need to be remade and  one  would  expect
    the Appellant's new  representatives  to  put  within  the  Appellant's
    bundle the new evidence that Mr Alim sought  to  rely  upon  today  but
    which I was unable to take into account given that it  was  not  before
    the First-tier Tribunal (that evidence concerning the  Appellant  being
    pregnant with a second child of the Sponsor).

 9. Finally, I do note one issue which Mr Tufan brought to my attention  on
    behalf of the Respondent, namely that the application was also  refused
    due to concerns over an absence of evidence regarding accommodation  in
    the UK, however this is something which the First-tier Tribunal  failed
    to make findings upon, albeit there was evidence of a tenancy agreement
    inspection  report  for  two  addresses  which  can  be  seen  in   the
    Appellant's bundle along with a letter from the landlord at pages 40 to
    68.  This is also an issue upon which findings are required and as such
    a further error of law.

10. In light of the above findings, I set aside the decision  and  findings
    of the judge entirely.

Notice of Decision

11. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

12. The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law and is set aside.

13. The appeal is to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  by
    a differently constituted bench.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                                  Date  11/05/17


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini




















