
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: oa/05691/2015
                                                               oa/05689/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 July 2016                                |On 14 July 2016               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                       Kusai Alwadi (FIRST APPELLANT)
                       Athar Alwadi (SECOND APPELLANT)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - istanbul

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Moran, Alex Moran Immigration & Asylum
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The first appellant is Kusai Alwadi who was aged 17 years at  the  date
    of his application for entry clearance but is now aged over  18  years.
    He is he son of the sponsor, Muhammed Alwadi (hereafter  the  sponsor).
    The second appellant, Athar  Alwadi,  is  the  adult  daughter  of  the
    sponsor.  She was over the age of 18 at the date of her application for
    entry clearance.  In respect of the second appellant, it  was  conceded
    that she  was  unable  to  reach  requirements  required  by  paragraph
    352D(ii) of HC 395 (as amended) so her application was made outside the
    Rules under Article 8 ECHR.  The mother of both  appellants  and  their
    two younger  siblings  had,  together  with  the  appellants,  appealed
    against refusals of entry clearance to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Heynes) which, in a decision dated  28  September  2015  dismissed  the
    appeals of Athar Alwadi and Kusai Alwadi but allowed the appeals of the
    other appellants.  Athar Alwadi  and  Kusai  Alwadi  now  appeal,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

The First Appellant: Kusai Alwadi

 2. The first appellant (Kusai Alwadi) was initially refused on  the  basis
    that insufficient evidence had  been  provided  to  show  that  he  was
    related to the sponsor as claimed.  That issue  has  now  been  decided
    conclusively by way of DNA evidence.  The respondent  now  agrees  that
    the only reason for refusing the first appellant under the  Immigration
    Rules lay with the refusal under paragraph  320(7A)  of  HC  395  which
    provides that entry clearance must be refused,

         'Where false representations have been made or false  documents  or
         information have been submitted (whether or  not  material  to  the
         application, and whether or not to the applicant's  knowledge),  or
         material  facts  had  not  been  disclosed,  in  relation  to   the
         application.'

 3. The appellant was refused under 320(7A) on the basis that an  extension
    sticker in his (valid) passport was false and had been obtained through
    dishonesty.  The First-tier Tribunal decision [17]  reports  that  "the
    forgery report, which was subject to a Section 108  application,  notes
    differences between the extension sticker and documents  normally  used
    by the Syrian authorities."  For reasons  which  will  become  apparent
    later, I do not intend to deal further with the Section 108 application
    and examination of the forgery report save  that  I  proceeded  on  the
    understanding that the stamp was not genuine.  For the reasons  I  give
    below, an issue in this appeal is whether the appellant  was  aware  or
    unaware that the sticker in the passport was a forged document although
    it is, of course, the case that 320(7A) remains a mandatory  grant  for
    refusal of entry clearance whether or not an applicant was  aware  that
    he or she had used a forged document.

 4. The sponsor has submitted a  witness  statement  signed  and  dated  25
    February 2015.   At  [13]  this  records  that  the  first  appellant's
    passport had expired on 19 September 2014 whilst  he  was  resident  in
    Libya.  The United Kingdom and Syrian Embassies had closed which "meant
    that he was stuck in Libya with  no  means  of  leaving  the  country."
    Enquiries amongst the Syrian community by the sponsor had led him to  a
    Syrian Embassy official still living in Libya who "could extend expired
    Syrian passports."  The sponsor paid a fee and obtained the  extension.
    This looked "official" to the sponsor who assumed that it was "fine and
    perfectly legal."  It then came as a "huge surprise" to the sponsor and
    the rest of the family to find out that the sticker was not legal.

 5. Judge Heynes found that dishonesty had been used by the first appellant
    (and, presumably, the sponsor) in the use of the document  bearing  the
    false stamp.  However, the only reason that he gives at [19]  was  "the
    delay in coming forward with the  explanation".   This  delay  led  the
    judge to believe that he had not been "told the whole truth  about  the
    acquisition of  this  counterfeit  extension  or  about  precisely  who
    amongst the family members was involved."  The problem with his finding
    is that, as is apparent from the papers which were  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, the explanation was put forward by the family to the ECO
    immediately following the refusal  of  entry  clearance.   Indeed,  the
    explanation is considered  (and  rejected)  in  an  email  from  Mrs  A
    Fotheringham, Entry Clearance Manager at Istanbul who stated,

         "I have noted the witness statement  and  assertions  made  by  the
         sponsor regarding various issues surrounding his adult daughter and
         his son's counterfeit extension, however these are not supported by
         sufficient evidence to satisfy me the decisions were incorrect."

    Judge Heynes was, therefore, factually incorrect to find that there was
    delay in providing an explanation.  In  consequence,  I  find  that  he
    erred in  law.   He  has  given  no  other  reason  for  rejecting  the
    explanation and  the  reason  he  has  given  is  inaccurate.   I  have
    therefore proceeded to remake the decision  in  respect  of  the  first
    appellant.

 6. As noted above, the first appellant relies on Article 8 ECHR.  He was a
    minor at the date of his application for entry  clearance  although  he
    has now achieved his majority.  The remainder of his family are  living
    in the United Kingdom.  Mr Moran, for the appellants, sought to rely on
    the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Mumu (paragraph 320); Article  8;
    scope) [2012] UKUT 00143 (IAC) in particular [18]:

         "Nothing in what we have just said should be taken to amount  to  a
         finding that it will never be disproportionate in Article  8  terms
         to uphold a decision under paragraph 320(7A).  Each case ultimately
         turns on its own facts.  There may well be cases where, despite the
         public policy  issues  inherent  in  paragraph  320(7A),  it  would
         nevertheless be disproportionate to refuse  entry  clearance.   The
         point we wish to make, however, is that the effect of  320(7B)  and
         7(C) is not such as to cause paragraph 320(7A) to be "read down" in
         a general way."

 7. Mr Moran submitted that this was an unusual case in which the appellant
    should succeed under Article 8.  But for  the  operation  of  paragraph
    320(7A), the appellant would have been granted  entry  clearance  along
    with his younger sibling.

 8. I have first to make a finding in respect of the alleged deceit in this
    instance.  Mr McVeety, for the respondent, did  not  choose  to  cross-
    examine the sponsor who, in any event, could only throw  limited  light
    upon the circumstances surrounding the issuing of the false  stamp.   I
    am aware that the burden of proof rests on the appellant and  that  the
    standard of proof is the balance of probabilities.  There is background
    material relating to Libya and the administrative chaos existing  there
    at the time of the application for entry  clearance  (and  which  still
    exists).  I have no reason to disbelieve the  sponsor's  evidence  that
    the United Kingdom and Syrian Embassies in Libya had closed  down.   On
    balance, I find that I accept the sponsor's evidence that  the  family,
    desperate to extend or renew the first  appellant's  passport,  allowed
    themselves to be tricked by a Syrian Embassy official (or an individual
    posing as such).  I accept the explanation given  by  the  sponsor  and
    make a finding that the first appellant (and the other members  of  the
    family) were unaware that the stamp endorsed in the  first  appellant's
    passport was a forgery.  I accept the force of  Mr  Moran's  submission
    that, had been possible to obtain a genuine extension to the  passport,
    there is no reason to suppose that a family would not  obtain  such  an
    extension.  I accept that individuals who find  themselves  in  foreign
    countries which are in a state of administrative chaos make  well  take
    imprudent steps to obtain travel documents.  However,  such  imprudence
    does not indicate complicity in the act of forgery or an  intention  to
    deceive the United Kingdom immigration authorities.

 9. The finding at [8] above is important in the Article  8  assessment  as
    both representatives acknowledge.  This is not a human rights appeal in
    which an ability of an appellant to satisfy  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules may or may not be  of  relevance  in  the  Article  8
    assessment (see Mustafa [2015] UKUT 000112 (IAC);   Adjei  [2015]  UKUT
    261  (IAC)).    Here,  the  question  of  proportionality  is  directly
    connected to the reason  for  refusal  of  the  application  for  entry
    clearance under the Immigration Rules; but for his  reliance  upon  the
    false stamp, the appellant should have succeeded in his application.  I
    agree with Mr McVeety's submission that,  where  deliberate  deceit  is
    used, the public interest favouring the applicant's exclusion from  the
    United Kingdom is very considerable and  will  generally  outweigh  the
    appellant's  interests  in  any  proportionality  assessment.   I  also
    acknowledge that there still remains a public interest in  discouraging
    those potential entrants who might place themselves unwittingly or  out
    of necessity in the  hands  of  rogues  from  whom  they  might  obtain
    unreliable travel documents.  However, set against that public interest
    is the fact that the  appellant  otherwise  satisfied  the  Immigration
    Rules and, at the time of the application for entry clearance  and  the
    refusal, found himself, at that time a child, separated  from  all  his
    close family members other  than  the  second  appellant,  his  sister.
    Having considered all the circumstances  carefully,  I  find  that  the
    decision to refuse the appellant entry  clearance  is  disproportionate
    and breached his right to enjoy family life with those members  of  his
    family now living in the United Kingdom.   His  appeal  is  allowed  on
    human rights grounds.

The Second Appellant: Athar Alwadi

10. Dismissing the second appellant's appeal, Judge  Heynes  said  no  more
    than this [28]:

         "The consequence of this decision to  [to  dismiss  the  Article  8
         appeal of the first appellant] is that  the  Article  8  appeal  of
         [Athar Alwadi] is accordingly weakened.  Even if the  remainder  of
         the family chose to leave, she would remain in Turkey  with  [Kusai
         Alwadi] who is now over 18."

11. Mr McVeety acknowledged that he found it very difficult to support  the
    judge's  decision  in  respect  of  the  second  appellant.   He   also
    acknowledged that, in the event that the first appellant  succeeded  in
    his appeal, this would leave the second appellant (a 19 year old  young
    woman) living alone in Turkey and separated from her family  who  would
    be  entirely  living  in  the  United  Kingdom.   Mr  Moran,  for   the
    appellants, acknowledged that the second appellant is an adult but both
    he and Mr McVeety accepted that the strength of her emotional ties  and
    dependency upon her family would not cease upon her achieving majority.
     Having considered all the circumstances, including the finding which I
    have made as to the use of the false document by the first appellant, I
    find that this was a rare case where the decision to refuse the  second
    appellant entry clearance to the United Kingdom separates her from  her
    family (displaced from Syria in very difficult  circumstances  but  now
    resettled in the United Kingdom) and is disproportionate.  I find  that
    the second appellant's appeal should be allowed under Article 8 ECHR.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dated  28  September  2015  is  set
aside insofar as it concerns the appeals of Athar Alwadi and  Kusai  Alwadi.
I have remade the decisions in respect of Athar  Alwadi  and  Kusai  Alwadi.
Both appeals are allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 11 July 2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
