
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05627/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 August 2018                             |On 4 October 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                            ZOHRA BENMERABET-SAID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Zohra Benmerabet-Said, was born on 6 September 1986  and
    is a female citizen of Algeria.  The appellant had  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom for indefinite leave to remain  as  the
    spouse of Mr  Hamid  Benmerabet-Said  (hereafter  referred  to  as  the
    sponsor).  The sponsor entered the United Kingdom in 1993  and  claimed
    asylum.  Although his application was refused by the respondent he  was
    nevertheless given indefinite leave to remain in 2010.  The sponsor and
    the appellant married in  Algeria  on  6  June  2012.  The  appellant's
    application to join her husband was refused by the Secretary  of  State
    and the appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  which  dismissed
    her appeal. She now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's representatives did not attend the hearing  before  the
    Upper  Tribunal  in  Bradford  on  30  August  2018  nor  was  she  was
    represented.  I am satisfied that the notice of hearing was sent to the
    appellant's representatives (Kirklees Law Centre) by second class  post
    on 25 July 2018.  It appears a copy of the notice of hearing  may  also
    have been sent to  the  United  Kingdom  sponsor.   The  appellant  has
    provided no explanation as to why the representative or the sponsor did
    not attend court (I assume the  appellant  herself  remains  living  in
    Algeria).  In the circumstances, I proceeded with the  hearing  in  the
    absence of the representative and/or the sponsor.

 3. The appellant had been represented before the Frist-tier Tribunal (Mr M
    F Ali) and the representative, on behalf of the appellant, had accepted
    [First-tier Tribunal determination,  21]  that  the  appeal  could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules because of the problems  identified
    by Judge  Kelly  [4(ii)  and  (iii)]  concerning  the  failure  of  the
    sponsor's two employers' letters to mention the length of employment of
    the period over which he had been  paid  his  salary  at  the  required
    level.  Thereafter, Judge Kelly had moved  on  to  consider  Article  8
    ECHR.  The judge accepted that family life had been  established.   The
    couple have a daughter who is an  Algerian  citizen.   At  [25],  Judge
    Kelly wrote:

         "There is nothing in relation  to  the  facts  of  this  case  that
         suggest that the decision of the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  [to
         reside] in the United  Kingdom  arises  from  anything  other  than
         choice as opposed to necessity.  I am not therefore satisfied  that
         the consequences of the  decision  are  sufficient  to  engage  the
         potential operation of Article 8."

 4.  Notwithstanding  that  finding,  the  judge  went   on   to   consider
    proportionality.  He noted that, "the sponsor has lived and  worked  in
    the United Kingdom for some thirteen years.   He  nevertheless  remains
    fluent in Arabic, French and Algerian languages.  All his close  family
    members ... continue to reside in Algeria."  The judge  identified  the
    only possible obstacle to married life being continued  in  Algeria  as
    being the loss of the sponsor's United Kingdom employment. However,  he
    found that the,

         "... with the sponsor's continuing cultural and familial  links  to
         Algeria, that obstacle would be easily overcome or at least without
         undue hardship to any member of the family.  The judge  found  that
         the refusal of entry clearance strikes a fair balance  between  the
         rights and interests of the appellant and her daughter on  the  one
         hand and the  wider  public  interest  in  maintaining  immigration
         controls on the other."

 5. The application for permission to the First-tier Tribunal  was  refused
    by a decision of Judge Martins which is dated 3 March 2018.  On renewal
    to the Upper Tribunal, permission was granted by Judge McWilliam  by  a
    decision dated 10 July 2018.   I  confess  that  I  am  surprised  that
    permission has been granted in this  case.   First,  Judge  McWilliams'
    reason for granting permission (that it was arguable that the judge had
    not considered evidence of the sponsor's earnings  in  connection  with
    Article 8) was not actually pleaded in either set of grounds of appeal.
     I am aware that the  Upper  Tribunal  should  not  interpose  its  own
    reasons for challenging  a  First-tier  decision  save  in  exceptional
    circumstances.  It should, instead, address only  those  grounds  which
    are actually pleaded.  Both sets of grounds of  appeal  are  short  and
    singularly unhelpful.  The grounds argue that  the  sponsor  has  spent
    many years living in the  United  Kingdom  and  cannot  "merely  uproot
    himself" and go to Algeria whilst the best interests of the child  (who
    is resident in Algeria) had not been considered.  Contrary to  what  is
    said in the grounds, those issues were  considered  by  the  judge  who
    reached clear and cogent findings supported by the evidence.  Both sets
    of grounds of appeal complain that the judge placed too much weight  on
    the fact that the sponsor could relocate  to  Algeria.   With  respect,
    that consideration was quite properly central to the  judge's  analysis
    of the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.  There is no evidence  at  all
    in this appeal to suggest that family  life  could  not  be  reasonably
    pursued in Algeria.  The finding that it could  reasonably  be  pursued
    there finding was available to the judge and, having made it, the judge
    had no alternative but to dismiss the appeal.  The grant of  permission
    by Judge McWilliam is puzzling.   The  appellant's  representative  had
    accepted that the appeal  could  not  succeed  under  the  Rules.   The
    appellant had accepted that she had provided inadequate evidence of the
    sponsor's earnings.  It is not clear to me why the  judge  should  have
    accepted other, less adequate evidence of  the  sponsor's  income  than
    that required by HC 395 (as amended) and, in consequence,  allowed  the
    appeal under Article 8.  Indeed, whatever the  evidence  regarding  the
    sponsor's income, the appeal fell only to be considered under Article 8
    in the First-tier Tribunal and the  judge's  unequivocal  finding  that
    family life  could  reasonably  be  continued  in  Algeria  effectively
    disposed of the appeal.

 6. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 26 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 26 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
