
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05352/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                Decision & Reasons   |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 20th May 2015                      |                On 3rd June 2015     |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

              LORD MATTHEWS, SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MANILA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Mami Bell
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Davison, counsel instructed by LEXLAW
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   We shall refer to the parties  as  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Appellant is a citizen of Japan born on 20th  June  1957.   Her  appeal
    against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer  [ECO]  dated  19th
    March 2014 refusing her entry clearance as a returning  resident  under
    paragraph 18 of the Immigration Rules was  allowed  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 28th October 2014.  The appeal was decided on the papers.

2.   The Appellant has been married to David  Christopher  Bell,  a  British
    citizen, since January 1990 and they have a British citizen child  born
    on 11th February 1994.  The  Appellant  and  her  husband  jointly  own
    property in the UK and the Appellant was settled with indefinite  leave
    to remain in the UK from 1990 until 2001. The Appellant's  husband  has
    been employed outside the UK since 2001 and she has travelled with  her
    husband and her son. They visited the UK as a family for two  weeks  on
    four separate occasions.  The Appellant's mother-in-law is aged 92  and
    is in need of increasing support because of health problems.

3.   The Appellant's application to return to the UK was refused by the  ECO
    because she had been living outside the UK for  more  than  two  years,
    paragraph 18(ii). The decision was  reviewed  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager [ECM], who concluded that the Appellant  left  the  UK  through
    choice and she had spent the last thirteen years living  overseas  with
    her husband as a result of his employment. The  Appellant  had  entered
    the UK four times as a visitor and had not lived in her family home for
    several years.  The ECM stated that as  the  Appellant  now  wished  to
    return to the UK to live she should apply for  a  new  settlement  visa
    because her residence status had lapsed some time ago.

4.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Petherbridge found that the decision was  not
    in accordance with the law because  the  ECO  and  ECM  had  failed  to
    consider paragraph 19 of the Immigration Rules which states:

         "A person who does not benefit  from  the  preceding  paragraph  by
         reason only of having been away from the United  Kingdom  too  long
         may nevertheless be  admitted  as  a  returning  resident  if,  for
         example, he has lived here for most of his life."


    The judge found that the purpose of  this  discretionary  Rule  was  to
    avoid injustice or undue hardship which might arise from an  inflexible
    application of the two year Rule.  The judge  identified  the  relevant
    factors to be taken into account in exercising  discretion  under  this
    paragraph and applied them to the facts of the Appellant's case.

5.   The judge concluded that the decision was not in  accordance  with  the
    law in  that  it  did  not  consider  the  relevant  Rules.  The  judge
    considered the Appellant's application and  allowed  the  appeal  under
    paragraph 19.

6.   The Respondent sought permission to  appeal  on  the  ground  that  the
    judge had failed to follow Ukus (discretion:  when  reviewable)  [2012]
    UKUT 00307 (IAC) and had taken on the role  of  the  primary  decision-
    maker in allowing the appeal under the Immigration  Rules.   Permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on that basis by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Osborne on 9th December 2014.

7.   In her Rule 24 response the Appellant  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    made clear findings and given reasons as to why the application  should
    succeed.  Those findings were not challenged and were open to the judge
    on the evidence.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  consider  the  correct
    Immigration Rule subject to the requirement of fairness.  Had  the  ECO
    considered  paragraph  19  the  judge  would  have  come  to  the  same
    conclusion and therefore any error was not material and  there  was  no
    disclosed lack of fairness.


Submissions

8.   Mr Jarvis submitted that it was clear from paragraphs 22, 23 and 36  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision that neither the ECO  nor  the
    ECM had taken into account paragraph 19 and that the decision  was  not
    in accordance with the law. The judge erred in law in finding that  the
    Appellant could succeed under paragraph 19.  Applying the  decision  in
    Ukus and Section 86 of the 2002 Act it was clear that where there is  a
    discretion inside the Rules the judge can allow an appeal on the  basis
    that the discretion should be exercised differently, but it was only if
    the ECO had exercised such a discretion that the judge could review it.
    The jurisdiction was limited to allowing the appeal insofar as  it  was
    not in accordance with the law for failing to deal with the discretion.

9.   The Rule 24 response referred to the case  of  CP  (Section  86(3)  and
    (5); wrong immigration rule) Dominica [2006] UKAIT  00040.   Mr  Jarvis
    submitted that in this case the judge could not look at an  alternative
    immigration rule because it was not permitted by  statute.   The  judge
    could not ignore this jurisdictional  point  because  to  do  so  would
    fetter the ECO's role as a primary decision-maker.  The  2002  Act  was
    clear and the case of Ukus reiterated the situation. The judge  had  no
    jurisdiction to consider the discretion in paragraph 19 if it  had  not
    been exercised by the ECO or the ECM.

10.  On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Davison  submitted  that  it  was  clear
    from the ECM's decision that the Entry Clearance Manager had  paragraph
    19 in mind.  He had taken into account the grounds of appeal  submitted
    in response to the ECO's refusal.  These appeared at pages 12 and 13 of
    the Appellant's bundle and referred to the exceptions to the  two  year
    rule and to the relevant guidance.  It was clear that the ECM had  this
    document before him and considered it and therefore he  must  have  had
    paragraph 19 in mind in reviewing the decision.

11.  Further paragraph 22 of the  decision  stated  that  the  ECO  did  not
    consider paragraph 19 of  the  Immigration  Rules,  but  that  the  ECM
    considered it obliquely.  The ECM had refused to exercise discretion in
    the Appellant's favour on the basis  that  she  had  been  out  of  the
    country for more than two years.  Paragraphs  and  18  and  19  of  the
    Immigration Rules went hand in glove and it would be very surprising if
    the ECM was unaware of paragraph 19. The ECM had  exercised  discretion
    in this case and therefore the judge was entitled  to  review  it.  The
    judge set out the Immigration Directorate Instructions in  relation  to
    paragraph 19 and had approached the rule in a fair manner.   Therefore,
    it was open  to  the  judge  following  CP  Dominica  to  consider  the
    applicability of paragraph 19 in relation to the Appellant.
    12.  Lastly, there was no material error of law in  this  case  because
    there was no challenge to the judge's findings.

13.  In response, Mr Jarvis submitted that it was clear  from  paragraph  19
    of the judge's decision that neither the ECO nor the ECM had considered
    paragraph 19 of the Immigration Rules and paragraph 20 of the  decision
    stated that no consideration had been given to the application in  line
    with paragraph 19 of the Immigration Rules.

14.  From the decision of Ukus it was clear that the ECM had to  demonstrate
    he had looked at the discretion in  paragraph  19  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It was not enough to refer to it  obliquely.   The  ECM  should
    note his function and what was required to be done  in  fulfilling  it.
    The 2002 Act preserved the right of the ECO to be the primary decision-
    maker. The fact that the Respondent had not challenged the findings was
    not relevant  since  the  judge  had  no  jurisdiction  to  make  those
    findings.


Discussion and Conclusions

15.  In the case of Ukus the Upper Tribunal held that:

         "If a decision-maker in the  purported  exercise  of  a  discretion
         vested in him noted his function and what was required to  be  done
         when fulfilling it and then proceeded to reach a decision  on  that
         basis, the decision  is  a  lawful  one  and  the  Tribunal  cannot
         interfere in the absence of a statutory power to  decide  that  the
         discretion should have  been  exercised  differently  (see  Section
         86(3)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).


         Where the decision-maker has failed to exercise a discretion vested
         in him, the Tribunal's jurisdiction  on  appeal  is  limited  to  a
         decision that the failure renders the decision 'not  in  accordance
         with the law' (Section 86(3)(a)). Because the discretion is  vested
         in the Executive, the appropriate course will be for  the  Tribunal
         to require the decision-maker to complete his task  by  reaching  a
         lawful decision on the outstanding application, along the lines set
         out in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Abdi [1996] Imm
         AR 148.  In such a case, it makes no difference  whether  there  is
         such a statutory power as is mentioned in paragraph 1 above.


         If the decision-maker has lawfully exercised his discretion and the
         Tribunal has such a statutory power, the Tribunal must  either  (i)
         uphold the  decision-maker's  decision  (if  the  Tribunal  is  not
         persuaded that the decision-maker's  discretion  should  have  been
         exercised differently); or (ii) reach a different decision  in  the
         exercise of its own discretion."







16.  We are not persuaded by Mr Davison's first submission that it is  clear
    from  the  ECM's  review  that  he  considered  paragraph  19  of   the
    Immigration Rules. There was no reference  to  it  in  the  Appellant's
    grounds of appeal at pages 12 and 13 of the Appellant's bundle, and the
    ECM made no reference to it or to an exercise of discretion in the  ECM
    Review.

17.  At paragraph 19 of the decision the judge found that  neither  the  ECO
    nor the ECM would appear to have considered the Appellant's application
    with regard to paragraph 19 of the Immigration Rules. At  paragraph  20
    the judge found that the decision of the ECO was not in accordance with
    the law and did  not  comply  with  the  Rules.  This  was  because  no
    consideration  would  appear  have  been  given  to   the   Appellant's
    application in line with  the  requirements  of  paragraph  19  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

18.  At paragraph 22 the judge stated "However, it  was  necessary  for  the
    ECO to have gone on  to  consider  the  Appellant's  application  under
    paragraph 19, which he certainly did not do and  neither  did  the  ECM
    consider it other than to say somewhat obliquely:
         I have examined the application in detail and am satisfied that the
         ECO did consider all other relevant evidence and did take a  common
         sense and  pragmatic  approach  to  the  application.  After  being
         outside of the United Kingdom for 13 years the Appellant  does  not
         qualify as a returning resident."

19.  At paragraph 23, the judge stated, "This amounts to no  more  than  the
    ECO/ECM refusing the application on the grounds that the Appellant  has
    been outside of the United Kingdom for more than 2 years."

20.  On reading the decision  as  a  whole,  we  find  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge concluded that neither the ECO nor  ECM  had  considered
    the  Appellant's  application  with  regard  to  paragraph  19  of  the
    Immigration Rules. This is clear from reading paragraphs 19, 20, 22 and
    23.

21.  We find that it is clear from paragraph 9 of the decision in Ukus  that
    the First-tier Tribunal can only review the  discretion  where  it  has
    been exercised by the primary decision-maker.  We find that  since  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the ECO  and  ECM  had  failed  to
    apply paragraph  19  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  which  involved  the
    exercise of discretion, the only course open to the judge was to  allow
    the appeal  to  the  limited  extent  that  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law and remained outstanding for a lawful  decision
    to be made.

22.  We note that there is nothing preventing the Appellant from  making  an
    application for settlement as a spouse given that she has not lived  in
    the UK for thirteen years and there was no  challenge  to  the  factual
    findings made by the judge.

    23.  Accordingly, we allow the Respondent's appeal and  set  aside  the
    decision to allow the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  We remake it
    as follows. The  Appellant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    allowed to the limited extent that the decision of 19th March  2014  is
    not in accordance with the law and remains  outstanding  for  a  lawful
    decision to be made.

24.  We are concerned that the Appellant  made  her  application  for  entry
    clearance over a year ago and the ECO and  ECM  failed  to  consider  a
    relevant  provision  of  the  Immigration   Rules   in   refusing   her
    application. Accordingly we make the following direction:

    Forthwith on receipt of this  decision  the  Respondent  shall  make  a
    decision  on  the  Appellant's  entry   clearance   application   under
    paragraphs 18 and 19 of the Immigration Rules.


Notice of Decision

The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed

The Appellant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal is allowed to the  limited
extent that the  Respondent's  decision  of  19th  March  2014  was  not  in
accordance with the law and remains outstanding for a lawful decision to  be
made.

We direct that the ECO make a decision under paragraphs 18  and  19  of  the
Immigration Rules, forthwith on receipt of this decision.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date 1st June 2015



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances





