
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05445/2011


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 6 August 2013                           |On 9 August 2013           |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MOULDEN

                                   Between

                               MRS Suzia Abdin
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms H Foot of counsel instructed by Syed
Shaheen solicitors
For the Respondent:        Mr G Saunders a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who was born on 4  June  1985.
    In April 2004 she married the sponsor, who is  a  British  citizen,  in
    Bangladesh. He had previously married another woman but it was  claimed
    that they separated in June 2003 when he gave her  an  Islamic  divorce
    which became effective 90 days later. Their divorce was  not  finalised
    by UK proceedings until November 2009. The appellant  and  the  sponsor
    have four children three of whom were  born  before  the  date  of  the
    decision.


 2. In September  2010  the  appellant  applied  for  entry  clearance  for
    settlement in the UK as the spouse of the sponsor with  their  children
    as dependants. This was her second application, the first  having  been
    made and refused in October 2005. The second application was refused on
    20 December 2010. Two interrelated  reasons  were  given.   First,  the
    respondent considered that the appellant's marriage to the sponsor  was
    not a valid marriage because his divorce from his previous  wife  post-
    dated his second marriage by over  four  years.   Second,  because  the
    sponsor was domiciled in the UK he  could  not  lawfully  contract  his
    second marriage to the appellant so as to satisfy paragraph  281(i)  of
    HC 395.


 3. The appellant appealed.  The grounds of appeal were  that  the  sponsor
    had validly divorced his first wife  before  contracting  his  marriage
    with the appellant and so the appellant did meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration  Rules.   Further,  it  was  stated  that  the  refusal
    decision infringed the appellant's human rights.


 4. On 30 November 2011 First-tier Tribunal (FTT) Judge  Neyman  heard  the
    appellant's appeal. She was represented but  the  respondent  was  not.
    After the hearing, on 4 October 2011, the judge sent detailed narrative
    directions to the parties  asking  the  appellant  to  address  matters
    which, wholly  or  in  part,  had  not  been  raised  at  the  hearing.
    Specifically she was asked to submit DNA evidence and  to  produce  the
    original of  the  sponsor's  tenancy  agreement  together  with  expert
    evidence as to why the tenant's covenants were limited.


 5. Having made adverse credibility findings on the sponsor's  credibility,
    the judge concluded as follows:


         "44. The sponsor is now 45 years old and he left Bangladesh when he
         was 20 i.e. he has lived here for the last 25 years i.e. more  than
         half of his life.  He is a national of this country.  When his last
         Bangladeshi passport expired in May 2004,  he  did  not  bother  to
         renew it.  He works in the United Kingdom and has done so for  many
         years.  In paragraph 1 of his  statutory  declaration  the  sponsor
         said that he is "permanently settled in the United  Kingdom".   All
         these factors when taken together indicate  that  the  sponsor  has
         made a decision to abandon his domicile of origin and to acquire  a
         new domicile of choice in the United  Kingdom.   In  addition,  the
         sponsor is not a credible witness, so I attach little weight to his
         claims that he has retained his domicile of origin i.e.  Bangladesh
         and that he has not acquired a domicile of choice i.e. the UK.


         45. For all these reasons, I find that the sponsor is domiciled  in
         the United Kingdom and  that  he  has  been  so  domiciled  at  all
         relevant times.  Given that the sponsor did not divorce  his  first
         wife until 2009 and that he married  the  appellant  in  2005,  his
         marriage to the appellant is polygamous and so it is  not  a  valid
         marriage at English law.

         46. I now  turn  to  the  requirements  of  paragraph  281  of  the
         Immigration Rules which requires (inter alia) that the applicant be
         married to the sponsor.  Since the appellant  has  failed  to  show
         that her marriage to the sponsor  is  valid  at  English  law,  she
         cannot succeed under paragraph 281.  In addition,  given  that  the
         sponsor is not a credible witness, he has failed to  show  that  he
         intends to live permanently with the appellant, so that  again  her
         appeal under paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rules must fail.   In
         addition, since the sponsor has failed to  show  that  he  has  the
         accommodation claimed, the appellant has failed to show that  there
         would be adequate accommodation for her here  without  recourse  to
         public funds, so that, for this additional and independent  reason,
         her appeal must fail under the Immigration Rules.   For  all  these
         reasons,  I  must  dismiss  the  appellant's   appeal   under   the
         Immigration Rules and I hereby do so."


 6. The appellant applied for and was granted permission to appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal. The appeal was heard by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Storey
    ("the UTJ") on 13 April 2012. He was satisfied that the FTT  Judge  was
    justified in finding that the appellant's husband and sponsor  had  not
    retained a Bangladeshi domicile and, prior to the date of his  marriage
    to the appellant, he had acquired a domicile of choice in  England  and
    Wales. The FTT  judge  was  correct  to  consider  that  the  sponsor's
    acquisition of a UK domicile of choice meant that his marriage  to  the
    appellant, being actually polygamous, was void.


 7. In relation to the  grounds  of  appeal  addressing  the  accommodation
    requirements of the Immigration Rules the UTJ assessed the position  on
    the basis that  the  FTT  judge  had  ensured  procedural  fairness  by
    notifying the appellant in  advance  and  by  way  of  directions  that
    accommodation was considered by him to be a live issue and that at  the
    hearing the sponsor was afforded an opportunity to address this  issue.
    Unfortunately, as is now common ground, that was not  the  position  or
    the order of events. The FTT judge did not  raise  his  concerns  about
    accommodation  until  after  the  hearing.  In   the   light   of   his
    understanding of the position the UTJ concluded  that  the  appellant's
    appeal  was  also  properly  dismissed  for  failure  to  satisfy   the
    accommodation requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 8. The grounds addressed by the UTJ also  contended  that  the  FTT  Judge
    erred in his assessment of the appellant's Article  8  claim.  The  UTJ
    concluded that as  the  UK  passport  authorities  had  issued  British
    passports to three of the children the FTT judge was wrong to find that
    there was no family life relationship between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor. (I note that it is now said that all four of the children have
    British passports. The discrepancy arises because the fourth child  was
    born after the application was made.) The ECO's grounds of refusal  did
    not challenge the appellant's claim that the sponsor was the father  of
    her three children and in the circumstances the FTT judge erred in  law
    when he concluded that they were not related as  claimed  just  because
    they had not availed themselves of the opportunity to produce DNA  test
    results.

 9. However, the UTJ did not consider that the error  was  a  material  one
    largely because the sponsor had made  no  effort  to  apply  for  entry
    clearance for his wife until 2009, even though on his  own  account  he
    had the legal capacity  to  marry  her  from  2003  onwards.   The  UTJ
    subsequently accepted, in dealing with the application  for  permission
    to appeal to the Court of Appeal,  that  the  appellant  had  submitted
    documentation that showed that she  first  applied  for  settlement  in
    October 2005.

10. The UTJ concluded that the FTT judge did not materially err in law  and
    upheld his decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal.

11. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the Court  of  Appeal
    which was refused by the UTJ. The application was renewed to the  Court
    of Appeal and permission was granted by Davis LJ. Following  the  grant
    of permission there was a consent order made by Moses  LJ  on  19  June
    2013 quashing the decision of the UTJ and remitting the appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal for reconsideration. The  order  was  accompanied  by  a
    Statement of Reasons  agreed  between  the  parties  which  stated,  in
    paragraph 2 :-

         "The respondent accepts that the UTIAC misdirected  itself  in  law
         for the following reasons: -

         a. The UTIAC erred in law by upholding the finding  of  the  First-
            Tier Tribunal ("FTT") that the appellant's sponsor had lost  his
            domicile of origin in Bangladesh. In this respect  the  evidence
            adduced was insufficient to show that domicile had been lost.

         b. The UTIAC misdirected itself in law by concluding that there was
            no breach of Article 8.

         c. The UTIAC wrongly concluded that the procedure  adopted  by  the
            FTT in respect of the appellant's accommodation was a fair one."

12. Both representatives agreed and I find that the  clear  effect  of  the
    order of the Court of Appeal and the Statement of Reasons  is,  firstly
    and obviously that the decision of the UTJ has been quashed. Were  this
    is the only conclusion my first task would be to consider  whether  the
    FTT judge erred in law. However, both representatives agree and I  find
    that there is also a conclusion that the FTT judge erred in law  in  at
    least three respects namely his conclusions that the sponsor  had  lost
    his domicile of origin, there was no breach of  Article  8  rights  and
    that there had been procedural fairness in relation to the question  of
    adequacy of accommodation.

13. Mr Saunders stated that what was set out in the  Statement  of  Reasons
    meant that the respondent had accepted that the sponsor  had  not  lost
    his domicile of origin in Bangladesh. He formally  conceded  that  this
    was still the respondent's position and that as a result the  appellant
    was at all relevant times validly married to the sponsor.  Mr  Saunders
    also said that the respondent did not wish to depart from  the  reasons
    for refusal. The  question  of  adequacy  of  accommodation  under  the
    provisions of the Immigration Rules was not disputed then  or  now.  He
    was not authorised to concede the appeal as a whole but had no  further
    submissions to make and asked me to substitute my decision for that  of
    the FTT judge.

14. Ms Foot said that if the appeal was allowed under the Immigration Rules
    the appellant would not pursue the appeal on  Article  8  human  rights
    grounds.

15. Mr Saunders' concession that the respondent accepted that  the  sponsor
    had not lost his domicile of origin in Bangladesh and that as a  result
    the appellant was at all relevant times validly married to the  sponsor
    disposes of the only reasons for refusal given by the  respondent.  The
    respondent has been given the opportunity to adopt the point  taken  by
    the  FTT  judge  and  to  question  whether  the  appellant  meets  the
    accommodation requirements of paragraph 281 of the Immigration Rule but
    has declined to do so. That alone is sufficient to dispose of the point
    but, as it was raised by the FTT judge, I will  address  this.  In  his
    directions the FTT judge asked to see the  original  tenancy  agreement
    and expressed concern that there were only limited  tenant's  covenants
    in  the  copy  he  had  seen.  He  asked  for  a  satisfactory  written
    explanation  from  a  qualified  individual  as  to  why  the  tenant's
    covenants were so limited. I have seen a copy of the tenancy  agreement
    which is a "TENANCY AGREEMENT for letting a furnished dwelling house on
    an assured shorthold tenancy under Part 1 of the Housing Act 1988".  In
    the light of the provisions implied by the Housing Act 1988 it does not
    appear to me that the agreement is deficient  in  respect  of  tenant's
    covenants or otherwise. It is in a standard form widely used and  often
    seen. I also note that there is  an  immigration  housing  report  with
    detailed information about the property  which  expresses  the  opinion
    that it  would  not  be  statutorily  overcrowded  for  the  occupation
    proposed by the appellant and the sponsor.

16. I set aside the decision of the FTT judge and remake  the  decision  by
    allowing the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.









    .............................................
    Signed                                           Date 7 August 2013
    Upper Tribunal Judge Moulden

