
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/ 05798 /2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 19th July 2016                      |On 4th August 2016                  |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr Muhammad Yaseen

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood (Home Office presenting officer)
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION  AND REASONS


1.   I shall refer to the parties as "the Secretary of  State"  who  is  the
    appellant in this matter and to Mr Yaseen as "the Claimant" who is  the
    respondent. This matter comes before me for consideration as to whether
    or not there is a material error of law in  the  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 15th January 2016 by  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Hodgkinson) (FTT)  in  which  the  Claimant's  appeal  was  allowed  on
    immigration grounds.

Background

 2.  The Claimant is a citizen of Pakistan who was studying in the  UK  from
    2011 under the Tier 4 scheme.  He applied for further leave  to  remain
    as a student which was refused on 24th September 2014 with no right  of
    appeal.  The refusal was on the grounds  that  the  Claimant  had  used
    deception by submitting an invalid English test (TOEIC) in  respect  of
    his student application made on 9.4.2013.  He was detained in  December
    2014 and served with a Notice of removal decision dated  13th  December
    2014. The Claimant was removed to Pakistan on 24th February 2015.

3.   He appealed from out of the country and the appeal  was  determined  by
    the FTT on the papers. His grounds of appeal argued that he did not use
    a proxy tester and that his English was good enough  as  shown  by  his
    qualifications.  He denied any deception and argued that the  Secretary
    of State failed to show solid evidence relating specifically to him.

4.   The FTT applied the  burden and standard of proof  and  concluded  that
    the Secretary of State produced insufficient evidence to discharge  the
    burden given that reliance was placed only on generic  evidence  of  Mr
    Millington and Miss Collings [15] ("generic evidence "),  a  print  out
    produced by ETS showing the scores for tests  taken  on  22.8.2012  and
    5.9.2012, and an ETS  documents  showing  that  a  test  was  taken  on
    5.9.2012 in the Claimant's name for speaking and listening , and  which
    were used for the application of  9.4.2013.  The  FTT  noted  that  the
    refusal reasons referred to the scores for the test taken on  22.8.2012
    as having been cancelled and found that there was a lack of clarity  in
    the evidence [15]. The FTT  considered  that  the  Secretary  of  State
    failed to discharge the burden of proof in that  no  specific  evidence
    was produced including the recording of the  speaking  and   the  voice
    verification software used [16]. The FTT found that  the  Claimant  had
    been disadvantaged as he did not have the opportunity to challenge  any
    evidence specific to him.

5.   In grounds of application for permission the Secretary of State  argued
    that detailed evidence had  been  provided  of  the  investigation  and
    processes, and that the evidence taken as a whole was  sufficient.  The
    spread sheet showed that both tests  taken  were  invalid  and  it  was
    alleged that the Claimant had used deception on two occasions.  The FTT
    failed to provide sufficient reasons for rejecting the evidence.

6.   Further the FTT erred by importing an impermissibly  high  standard  of
    proof and that it is not necessary  to  produce  the  voice  recordings
    having regard to the standard of proof.

7.   Permission was granted on the grounds that the FTT  did  not  have  the
    advantage of Qadir [2016] UKUT.

Submissions

8.   Ms Isherwood submitted that the Claimant  had  used  deception  in  two
    tests and that following Qadir it had been accepted  that  the  generic
    evidence was capable of meeting the initial evidential burden of  proof
    on the Secretary of State .  There after there was no evidence from the
    Claimant  giving  any  innocent  explanation.   The  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.


Discussion and conclusion

9.   In Qadir the Upper Tribunal ("UT") confirmed the three staged  approach
    to the burden and standard of proof in  these  English  language  proxy
    cases. There is an evidential burden on  the Secretary of State   which
    requires that sufficient evidence be adduced to raise an  issue  as  to
    the existence or non existence of a fact in  issue;  i.e  by  producing
    the completed application  which is   prima  facie  deceitful  in  some
    material fashion.   The Claimant has the burden to show that  there  is
    an innocent explanation which satisfies the level of plausibility.   If
    that is satisfied the burden falls on the Secretary of State to show on
    the  balance  of  probabilities  that  the   Claimant's   prima   facie
    explanation is to be rejected.

10.      Further in Qadir the UT concluded  that  by  a  narrow  margin  the
    "generic evidence" produced by the Secretary of  State  discharged  the
    evidential burden [68].

11.  In this matter as stated by the permitting Judge the FTT did  not  have
    the benefit of Qadir.  It must be accepted that  the  generic  evidence
    was certainly capable  of  satisfying  the  evidential  burden  on  the
    Secretary of State and that the FTT erred in law in  this  regard.   It
    erred  by  failing  to  take  into  account  the  comparatively  modest
    threshold which an evidential burden entails and by failing to go on to
    consider  the further two stages in the process.   The  FTT  materially
    erred in law. Whilst Qadir accepted that each appeal is fact sensitive,
    nevertheless I am satisfied that the FTT's approach was flawed.

Decision

12.      There is a material error of law disclosed in  the  decision  which
    shall be set aside.

Re making

13.      I now consider how to remake the  decision.   I  heard  submissions
    from Ms Isherwood and I had before me the evidence that was before  the
    FTT from the Claimant, namely his witness statement dated  5th  January
    2016.  I start from  the  premise  that  the  Secretary  of  State  has
    discharged the evidential burden through the "generic evidence" and the
    spread sheets showing the  dates  for  the  two  tests  taken  and  the
    results.  In his witness statement the Claimant denied using  deception
    and relied on  his qualifications arguing that he has no reason to  use
    a proxy tester given his language ability.  He further relied  on   the
    fact that his TOEIC had been used in support of a previous  application
    and had not been questioned. There was no further explanation given  by
    the Claimant which showed any innocent  explanation  in  particular  in
    relation to the two tests taken on different dates both of  which  were
    found to be invalid. There is no explanation or  evidence  produced  by
    the Claimant aside from  reliance  on  his  qualifications  which  were
    obtained in the UK after the dates on which the  tests  were  taken.  I
    take into account that he is outside of  the  UK  but  his  grounds  of
    appeal rely specifically on the failure of the Secretary  of  State  to
    discharge the burden and standard of proof.  The Claimant sent a letter
    dated 19th July reiterating this point and did not provide any  further
    evidence. I am satisfied that the Secretary of State has discharged the
    burden of proof to the civil standard that deception was  used  by  the
    Claimant in particular having regard to the fact that the Claimant  sat
    two sets of tests on different dates.

14.      I dismiss the appeal.


    NO ANONYMITY ORDER




                               Signed                     Date 1.8.2016


                               GA BLACK
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal





    NO FEE AWARD as the appeal is dismissed.

                               Signed                     Date 1.8.2016


                               GA BLACK
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

