
[pic]
IAC-CH- CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05712/2014 &
                                                               OA/05706/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport     |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On 12th August 2015                  |On 28th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE


                                   Between

                      MISS MAGALI BITSHILUALUA AKULAYI
                         MISS KETSIA KASHAMA MUSUMBA
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - KINSHASA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Louise Fenney, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                             DECISION & REASONS

 1. The two appellants both female citizens of the Democratic  Republic  of
    Congo  (DRC)  who  have  applied  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom   for
    settlement.  Their application was based upon  their  adoption  by  Mrs
    Dounce Tshisungu, their Sponsor, who is a person present in the  United
    Kingdom.  Their Sponsor is a citizen of the DRC as is  her  husband  Mr
    Didwe.  Both the Sponsor and her  husband  have  been  granted  refugee
    status in the United Kingdom.

 2. The respondent refused  both  applications  upon  the  basis  that  any
    adoption order in the DRC was not recognised or accepted under  UK  Law
    and that  the  appellants  could  only  be  considered  under   "family
    reunion", but neither appellant satisfied the requirements.

 3. The appellant's appealed against that decision and  their  appeal  came
    before Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Britton sitting at  Newport  on
    12 December  2014.   An  oral  hearing  was  held,  both  parties  were
    represented.  The  judge  heard  evidence  from  the  Sponsor  and  her
    husband.

 4. In a determination dated 30 December 2014, Judge Britton dismissed  the
    appeals.

 5. The appellants then sought leave to appeal.  The grounds alleging error
    lack structure and are difficult to identify the  cause  of  complaint.
    However it is noted that there is criticism of the judge with regard to
    the waandy he dealt with the mention (or lack of it) of the  appellants
    when the Sponsor and her husband were interviewed  in  connection  with
    their asylum applications.  The judge  is  criticised  for  failing  to
    consider all the evidence to have paid  insufficient  attention  to  an
    adoption agreement "that is legal in the Democratic Republic of Congo".
     He had made no findings.  It is suggested  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer "did not deduce what they relied up to make  such  a  statement
    (sic)".  This relates to whether or  not  the  adoption  agreement  was
    valid under UK Law.  It is alleged the judge failed to have  regard  to
    the principles of "family unity".  The judge erred (it is  alleged)  in
    not noting that the appellants had no permanent  accommodation  in  the
    DRC and that he  failed  to  give  proper  consideration  to  the  best
    interests of minor children.

 6. The  application  for  leave  came  before  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Robertson, who considered the application out of  time  and  that  such
    time limit could not be extended,  but  also  found  that  the  grounds
    lacked arguable merit.  The reasons given  for  this  decision  are  as
    follows:

         "1.  The Appellants seek permission to appeal against the  decision
         of First-Tier Tribunal Judge Britton (the Judge), dismissing  their
         appeals under the  Immigration  Rules  and  under  Article  8  ECHR
         against the refusal by the Respondent to grant them leave to  enter
         pursuant to the provisions of paragraph  352D  of  the  Immigration
         Rules.

         2.   The decision was provided to the  Appellants  on  31  December
         2014.  The application was not made until 3 February 2015, which is
         more than 28 days from the date on which it  was  provided  to  the
         Appellants (rule 33 of the Tribunal Procedure (First-Tier Tribunal)
         (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) 2014).  The only reason given  for
         lateness was that the decision was not  received  until  5  January
         2015 but time, under the Rules, does  not  run  from  the  date  of
         receipt.  However, in deciding whether or not  to  extend  time,  I
         have considered the strength of the grounds as follows:

         3.   It is not arguable, as submitted  in  the  grounds,  that  the
         Respondent needed to adduce evidence to establish that the adoption
         of the Appellants in the DRC was not recognised in the UK (as  this
         is provided for in The Adoption (Recognition of Overseas  Adoption)
         Order 2013).  Nor is it  arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  in  his
         assessment that the Sponsor had not travelled to the DRC  to  visit
         the Appellants because this is clearly recognised at para  23.   He
         found, as he was entitled to find, that Article 8 was  not  engaged
         because there was no evidence of contact between the Appellant  and
         the sponsor (para 23).  He gives clear reasons as to why he did not
         accept the Sponsor's explanation as to why she did not mention  the
         Appellants in her screening interview (see para 33).   Furthermore,
         it is not arguable that the Judge did not take into account all the
         evidence before him; as acknowledge in the grounds, he set  out  in
         detail the evidence that was before him and his findings were  made
         on the evidence in the ground.  The grounds  disclose  no  arguable
         errors of law and are simply a disagreement with  the  findings  of
         the Judge.

         4.   As the grounds lack arguable merit, time is not extended".

 7. The appellants then renewed their application to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds were repeated  save  for  challenge  to  Judge  Robertson's
    refusal.

 8. The matter then came before Upper Tribunal Judge Blum who  granted  the
    application without an oral hearing.  Judge Blum found the  application
    to have been in time.  He found that  the  appellants  could  not  have
    succeeded under the "adoption route" as  adoptions  from  DRC  are  not
    recognised in the United Kingdom.  However Judge Blum found that it was
    arguable that Judge Britton had failed to take into account mention  of
    the children during the asylum process.  Additionally the  judge  found
    possible error with regard to the way Judge Britton treated the ability
    of the family members in the DRC to care for the appellants.

 9. Hence the matter came before me in the Upper Tribunal.

10. Miss Fenney in her submission said that the judge  had  not  considered
    Article 8.  There was error with regard to the treatment of the contact
    that had been maintained.  The fact that the adoption was legal in  the
    DRC should have been considered in the consideration of "family  life".
    Miss Fenney referred me to page 21 of the appellant's original  bundle,
    where mention is made by the Sponsor's husband of  the  two  appellants
    (in fact page 20).

11. Mr Richards in his submission said that no material  error  of  law  is
    contained in the decision of Judge  Britton.   The  judge  was  clearly
    aware of the relationship  and  there  are  very  clear  findings.   At
    paragraph 36 of the determination Judge Britton finds any  interference
    proportionate.  Any minor error of fact would not be  material  to  the
    outcome.

12. In response Miss Fenney referred to paragraph 35 which showed the judge
    had failed to consider the evidence and that the  children  were  being
    passed from one relative to another.

13. At the conclusion of the hearing I indicated that for the reasons I now
    give I found no material error of law in Judge Britton's determination.

14. I do not consider that any of the allegations of error have  been  made
    out.  Miss Fenney in her submission alleged that Judge Britton had  not
    dealt with Article 8.  Paragraph 23  onwards  shows  the  consideration
    Judge Britton gave to  that  article  of  the  Convention.   The  judge
    properly directed himself and carefully reviewed  the  evidence  before
    him before concluding (36) that  any  interference  was  proportionate.
    This shows that the judge clearly covered  the  whole  situation,  even
    though he had previously found that no family life had existed.

15. Dealing with the substantive issue before Judge Britton he was  clearly
    correct in coming to the conclusion that he  did  with  regard  to  the
    question of adoption.  Adoptions in the DRC are not recognised  in  the
    United Kingdom.  That is the law  and  it  is  not  necessary  for  the
    respondent to adduce evidence of that.  Judge Blum at  paragraph  3  of
    his reasons has made the position very clear.

16. As to the family reunion position, Judge Britton fully considered  that
    aspect.  It is said that he failed to engage with the evidence that the
    Sponsor had mentioned the children in the second interview.  He clearly
    accepted  that  evidence  as  is  shown  in   paragraph   25   of   his
    determination.  At paragraph 33 the  judge  considered  it  significant
    that the Sponsor had not mentioned the appellants during her  screening
    interview.  The judge was perfectly  entitled  to  give  that  evidence
    significance.  He explains that by saying that if  the  appellants  had
    been members of her family it would have been "in the forefront of  her
    mind to mention it".  He was entitled to reach that conclusion.

17. It is possibly an error on the  part  of  the  judge  that  he  omitted
    reference to Mr Didwe's evidence in claiming asylum with regard to  the
    two appellants, but I do not consider that error to be material to  the
    outcome when reading the determination as a whole.  At page 20  of  the
    appellant's bundle Mr  Didwe  explains  that  the  two  appellants  are
    "nieces of my wife" and that they looked after  them.   That  does  not
    confirm the relationship that the Sponsor now claims to have  with  the
    two appellants.  There are clearly a group of people  in  the  DRC  who
    look after the two appellants and all are relatives of the Sponsor.

18. Criticism was levelled at Judge Britton with regard to his treatment of
    the evidence that Mr Didwe returned to "Congo".   Judge  Britton  deals
    with this at paragraphs 29 and 30, and he then gives an explanation  of
    his findings at paragraph 33.

19. As indicated above, I find that none of the allegations alleging  error
    of law are made out.  The one mistake that could be attributed to Judge
    Britton is not material to the outcome, which clearly would  have  been
    the same if that error had not been made.

20. In finding no material error of law, I accordingly dismiss this  appeal
    and the decision of Judge Britton must stand.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Poole
