
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/05577/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5 December 2016                   |On 6 December 2016                   |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

                         Amira Abdalla Ahmed Elmahdi
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                      Entry Clearance Officer, Pretoria
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Chohan, of Counsel, instructed by Citadel
                    Immigration Lawyers Limited.
For the Respondent:    Mr. P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Sudan born on 1 January  1993.  She  has
    been granted permission to appeal against the decision of Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Row who, following  a  hearing  on  16  June  2016,
    dismissed her appeal under the Immigration Rules and  on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8 of the 1950 European Convention for  the  Protection
    of Human Rights and Fundamental Freedoms (ECHR)) against a decision  of
    the respondent of  19  January  2015  refusing  her  application  of  4
    December 2014 for entry clearance on the basis of family  reunion  with
    her spouse Mr Nader Hasan Khalifa, a national of Sudan born on  17  May
    1971 (the "sponsor") who has been granted limited leave  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom as a refugee.

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's application because he  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant and the sponsor were  married  before  the
    sponsor left Sudan or that  they  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship or that they intended to live together permanently in  the
    United Kingdom. In particular, the respondent noted that the  appellant
    had not produced a marriage certificate and he  considered  that  there
    was little evidence of communication  between  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor. He therefore refused the application under  paragraph  352A(i)
    and (iv) of the Immigration Rules.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") granted permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal that was limited  to  the  final  point  raised  in  the
    grounds. Permission was otherwise refused.

 4. The final point raised in the grounds was that the judge had erred  (at
    [22]) in placing weight on the  fact  that  the  sponsor  had  employed
    illegal means to gain entry into the United Kingdom when assessing  the
    sponsor's evidence, given  that  the  sponsor  had  been  recognised  a
    refugee. The judge of the FtT who granted permission referred to  Adimi
    [1999] EWHC 764 (Admin) and stated that it was "clear that the  [judge]
    gave significant weight to the fact that  the  sponsor  [had]  employed
    illegal means to gain entry to the  UK  when  assessing  the  sponsor's
    credibility" and that it may be the case that, had the judge not  taken
    that issue into account, he might have arrived at a  different  overall
    conclusion.

The judge's decision

 5. At [24] of his decision, the judge said that he was not satisfied  that
    the appellant had shown that she was married to the sponsor in 2002  in
    Sudan or at all.

 6. The judge heard oral evidence from the sponsor. It is  plain  from  his
    reasoning at [10]-[23] of the decision that he did not find the sponsor
    credible. He did not find that  the  sponsor  and  the  appellant  were
    married or in any form of relationship on the evidence before  him.  He
    therefore dismissed her appeal under the para 352A of  the  Immigration
    Rules. He found that Article 8 was not engaged  because  there  was  no
    family life between the appellant and the sponsor.

 7. The judge said that there were a number of matters that made him  doubt
    what the appellant and the sponsor have said ([9]). He gave his reasons
    at [10]-[22]. These may be summarised as follows:

    i)     He did not accept that he had been given a credible  explanation
         as to why the appellant and the  sponsor  lost  contact  with  each
         other between 2008 and 2013 ([10]).

    ii)    He did not accept that he had been given a credible  explanation
         as to why no marriage certificate had been produced. He  noted,  in
         particular, that the sponsor had been inconsistent in his  evidence
         as whether a marriage  certificate  had  been  issued,  stating  as
         follows ([12]-[15]):

         a) in his witness statement, that no marriage certificate had  been
             issued because marriage certificates are not issued in  Sudan,
             that a marriage is not registered until it is necessary to  do
             so and that it was not necessary to do so until October 2014;

         b) in his evidence-in-chief at  the  hearing,  that  there  was  no
             marriage certificate which the judge noted was consistent with
             his witness statement;

         c) in cross-examination at the hearing, that a marriage certificate
             was issued on the day of the ceremony but that he did not have
             it; his father had the certificate.

         d) in re-examination, that his wife had  the  marriage  certificate
             and then later in re-examination that his father had it.

         The judge said that two matters arose from  this  evidence.  First,
         that it was difficult to place any reliance on anything the sponsor
         said on the subject of the marriage certificate. Second,  that  the
         statement made by the sponsor at [13] of his witness  statement  to
         explain the unavailability of any marriage certificate was not only
         incorrect but it was deliberately misleading.

    iii)   He said (at [16]) that there were a number of problems with  the
         assertion that  the  appellant  was  the  person  the  sponsor  had
         referred to at his asylum interview when he said that he had a wife
         and a son. Firstly, that in his interview,  the  sponsor  had  said
         that he was married 8 years before his asylum interview which would
         mean that he was married in 2000 whereas the evidence the appellant
         and the sponsor gave in the  instant  appeal  was  that  they  were
         married in 2002. That, whilst it was not  uncommon  for  people  to
         forget a wedding anniversary, people usually remember the  year  in
         which they were married. Secondly, at  his  asylum  interview,  the
         sponsor gave two different versions of  his  wife's  name  both  of
         which were substantially different from the name the appellant  has
         given in the instant  appeal  even  after  allowing  for  different
         phonetic spellings.

    iv)    In relation to the evidence of  communication  with  Sudan,  the
         judge noted that the evidence might indicate communication  between
         the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  but  it  might   also   indicate
         communication between the sponsor and his father who lives in Sudan
         or it might indicate communication between two people preparing  an
         illegal entry into the United Kingdom ([17]-[19]). In addition,  he
         noted that the Lycamobile calls related to the  period  immediately
         prior to the application and immediately after the decision.

    v)     In relation to the  evidence  of  money  transfers  between  the
         sponsor and the appellant, he noted that this related to the period
         immediately before the application. He did not find that they added
         substantially to the appellant's case. He considered that they  may
         indicate a relationship between the appellant and the  sponsor  but
         the money  transfers  may  also  have  been  made  to  create  that
         impression ([20]).

    vi)    In relation to the photographs taken of the  appellant  and  the
         sponsor during the sponsor's trip to Egypt  in  January  2016,  the
         photographs might indicate a relationship between the appellant and
         the sponsor but they might equally have been taken to suggest  that
         there was such a relationship ([21]).

    vii)   At [22]-[23], the judge then said as follows:

             "22.      The sponsor arrived in the United Kingdom  illegally
                  having apparently paid E 5000 in order to do so and E 2000
                  to procure a forged passport to enable him to travel  from
                  Belgium. He used a false name and date  of  birth.  He  is
                  said to have used a  number  of  different  names  in  the
                  process. He is clearly not someone who would balk  at  the
                  transfer of large sums of money to gain illegal  entry  to
                  the United Kingdom or at the use of forged  documents  and
                  false identities to further this end. He has  done  so  in
                  the past. The respondent was entitled to view anything the
                  sponsor says on the subject of immigration or any document
                  he produced with circumspection.

             23. The respondent has raised legitimate  concerns  which  the
                  appellant has not answered. It is  for  the  appellant  to
                  prove her case and show that the documents she  relies  on
                  [sic] what she says they are. She has  not  done  so.  The
                  registration document has not  been  authenticated.  There
                  was a marriage certificate which has not been produced.  A
                  duplicate could have been obtained if  not  the  original.
                  Instead of doing this the sponsor has  given  deliberately
                  misleading information."

The hearing

 8. At the commencement of the hearing, I drew Mr Chohan's attention to the
    fact that the sponsor's use of forged documents to travel to the United
    Kingdom concerned his travel from  Belgium,  a  safe  country,  to  the
    United Kingdom and whether in these circumstances, the judge had  erred
    in law in his assessment at [22].

 9. Mr Chohan submitted that, although Belgium  was  a  safe  country,  the
    sponsor was being assisted by an  agent.  He  submitted  that,  as  the
    Secretary of State had gone on to grant the sponsor's asylum claim, the
    sponsor's use of forged documents to enter the United Kingdom was not a
    relevant consideration. He submitted that, by taking into  account  the
    fact that the sponsor had used forged documents  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom, the  judge  had  effectively  re-opened  that  issue  and  the
    sponsor's credibility that had been decided by the Secretary of State's
    grant of asylum in the sponsor's asylum  claim.  This  is  because  the
    Secretary of State had not rejected the sponsor's  credibility  in  his
    asylum claim.

10. I heard briefly from Mr Duffy. He drew attention to the fact  that  the
    Secretary of State's  grant  of  asylum  was  not  accompanied  by  any
    reasons. The fact that  she  granted  asylum  did  not  mean  that  she
    accepted that the sponsor's use of forged documents to enter the United
    Kingdom did not raise credibility issues.

11. In reply,  Mr  Chohan  submitted  that  the  sponsor's  use  of  forged
    documents to enter the United Kingdom  cannot  be  relied  upon  as  an
    overriding factor for discrediting the entire basis of the  appellant's
    case on the issues in her appeal.  He  submitted  that  the  judge  had
    placed determinative or disproportionate weight on the sponsor's use of
    forged documents to enter the United Kingdom.

12. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

13. The judgment in Adimi concerned the prosecution of individuals who have
    claimed asylum for travelling or being found  in  possession  of  false
    travel documents.  It did not directly concern whether  the  use  of  a
    false document to enter the United Kingdom is relevant in assessing the
    credibility of the individual who  has  claimed  asylum.  It  concerned
    Article 31(1) of the refugee Convention which provides:

         "31(1) The  Contracting  States  shall  not  impose  penalties,  on
         account of their illegal entry or presence, on refugees who, coming
         directly  from  a  territory  where  their  life  or  freedom   was
         threatened in the sense of Article 1, enter or are present in their
         territory without authorisation, provided they  present  themselves
         without delay to the authorities and  show  good  cause  for  their
         illegal entry or presence."

14. Article 31(1) of the Refugee Convention refers  to  "coming  directly".
    However, it is clear that the Court did not consider that Article 31(1)
    should be limited to those who travel directly from the territory where
    their life or freedom was threatened to the territory of a  Contracting
    State. At [17]-[19] of Adimi, the Court said:

         "(a) "Coming directly "

         17.      The respondents accept  that  a  literal  construction  of
         "directly" would contravene the clear purpose of  the  Article  and
         they accordingly accept that this condition can be  satisfied  even
         if the refugee passes through intermediate countries on his way  to
         the United Kingdom. But that is only so, they argue, provided  that
         he could not reasonably have been expected to  seek  protection  in
         any such intermediate country and this will not be the case  unless
         he has actually needed, rather than merely desired, to come to  the
         United Kingdom. In short it is  the  respondents'  contention  that
         Article 31 allows the refugee no element of choice as to  where  he
         should claim asylum. He must claim it  where  first  he  may:  only
         considerations of continuing  safety  would  justify  impunity  for
         further travel.

         18.      For my part I would reject  this  argument.  Rather  I  am
         persuaded by the applicants' contrary  submission,  drawing  as  it
         does on the travaux pr�paratoires, various Conclusions  adopted  by
         UNHCR's executive committee  (ExCom),  and  the  writings  of  well
         respected academics and commentators (most  notably  Professor  Guy
         Goodwin-Gill, Atle Grahl-Madsen, Professor James  Hathaway  and  Dr
         Paul Weis), that some element of choice is indeed open to  refugees
         as to where they may properly claim asylum.  I  conclude  that  any
         merely short term stopover en  route  to  such  intended  sanctuary
         cannot forfeit the protection of the Article,  and  that  the  main
         touchstones by which exclusion from protection should be judged are
         the length of stay in the intermediate  country,  the  reasons  for
         delaying there (even a substantial delay in an unsafe third country
         would be reasonable were the time spent trying to acquire the means
         of travelling on), and whether or not the refugee sought  or  found
         there protection de jure or de facto from the persecution they were
         fleeing.

         19.      It is  worth  quoting  in  this  regard  the  UNHCR's  own
         Guidelines with regard to the Detention of Asylum Seekers:

             "The expression 'coming directly' in Article 31(1) covers  the
             situation of a person who enters the country in  which  asylum
             is sought directly from the country of origin, or from another
             country where his protection, safety and security could not be
             assured. It is understood that this term also covers a  person
             who transits an intermediate country for  a  short  period  of
             time without having applied for, or received, asylum there. No
             strict time limit  can  be  applied  to  the  concept  'coming
             directly' and each case must be judged on its merits."

15. I do not accept Mr Chohan's submission that  the  mere  fact  that  the
    Secretary of State granted the sponsor refugee status  means  that  the
    sponsor's credibility in relation to his use of forged travel documents
    to travel from Belgium had been  accepted.  In  the  first  place,  the
    Secretary of State does not give reasons for granting asylum. Secondly,
    in any event, it is  possible  for  the  Secretary  of  State  to  have
    accepted the core of the sponsor's case in relation to the reasons  for
    claiming asylum  without  the  need  to  consider  his  credibility  in
    relation to his use of forged documents to travel from Belgium  to  the
    United Kingdom.

16. Pursuant to  Adimi,  any  decision  whether  or  not  to  prosecute  an
    individual requires consideration of matters such as the length of time
    the individual has spent in the third country,  his  reasons  of  being
    there and whether or not he sought refuge there. It  may  be  that  the
    same assessment needs to be undertaken in asylum claims and even in the
    context of an immigration application if the action of a refugee in the
    use of false travel documents is relevant to credibility  generally  or
    an issue in the immigration case. However, I do not  need  to  reach  a
    concluded view on this issue for the reasons given at [17]-[18]  below.
    Suffice it to say that I accept that it may be that the judge ought not
    to have taken into account the fact that the sponsor  had  used  forged
    documents to travel to the United Kingdom given that (as far as  I  can
    see) there was no evidence before the judge as to the  length  of  time
    the sponsor spent in Belgium, his reasons  for  being  in  Belgium  and
    whether or not he sought protection in Belgium.

17. However, I am satisfied that any error in the judge taking into account
    against the sponsor's credibility the fact  that  he  had  used  forged
    documents to travel from Belgium to the United Kingdom is not  material
    notwithstanding anything to the contrary in the grant of permission. It
    is plain from the judge's reasoning not only that he gave several other
    reasons for making his adverse credibility assessment but also that  he
    found no other aspect of the sponsor's evidence credible. He  found  no
    other aspect of the appellant's evidence as positively establishing the
    issues in the case. In this respect, it is my  view  that  the  judge's
    observations at [17]-[19] of his decision concerning  the  evidence  of
    communications with Sudan, at [20] concerning  the  evidence  of  money
    transfers and at [21] concerning the photographs taken in Egypt to  be,
    at best, neutral in the sense that he  decided  that  the  evidence  he
    considered at [17]-[21] was not such as to be sufficient  to  discharge
    the burden of proof on the standard of the  balance  of  probabilities.
    Thus, even if the reasoning at [22] is discounted  completely,  one  is
    left with the reasoning at [10]-[16] which is a  sufficient  basis  for
    the adverse credibility assessment of the  remaining  evidence  of  the
    sponsor and the evidence of the appellant.

18. My view that the judge's reasoning at [22]  was  not  material  to  the
    outcome is strengthened by the fact that the judge did not mention  the
    issue he had discussed at [22] in his concluding paragraph, i.e. [23].

19. I have therefore concluded that, even if the judge had erred in law  at
    [22], the error was not material, given the judge's  reasons  at  [10]-
    [16]. The appellant's appeal is therefore dismissed.




    Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.


[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Gill    Date: 6 December 2016
