
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/05912/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 November 2016                  |On 18 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                             MRS NURA HASSAN NUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Chopra, Solicitor instructed by Cohesion Legal
                    Services Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case, Mrs Nura Hassan Nur is a citizen of Somalia
    born on 29 January 1983.  She applied for entry clearance to settle  as
    the partner of Mr Maxamed Dahir under Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  That application was refused by an Entry Clearance  Officer  in
    Pretoria on 25 February 2015 and upheld in the Entry Clearance  Manager
    review of 22 August 2015.  The appellant appealed that decision.  In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 18 April 2016 Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Pickup dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  immigration
    and human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed with permission on the grounds that:

      1) It is arguable that the judge erred in finding that  there  was  no
         unlawful failure by the Secretary of State to  exercise  discretion
         to request original copies of the bank statements and wage slips;

      2) That it was arguable that the judge made a material error  of  fact
         in respect of the wage slips not covering a period of a minimum  of
         six months.

 3. Permission to appeal was not granted on the remaining grounds and these
    were not pursued by Mr Chopra at the appeal before me and  therefore  I
    do not consider them any further.

Error of law consideration

 4. Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pickup at [16]  of  his  decision  and
    reasons properly considered that there is discretion under paragraph  D
    of Appendix FM-SE of the Immigration Rules for the Secretary  of  State
    to consider evidence  submitted  after  the  application  and  to  seek
    further evidence from an applicant where a document has been  submitted
    in the wrong format such as a copy rather than  an  original.   However
    the judge concluded that the provisions also explain that they will not
    seek such further evidence if it appears that the application  will  be
    refused for other reasons and the judge went on to find: "as it was  in
    this case".  In the circumstances the judge did not find that there was
    an unlawful failure to  exercise  a  discretion  on  the  part  of  the
    Secretary of State.

 5. Paragraph D of Appendix FM-SE reads as follows:

         "D(a)    In deciding an  application  in  relation  to  which  this
              Appendix states the specified documents must be provided, the
              Entry Clearance Officer or Secretary of State (the  decision-
              maker) will consider documents that have been submitted  with
              the application, and will only consider  documents  submitted
              after the application where subparagraphs (b) or (e) applies.



         (b)  If the applicant:

              (i) has submitted:

                  (aa)      a  sequence  of  documents  and  some  of   the
                       documents in the sequence have been omitted (e.g.  if
                       one bank statement from the series is missing);

                  (bb)     a document in the wrong format (for example,  if
                       a letter is not on letterhead paper as specified); or

                  (cc)     a document that is a copy and  not  an  original
                       document; or

                  (dd)     a document which does not  contain  all  of  the
                       specified information; or

              (ii)     has not submitted a specified document,

              The  decision-maker  may  contact  the   applicant   or   his
              representative  in  writing  or  otherwise  and  request  the
              document(s)  or  the  correct   version(s).    The   material
              requested must be received....at the address specified in the
              request  within  a  reasonable  timescale  specified  in  the
              request.

         (c)  The decision-maker will not request documents where he or  she
              does not anticipate that addressing  the  error  of  omission
              referred to in sub-paragraph (b) will lead to a grant because
              the application will be refused for other reasons.

         .....".

 6. Although the judge was clearly correct in his summary of  the  relevant
    paragraph, including that the  decision-maker  will  not  request  such
    documents if he or she does not anticipate that addressing the error or
    omission will lead to a grant because the application will  be  refused
    for other reasons, the only  other  reason  that  the  application  was
    refused (other than the issue of the original  documents)  was  on  the
    basis that the appellant had failed to demonstrate  that  she  had  the
    relevant English language qualification.  However, at paragraphs [8] to
    [12] of his decision the judge Pickup found  that  the  respondent  had
    adduced insufficient evidence for the judge to  discount  or  discredit
    the submitted English language test certificate and therefore found for
    the appellant on this ground.

 7. Given that the judge had found that the respondent had  been  incorrect
    in the refusal of the appellant's application under paragraph E-ECP.4.2
    in relation to paragraph EC-P.1.1(d) of Appendix FM of the  Immigration
    Rules (E-ECP.4.1) I am satisfied therefore that in these  circumstances
    the decision-maker was in error in not considering whether to  exercise
    the discretion to request further documents.

 8. I am satisfied that the respondent did unlawfully fail to exercise that
    discretion in the circumstances where the refusal by the ECO under  the
    English language requirement has been found to be incorrect.  In  these
    circumstances I am satisfied that there is a material error of law.

 9. In relation to the remaining  ground  that  the  judge  considered,  at
    paragraph [17] following the submissions of the Presenting Officer that
    there was not a full six month bundle  of  wage  slips,  I  accept  the
    submissions of the appellant's representative that this was a  material
    error of fact as the bundle before me clearly shows a full  six  months
    from 3 May 2014 to 28 November 2014 was provided.  Mr Avery viewed this
    information and did not specifically dispute this.

Conclusion

10. I am satisfied that the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    contains an error of law such that the decision should be set aside.  I
    substitute  my  decision  remaking  the  decision  and   allowing   the
    appellant's appeal to the extent that it is remitted to the  respondent
    to make a lawful exercise  of  the  discretion  that  is  open  to  the
    respondent under Appendix FM-SE.

No anonymity direction was sought or is necessary in this case.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee application was received and no fee award is therefore made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
