
[pic]
IAC-CH-AP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05002/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th July 2015                    |On 24th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                sajid kamran
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Latif, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision to refuse entry clearance to the UK as the spouse of
    a settled person.

 2. The grounds assert that the judge's Article 8 consideration is  flawed.
    In elucidating the grounds with  the  Appellant's  representative  they
    break down into six discrete components set out at paragraph 9  of  the
    grounds under sub-paragraphs (a) to (e)/(f).

 3. Ground 1 is that the judge is in error when at paragraph 34 he states:

      i) "I am bound to take into account, as a  factor  in  favour  of  the
         Respondent,  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  does  not  meet   the
         Immigration Rules."

 4. I find no error in that regard.  The judge correctly self-directs  that
    the public interest is in the maintenance of the Immigration Rules  and
    accordingly in the context of an argument where the  Respondent's  case
    is asserted to be the public interest, the failure to meet the Rules is
    bound to count against the Appellant.   The  judge  has  not  made  the
    matter determinative but puts it in the scales on the Respondent's side
    and makes no material error of law in doing so.

 5. Ground 2 challenges  paragraph 45 where the judge writes:

         "Whilst I accept that it is in the children's  best  interests  for
         the Appellant to join them in the UK, his apparent lack of  urgency
         in applying for entry does not suggest that it is overwhelmingly in
         their interests that he should come as quickly as possible."

    The grounds argue that any delay in applying to join the children  does
    not make it "not being in the  children's  best  interests  that  their
    father should be granted entry clearance."  With respect to the  writer
    of the grounds this is not what the judge  is  saying.   The  judge  is
    plainly commenting that the delay in  making  the  application  reveals
    that the Appellant himself did not find that  the  children's  position
    was such that he needed to make his application as soon as he could. It
    is the evidence of Appellant's own assessment that is being considered.

 6. The ground fails to read  the  decision  as  a  whole  which  makes  it
    perfectly clear that the judge did find that it was in  the  children's
    best interest to have their father  living  with  them  in  the  United
    Kingdom. The disagreement in the grounds is really with the  assessment
    of the weight to be attached to the best interests of the  children  in
    the over all  balancing  exercise.  In  that  context  the  history  of
    separation was a factor that the judge was able to take  into  account,
    including the reasons for it.

 7. Ground 3 is in similar vein to ground 2  above  and  asserts  that  the
    judge has held the delay in making  an  entry  clearance  "against  the
    children" and in effect "blamed" the children for it. I find that  that
    is a mischaracterisation of the inference drawn from the delay for  the
    reasons that I have set out above.

 8. Ground 4 asserts that Section 117B(3) of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 has been wrongly applied because the provisions  at
    117B(6) are the more relevant.

 9. I set out Section 117B in full as follows:

         "117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable  in  all
             cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls  is  in  the
             public interest.

         (2)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are able to speak  English,  because  persons  who  can  speak
             English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in  the  public  interest,  and  in  particular  in  the
             interests of the economic well-being of  the  United  Kingdom,
             that persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
             are financially independent, because such persons -

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)   are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to -

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

             that is established by a person at a time when the  person  is
             in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
             a person at a time when the  person's  immigration  status  is
             precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

10. Contrary  to  the  grounds,  Section  117B(6)  does  not  restrict  the
    operation of Section 117B(2) and (3)  in  the  context  of  immigration
    decisions not involving removal. A plain reading of the provision makes
    it clear that sub-paragraph (6) concerns removal and has no application
    in this, an entry clearance case. There is no authority to suggest that
    the position should be automatically mirrored, by inference, to an  out
    of country case. Parliament has restricted the position in  117B96)  to
    the in-country position. There is nothing untoward  in  that  position.
    the differences in the character and quality of family life enjoyed  in
    in-country  and out of country cases has been marked  in  jurisprudence
    time and  again.   The  Razgar  principles  adequately  provide  for  a
    consideration of all relevant factors where Article 8 is engaged.

11. Ground 5 asserts that having concluded that the children  would  remain
    in the United Kingdom, and having concluded that  it  is  in  the  best
    interests of the children to have the Appellant living with  them,  the
    decision to dismiss the appeal runs  contrary  to  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 concerning  the  need  to
    safeguard and promote the welfare of children who  are  in  the  United
    Kingdom.

12. The best interests of the children  are  a  primary  not  determinative
    factor and the decision makes it clear  that  although,  as  a  general
    proposition, children are usually better off living with both  parents,
    the judge has not found anything in the children's  circumstances  that
    outweighs  the  public  interest  in  the  maintenance   of   effective
    immigration control.  That position is clearly set out at paragraph 46:



         "The fact that it is in the interests  of  the  children  that  the
         Appellant should be afforded entry does not mean that  the  refusal
         of the application is necessarily disproportionate.  Other  factors
         might outweigh their interests."

    In the same paragraph the judge refers to the fact that  the  Appellant
    does not meet the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules,  the
    requirement that directly relates  to  the  question  of  the  economic
    wellbeing of the United Kingdom which is the legitimate  aim  to  which
    the maintenance of  effective  immigration  control  is  aimed  in  the
    context of the permissible derogation from Article 8 family and private
    life rights set out at Article 8.  The judge however looks  wider  than
    the financial requirements of the Immigration Rule and reaches his  own
    conclusion that the Appellant has not established  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the Appellant  is  "financially  independent".   The
    judge properly takes account of the fact  that  the  Appellant  is  not
    currently supporting his wife and children in the  United  Kingdom  and
    they are on benefits. The judge notes that the third party  support  on
    offer is not assisted by  the  vagueness  of  its  terms  and  lack  of
    enforceability.  On  the  facts  the  brother  is  not  supporting  the
    Appellant's wife. The judge finds that in any event third party support
    is not consistent with the concept of financial independence.

13. The judge recognises that when balancing  the  Article  8  factors  the
    particular weight to be given to the position of the  children  is  not
    fixed. The judge has set out  the  ages  of  the  children  which  vary
    between 11 and 20. He bears in mind that the children have  effectively
    been without their father's presence for a number of years, all  having
    been born here, none of whom have lived with their father beyond  brief
    visits to Pakistan and the Appellant's single brief visit  to  the  UK.
    The judge finds  there  is  nothing  particularly  unusual    in  their
    position.  The judge finds that there is no  evidence  that  they  have
    been adversely affected.  The judge considers the  evidence  concerning
    the health of the Appellant's wife, bearing in mind her needs  and  how
    she is currently able to meet them, and concludes that  the  factor  of
    the Appellant's non-availability to assist the Sponsor does  not  place
    any unreasonable burden on the children.

14. At paragraph 50 the judge concludes, consistently  with  jurisprudence,
    that there is nothing in the children's circumstances which operates to
    show that they are determinative of the proportionality  exercise,  nor
    that even when taken into account with all the other factors, they  are
    sufficient to draw the balance in favour of the Appellant.

15. In short the judge found that  the  Appellant  failed  to  satisfy  the
    burden  on  him  to  establish  a  factual  matrix  which  supported  a
    conclusion that the best interests of the children carried  the  weight
    argued for by Mr Latif.

16. Ground 6 asserts that the judge failed to take into account that  as  a
    result of the loss of the Appellant's appeal the Appellant's  wife  may
    choose to go to live with the Appellant in Pakistan and that her  minor
    children would therefore in  effect  be  forced  to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom to be with them so that the issue of removal at S117B(6) had  a
    further relevance.

17. That ground reveals no error in the judge's decision.   It  was  not  a
    factor that was prayed in aid of the Appellant's case and in any  event
    is not only speculative, but exceeds the evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    wife that in the event of refusal she would not return to  Pakistan  to
    live with the Appellant.

18. Mr Tarlow's submission,  to  the  point  that  the  decision  is  well-
    balanced, reflecting positive as well as negative  points,  and  paying
    due regard to the children's circumstances, including paying regard  to
    their own wishes  for  the  Appellant  to  join  them,  with  a  proper
    assessment of their best interests is well made.

19. In short I find no material  error  of  law  in  the  judge's  decision
    dismissing the Appellant's appeal and it stands.

20. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
