
[pic]



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/05549/2015
     OA/05551/2015
     OA/05552/2015
     OA/05556/2015
                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 2 May 2017                       |On 10 May 2017                          |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                              Mrs Nusrat Zahid
                               Mr Waseem Zahid
                               Mr Ahsan Zahid
                                    [H Z]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr D Chuckooa, Solicitor from Bridgewater Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is are appeals by the four Appellants against a  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  27
    September 2016, in which he dismissed their  appeals  on  all  grounds.
    The first Appellant is the mother  of  the  other  three  and  all  are
    citizens of Pakistan.

 2. By applications made on 31 October 2014  the  Appellants  sought  entry
    clearance to join the Sponsor (Mr Zahid), who is  the  husband  of  the
    first Appellant and the father of the other  three.   The  applications
    were refused by the Respondent on 17  February  2015.   These  refusals
    were based on an alleged failure to meet the financial requirements  of
    Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules, with reference to  the  specified
    evidence  required  by  Appendix  FM-SE.   In  addition,  the  evidence
    relating to accommodation was said to be inadequate and there  was,  it
    was said, an absence of clear evidence relating to the English language
    requirements.

 3. The Appellants duly appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  At this stage
    they were not legally represented.

The judge's decision

 4. The Appellants had requested and paid the requisite fees  for  an  oral
    hearing of their appeals.  Thus on 5 September 2016  the  appeals  came
    before the judge as oral  hearings.   A  Presenting  Officer  attended.
    There was, however, no attendance by  Mr  Zahid.   Just  prior  to  the
    hearing Mr Zahid had sent in a bundle of evidence to  be  relied  upon,
    together with a covering letter.  The documents were  received  at  the
    hearing centre on 1 September 2016.  On the second page of the covering
    letter Mr Zahid stated: "I am getting treatment of heart and unable  to
    attend the honourable court and requesting you to consider my matter on
    paper hearing and obliged."

 5. In light of this the judge quite properly considered whether or not  he
    should proceed with the hearing in the  absence  of  the  Sponsor  (see
    paragraphs 34 and 35).  The judge  concluded  that  he  would  proceed.
    This was on the basis that:

 a) the Sponsor had not asked for an adjournment in his covering letter;

 b) the bundle of evidence had been served late in the day;

 c) it was right that the Respondent, who was represented at  the  hearing,
    should have the opportunity to consider the evidence and make any  oral
    submissions thereon.

 6. The judge then moved on to  consider  the  substance  of  the  appeals,
    namely whether or not the Appellants could satisfy the requirements  of
    Appendix FM.  The judge was, it is right to say, unimpressed  with  the
    evidence relating to the Sponsor's finances.

 7. He was similarly unimpressed with the tenancy agreement provided by the
    Sponsor, and found that it was insufficient to show that there would be
    adequate accommodation for the Appellants.  As  to  the  issue  of  the
    English language requirements, the judge declined to  make  a  specific
    finding on this issue.

 8. He then goes on to consider whether an  Article  8  claim  outside  the
    context of the Rules  could  succeed.   At  paragraphs  40  onwards  he
    concludes that there were no compelling  circumstances  in  this  case,
    that there was no right for people to choose where they would reside as
    a family, and that there was no particular reason as to why the Sponsor
    could not return to Pakistan to live with his family there. He also had
    regard to the fact that the Rules had not been satisfied.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 9. The grounds of appeal appear  to  assert  that  the  judge  acted  with
    procedural unfairness in proceeding in  the  absence  of  the  Sponsor.
    They go on to assert that both the Respondent and the judge were  wrong
    to have rejected the evidence  provided  in  respect  of  the  relevant
    requirements of the Rules.

10. By a decision dated  16  March  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Page
    granted  permission  essentially  on  the  basis  that  there  may   be
    procedural  unfairness  and  that  the  Sponsor  should  be  given  the
    opportunity to argue the point at an  oral  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

The hearing before me

11. Subsequent to the grant of  permission  the  Appellant  obtained  legal
    representation.  Mr Chuckooa sought to rely on the  grounds  of  appeal
    and maintained the argument that the judge was wrong to have  proceeded
    to hear submissions from the Presenting Officer.   In  respect  of  the
    substance of the cases Mr Chuckooa pointed out that there were payslips
    and an employer's letter from the Sponsor before the judge.

12. Mr Whitwell submitted that there were clearly no material errors of law
    in the judge's decision.

Decision on error of law

13. As I announced to the parties at the hearing, I conclude that there are
    no material errors of law either on procedural or  substantive  issues.
    My reasons for this conclusion are as follows.

14. In respect of the procedural unfairness point, the  Appellant,  through
    the Sponsor,  had  sought  an  oral  hearing  and,  as  has  been  said
    previously, paid the requisite fee.  Thus the matters came  before  the
    judge as oral hearings.  The Sponsor did not attend.  Instead  he  sent
    in a bundle of evidence and the covering letter  referred  to  earlier.
    The covering letter asserted that due to vague medical  conditions  the
    Sponsor was unable to attend.  He was requesting  that  the  matter  be
    considered on the papers.

15. What is quite clear from the letter is that he was not asking  for  the
    case to be adjourned.  There was not even an implication  that  such  a
    course of action was being requested.  An individual does not  have  to
    have any legal knowledge to be able to ask the Tribunal to put  a  case
    off to another date if for whatever reason they are unable to attend  a
    hearing.

16. In this case the Appellant said in terms that he wished the  matter  to
    be considered in his absence.  He may describe it as  being  considered
    "on the papers", but of course the matter was listed for oral  hearing.
    In light of this and the late service of the  evidence  the  judge  was
    fully entitled  when  considering  whether  it  was  fair  and  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed and that the  Presenting  Officer,  who
    was of course present, should have time to consider  the  evidence  and
    then make any relevant submissions thereon.  Indeed, for the judge  not
    to have done so would arguably have been unfair to the Respondent.  The
    need to ensure fairness cuts both ways.

17. On this basis there is no merit whatsoever in the  assertion  that  the
    judge acted unfairly.

18. Turning  to  the  merits  of  the  case,  the  judge  clearly  had  the
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE in mind, as he did the evidence that had
    been submitted late in the day by  the  Sponsor.   He  appreciated  the
    practical difficulties faced by individuals who are paid  in  cash  for
    their employment, but clearly stated at paragraph 36  that  nonetheless
    income had to be proved, and that the manner of proving it was  defined
    by the specified evidence set out in Appendix FM-SE.  The judge was not
    satisfied that this had been the case.

19. It is quite apparent from the papers before the  judge  and  everything
    that I have seen on file that at no stage, either with the application,
    in  the  bundle  of  evidence  or  even  subsequently,  have  any  bank
    statements for the Sponsor  ever  been  submitted  in  support  of  the
    application.  The provision of bank statements covering  the  requisite
    period of six months prior to the making of the application is  one  of
    the three basic sources of specified evidence set out in  Appendix  FM-
    SE.  The simple fact that this evidence was entirely absent meant  that
    the appeals, insofar as they related to satisfaction of the Rules, were
    bound to fail.  There was no error by the judge in his consideration of
    the financial requirements.

20. Furthermore, the judge was fully entitled to conclude that the  tenancy
    agreement  in  and  of  itself  was  insufficient  to  show  that   the
    accommodation was adequate,  particularly  where  three  children  were
    concerned.  There was no surveyor's report or  any  other  evidence  to
    indicate the nature of the other  rooms,  who  in  fact  lived  at  the
    property, and such like.  There are no errors here.

21. For the sake  of  completeness,  although  the  judge's  conclusion  in
    respect of Article 8 outside the context of  the  Rules  has  not  been
    specifically challenged, I see no errors  here  whatsoever.  The  judge
    rightly considered the issue but found, as he was  probably  bound  to,
    that there were no compelling circumstances here.  In  particular,  the
    fact that the Appellant did not meet significant aspects of  the  Rules
    themselves (i.e. financial requirements and adequacy of  accommodation)
    were clearly factors that weighed heavily against the Appellants.

22. No issue of evidential flexibility ever arose from these cases.  It has
    never been relied on, and more importantly, was never going  to  assist
    the Appellants because of the complete absence of bank statements.

23. In light of the above the decision of the judge stands.

24. I would add this one further comment.  It is open to the Appellants  to
    make fresh applications in which they may seek to adduce  all  relevant
    evidence, perhaps with the assistance of legal representation.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The Appellants' appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                                  Date: 9 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor





TO THE RESPONDENT

FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeals and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date: 9 May 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
