
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05613/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25th June 2015                        |On 29th June 2015                 |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                               KELMAND SOKOLI
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr.  M. Azmi, counsel, instructed by Direct
Immigration Solutions


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 History of Appeal

   1. The Respondent, who was born on 28th March  1988,  is  a  national  of
      Albania. He entered the United Kingdom illegally on 1st  October  2008
      and worked here and was removed at public expense on 7th  March  2010.
      He then re-entered illegally on 23rd December 2010 and was once  again
      removed on 23rd December 2011. He lived with Gennifer Yvonne  Solomon,
      who is a British citizen, between September and December 2011 and  was
      arrested on 8th December 2011, when they attempted to marry.

   2. On 13th April 2012 the Appellant applied for entry clearance in  order
      to return to the United Kingdom to marry  Gennifer  Solomon  but  this
      application was refused on 30th July 2012. This decision was  reviewed
      by an Entry Clearance Manager on  31st  October  2012.  However,  this
      decision was subsequently withdrawn on 18th February 2013.

   3. He made a further application for entry  clearance  on  14th  February
      2014 in order to return  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  marry  Gennifer
      Solomon but this application was  refused  on  4th  April  2014  under
      paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules. The Entry Clearance Office
      also asserted that he was not satisfied  that  his  relationship  with
      Gennifer Solomon was genuine or that he was genuinely seeking entry in
      order to marry her and live with her on a permanent basis.

   4. The Appellant appealed and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
      Judge A. W. Khan on 16th December 2014.  In  a  decision  and  reasons
      promulgated on 7th January 2015, he allowed the appeal  on  the  basis
      that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with the law.  He
      did so because he found that the decision to  refuse  the  Appellant's
      entry clearance under paragraph 320(11) had not been referred  by  the
      Entry Clearance Officer to the Entry Clearance Manager, as required by
      Section RFL 7.5. In  addition,  he  found  that  the  entry  clearance
      officer had failed to make a decision in relation to  the  Appellant's
      initial application.

   5. The Respondent sought permission to appeal on 14th  January  2015  and
      permission to appeal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin,
      sitting as a judge of the First-tier Tribunal on 16th  February  2015.
      She found that it was arguable that the Judge  erred  in  finding  the
      decision unlawful without evidence that the  decision  to  refuse  the
      spouse settlement application under paragraph  320(11)  had  not  been
      referred to an Entry Clearance Manager.

   6. The initial error of law hearing set down to be heard on 29th May 2015
      had to be adjourned due to a bereavement in counsel's family.

   7. At the error of law hearing, Mr. Avery asserted  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge had erred in law as there was no  evidence  to  confirm
      that the decision had not been reviewed by an entry clearance manager.
      Counsel for the Appellant also sought to rely on the  unreported  case
      of the Upper Tribunal  where  a  decision  was  found  to  be  not  in
      accordance with the law because there was no entry  clearance  manager
      authorisation.

 Error of Law Hearing

   8. There was no dispute between the  parties  that  paragraph  RFL7.5  of
      internal guidance provided to entry clearance staff states that  entry
      clearance officers   will  need  to  obtain  entry  clearance  manager
      authorisation for all refusals under  paragraph  320(11).   There  was
      also no dispute that in  Sultana  and  Others  (rules:  waiver/further
      enquiry; discretion) [2014] UKUT 00540 (IAC) the Upper  Tribunal  held
      that "a failure to recognise, or give effect to, an IDI may render  an
      immigration decision not in accordance with the law" and that the same
      should apply in relation  to  guidance  provided  to  entry  clearance
      staff.

   9. The Respondent had appealed on the basis that there was no evidence to
      show that the decision had not been referred  to  an  entry  clearance
      manager. However, there was no evidence before the Judge from an entry
      clearance manager  and  the  inclusion  of  such  documents  in  entry
      clearance cases is standard practice. There was also no mention in the
      record of proceedings or the decision and reasons of the  Home  Office
      Presenting Officer asserting that any such letter  was  in  existence.
      As a consequence, I do not find that the First-tier Judge did  err  in
      law on this basis.

  10. Furthermore, Mr. Avery informed me at the hearing that he had not been
      able to obtain a similar document in relation to  the  decision  under
      appeal and could not disclose any other information as to whether  the
      decision had been reviewed by an entry clearance manager.  I have also
      taken into account the fact that my record of proceedings for 29th May
      2015 notes that Mr. Melvin, the Home Office Presenting Officer on that
      occasion, told me that there was no entry clearance  manager's  letter
      in relation to this application as the  entry  clearance  manager  had
      relied on the letter produced by an  entry  clearance  manager,  dated
      31st October 2012.

  11. It is also clear from the  documents  on  the  court  file,  that  the
      Respondent has yet to make a fresh decision on the Appellant's initial
      application and that when doing so the Appellant will be  entitled  to
      rely on paragraph 320(7C) which was still in force at the date of that
      application.

  12. I do not find that the failure to reach a decision on that application
      rendered the Respondent's later decision unlawful but would hope  that
      when the Respondent reviews the decision on this later application,  a
      decision is also made on the earlier application.

  13. For all of these reasons I am satisfied that there  were  no  material
      errors of law in the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and findings
      and that it should stand.

 Conclusions:

 1.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and findings did not  include
      material errors of law.

   2. The decision that the Respondent's decision was not in accordance with
      the law stands and the Appellant's applications  remain  undecided  by
      the Respondent.



     Date 26th June 2015
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
