
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/05252/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 12 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER


                                   Between

                                     THN
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER -BANGKOK
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jacobs of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

      1. The Respondent notified the Appellant of her decision to refuse  to
         grant leave to enter as a dependent relative of her  sister  on  20
         March 2014. Her appeal against that decision was dismissed by First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Boyes ("the Judge") following a hearing  on  26
         March 2015. This is an appeal against that decision.

      2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order preserving  that
         already in force. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs
         otherwise,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  or  any   form   of
         publication thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the
         original appellants. This direction applies  to  all  parties.  Any
         failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt
         of court proceedings. I do so in order to preserve the anonymity of
         the Appellant who is a child.

      3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal
         (20 August 2015) on the ground that;
         "1.      An arguable error of law has arisen  in  relation  to  the
             extent of the Judge's reasoning for the conclusion set out  at
             paragraph 28 of the decision that he was  not  persuaded  that
             the Appellant would be put out on the street if  she  was  not
             brought to the UK by the Sponsor.
          2. The Judge has set out a number of findings under  the  heading
             of "My Conclusions" but states at paragraph 28  in  connection
             with not being persuaded that the Appellant would be  put  out
             in the street that this was particularly so  bearing  in  mind
             that on the Sponsor's own account (sic - it  should  be  "she"
             instead of "he") he had been sending quite considerable  funds
             to Vietnam for the Appellant's benefit.
          3. At paragraph 23 the Judge states that he does not say that  it
             is implausible that she did not know  (sic  -  it  should  say
             "about the existence" instead of  "in  the  context")  in  the
             context of her sister. This was  the  first  issue  the  Judge
             considered at paragraph 23 in  relation  to  the  question  of
             whether serious and compelling family or other  considerations
             had been established.
          4. At paragraph 24 the  Judge  has  referred  to  inconsistencies
             which raised questions regarding the  overall  reliability  of
             the evidence both  witness  and  documentary.  This  was  with
             reference to the dates referred to. One set of dates was  late
             2011/early 2102 and the other December 2012.
          5. At  paragraph  25  the  Judge  refers  to  the  raising  of  a
             possibility that the relationship between the Appellant (sic -
             it should say "and NGD") is actually one of niece  and  uncle.
             At paragraph 26 the Judge refers to various other issues being
             raised by the Respondent regarding the documents but the Judge
             considered  these  could  have  been  caused  by   errors   in
             translation or were ambiguous in their wording so he placed no
             weight upon them.
          6. At paragraph 27 the Judge accepted that the Sponsor  had  been
             sending funds to Vietnam for the benefit of the Appellant.  He
             accepted there was communication by Skype and telephone.
          7. The extent  of  the  Judge's  reasoning  in  relation  to  his
             credibility findings set against the context of  paragraph  28
             is arguably insufficient. This has a bearing on the extent  of
             the consideration as to whether there would  be  a  breach  of
             Article 8."

Respondent's reply

      4. The Respondent contends (15 September 2015) that  the  grounds  are
         nothing more than a disagreement with the outcome. The findings are
         sustainable on the  evidence  and  the  reasons  given  are  sound.
         Particularly noteworthy is the finding that the  address  at  which
         the Appellant resides with her uncle is the same  address  as  that
         known for the Appellant's mother in 1991 and 2002.

Discussion

    Ground 1 - inadequate  reasons  for  finding  the  Appellant  would  be
    rendered homeless

      5. The relevant part of paragraph 297 of the Statement of  Changes  in
         Immigration Rules HC395 ("the rules") states that
         "The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave to
         enter the United Kingdom as the child of...a relative  present  and
         settled...in the United Kingdom are that he
          i) is seeking leave to enter to ... join a ... relative in one of
             the following circumstances ...
             (f) ... a relative  is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                  Kingdom ... and there are serious and compelling family or
                  other considerations which make  exclusion  of  the  child
                  undesirable ..."

      6. The Judge recorded that [23] "... it seems to  me  surprising  that
         the Sponsor did not know that her mother was pregnant or  that  she
         gave birth to a baby even though she was living  with  her.  Whilst
         she was a child, she was 11 years old at the time so was old enough
         to have an awareness of what was happening around her. I do not say
         that it is implausible that she did not know. However, when this is
         considered along with the other concerns that arise from the  other
         evidence before me, I am not persuaded that the Sponsor only became
         aware that she had a sister in 2010. I think it  more  likely  that
         she has been aware of her sister's existence all along...".

      7. The Judge stated that [25] NGD  "...who  has  been  acting  as  her
         guardian, is referred to as her uncle, she as his niece, and it  is
         said that he was a very close friend  of  her  father  but  is  not
         related...the address specified for" NGD "is the same one  recorded
         as the mother's address on both the Appellant's and Sponsor's birth
         certificates, but is not the address recorded for the father.  This
         does raise  the  possibility  that  the  relationship  between  the
         Appellant (sic - should say "and NGD") is actually one of niece and
         uncle, bearing in mind that it does  appear  that  the  Appellant's
         mother is also living at that address both in 1991 and 2002."

      8. The Judge stated [27] "I accept...that the Sponsor has been sending
         funds to Vietnam for the benefit of the Appellant,  although  I  do
         not discount the possibility that some of those funds are  for  one
         or more other family members.  I  accept  that  the  Appellant  and
         Sponsor communicate with one another by  Skype  and  telephone  and
         that the Sponsor has an  interest  in  the  Appellant's  wellbeing,
         welfare and education. However, there is nothing unusual about that
         sort of relationship existing between younger and older siblings."

      9. The Judge stated [28] "... I am  not  persuaded  by  the  Sponsor's
         evidence that the Appellant is not  being  properly  cared  for  at
         present. As I am not persuaded that the  relationship  between  the
         Appellant and" NGD "is as claimed, I  am  not  persuaded  that  the
         Appellant will be put out on the  street  by  him  if  she  is  not
         brought to the UK by the Sponsor. This is particularly  so  bearing
         in mind that, on the Sponsor's own account  she  has  been  sending
         quite considerable funds to Vietnam for the Appellant's benefit."

     10. It was submitted by Mr Jacobs that evidence had been given  (and  I
         note here that I checked the record of proceedings for the  wording
         which I record here) that NGD lives with his wife  and  2  children
         and made very firm statements he will not look after the  Appellant
         any more. He cannot emotionally support her. The house is  not  big
         enough. He promised her father he will keep her in the short  term.
         Mr Jacobs submitted that the only reason he  has  not  evicted  the
         Appellant is due to the money sent by the  Sponsor.  There  is  not
         enough money or space. He has threatened to throw her  out  but  is
         waiting for  the  appeal.  The  Judge  has  speculated  as  to  the
         whereabouts of the Sponsors mother. There is no  finding  regarding
         whether she is in Vietnam or not.

     11. Mr Nath submitted that the findings were open to the Judge and must
         be read cumulatively.  The Judge dealt with the  discrepancies  and
         credibility issues. There is no letter from NGD to confirm he  will
         evict the Appellant. The financial support is the  reason  she  has
         been there.  It was open to the Judge to find that the Sponsor  has
         not been transparent.

     12. I agree with Mr Nath that the whole of the findings need to be read
         together. The Judge was  entitled  to  make  the  findings  he  did
         regarding the credibility of the Sponsor. In addition, there was  a
         complete lack of direct evidence from NGD of his intentions despite
         the Sponsor being in touch with him. I bear in  mind  the  multiple
         methods by which evidence from abroad  can  be  obtained,  and  the
         guidance in TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40 that  where  (as
         here) there were circumstances in which evidence corroborating  the
         Appellant's (and in my  judgment  Sponsor's)  evidence  was  easily
         obtainable, the lack of it affects the assessment  of  credibility.
         It is not a case of evidence being sought from "a persecutory home"
         as in asylum cases, but a case where  the  Sponsor  is  in  regular
         touch with an adult in Vietnam, and indeed I was told  is  visiting
         Vietnam in November.

     13. Given the dearth of evidence from Vietnam, I am satisfied that  the
         Judge was entitled to make all the findings  he  did.  The  grounds
         amount to nothing more than a challenge to those findings.

     14. In my judgement there was therefore no material error of law in the
         decision regarding adequacy of reasons.

    Ground 2 - inadequate consideration as to  whether  there  would  be  a
    breach of Article 8 ECHR

     15. The Judge stated [42] "I am  not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant's
         background and upbringing is as presented to the Respondent and the
         Tribunal... I am not satisfied that" the Sponsor "has no  knowledge
         at all of her mother's whereabouts. I would go so  far  as  to  say
         that even if it is the case that the Appellant's mother  has  taken
         only  limited  responsibility  for  her  upbringing,  it  is  still
         necessary for it to be demonstrated that every effort has been made
         to establish  the  Appellant's  mother's  whereabouts  and  ...  to
         confirm that she consents  to  the  Appellant  being  removed  from
         Vietnam and being brought permanently to the UK to settle, as  well
         as providing a proper  detailed  account  of  her  involvement,  or
         otherwise, in the Appellant's upbringing."

     16. The Judge stated [43] "Whilst any such evidence is  being  obtained
         to clarify the position, contact can continue between the Appellant
         and Sponsor as it has before, (sic - should be "and")  the  Sponsor
         can  continue  to  send  funds.  As  a  further   entry   clearance
         application can then be made the decision does not  result  in  the
         Appellant and Sponsor being permanently separated."

     17. Mr Jacobs submitted that there had been no assessment  carried  out
         pursuant to s55 of the Borders,  Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act
         2009.

     18. Mr Nath submitted that the Article 8 assessment was  thorough,  and
         clear findings had been made regarding  s117  of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

     19. The Judge stated [45] that he had considered and  applied  s55  and
         s117.  The  Judge  plainly  found  that  the  Appellant  is   being
         adequately housed and provided for, including financially, and that
         there was no evidence that the Appellant's mother consented to  her
         removal from Vietnam. The findings the Judge made  were  sufficient
         to establish that no "serious and compelling"  circumstances  exist
         within the rules. Those findings were also open to him  within  the
         Article 8 proportionality balancing exercise which were added to in
         detail [42 and 43] and were evidence based, and, in  my  judgement,
         more than adequate to establish that the relevant assessments  were
         undertaken.

     20. In my judgement  there  was  therefore  adequate  consideration  of
         Article 8 and no material error of law in the decision.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

    I do not set aside the decision.


Signed:
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
9 October 2015

