
IAC-FH-AR-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05661/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke-on-Trent              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 April 2015                     |On 12 May 2015                       |
|Prepared 10 April 2015               |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                ECO PRETORIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         SAMANTHA HAZVINEI CHINYANI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Royston, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  ECO  and  the
    Respondent is referred as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of  Zimbabwe,  date  of  birth  20  May  1993,
    appealed against the ECO's decision, dated 14 March 2014, to refuse  an
    application for family reunion with reference to paragraph 319V of  the
    Immigration Rules HC 395 as amended.

3.   The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Shanahan  (the  judge)
    who on 14 January 2015 allowed the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds, it
    being clear that the Claimant did not  succeed  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.

4.   Permission to appeal that decision was  given  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Manuell, (Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge)  on  24  February
    2015.

5.   A Rule 24 response was lodged by Mr O'Ryan, Counsel for  the  Claimant,
    who appeared before the judge, but he was unable to attend and provided
    for the purposes of the hearing before me a copy of  his  note  of  the
    hearing before the judge.  Mr  Royston  provided  a  skeleton  argument
    which was consistent with the grounds previously settled by Mr  O'Ryan.



6.   At the hearing Mr McVeety indicated that he was not pursuing the  third
    ground of appeal raised  by  the  ECO,  namely  the  issue  of  whether
    consideration had not been given to the reasonableness of expecting the
    Sponsor to move back to Zimbabwe; bearing in  mind  the  Sponsor  is  a
    refugee.

7.   Accordingly the principal issue remained:- whether  or  not  the  judge
    had properly considered proportionality and, in  doing  so,  had  taken
    into account considerations expressed in Sections 117A and 117B of  the
    NIAA 2002 amended by the Immigration Act 2014.

8.   In submissions Mr  McVeety  had  some  difficulty  given  the  way  the
    grounds had been  drafted in that it is clear from paragraph 15 of  the
    decision that the judge fully understood and carried out his assessment
    of the issue of Article 8 outside of  the  Rules  but  with  particular
    reference to first case law as expressed in Oludoyi [2014] UKUT 539, MM
    (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985, Nagre [2013] EWHC 720  and  AJ  (Angola)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1636 and in the circumstances understood  the  position
    that there was no threshold of exceptionality before  Article  8  as  a
    second stage could be considered outside of the Rules.   There  was  no
    issue that the Claimant could meet the requirements to remain under the
    Rules.

9.   It is therefore clear on a fair reading of the decision that the  judge
    did have regard to the first, second, third and fourth requirements  as
    identified in the  case  of  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27  and  plainly  as
    expressed was  reflect the sense in  which as Razgar is applied by  the
    case of Huang [2007] UKHL 11.  In those circumstances the question  was
    had the  judge  given  sufficient  reasons  which  were   adequate  and
    appropriate in law  to  show  that  the  assessment  of  the  balancing
    exercise had been  properly carried out.  In short, Mr  McVeety  argued
    that it had not and Mr  Royston  took  me  to  the  paragraphs  in  the
    decision which he said  clearly  reflected  the  fifth  question  being
    properly addressed by  the  judge  and  explicitly  taking  account  of
    Section 117A and Section 117B. Whatever  maybe  the  intention  of  the
    Secretary of State in making those amendments to  the  NIAA  2002,  the
    particular issues referred to are not exhaustive but do require further
    consideration.

10.  To this extent the issue of the Claimant's financial independence,  her
    English language abilities, the extent to which  either  she  would  or
    would not be a burden upon the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom
    and the issue of integration were matters which were addressed  by  the
    judge albeit with brevity in paragraph 22 of the decision.   The  judge
    also took into  account  the  wider  family  life  interests  that  the
    Claimant  held  in  the  United  Kingdom  and   the   significance   of
    interference, the public interest which was essentially  identified  as
    relating to maintaining effective immigration control.

11.  The belief of there needing to be an exceptional case to succeed  under
    Article 8 ECHR is not a threshold in LTE cases, as has been made plain,
    but essentially there will be few cases where events  demonstrate  that
    refusal is disproportionate.  In this case the judge found that it  was
    such a case. Accordingly it is not for me to interfere with  a  judge's
    properly reasoned decision simply  because  I  might  have  reached   a
    different  decision  or  disagreed  with  the  judge's  assessment   of
    proportionality.

12.  Accordingly, within the limitations of my consideration  of  errors  of
    law arising in such decisions I do not find the Original Tribunal  made
    any error of law.  The ECO's appeal is dismissed.

13.  No anonymity direction is made.

NOTICE OF DECISION

14.  The original Tribunal's decision stands.

    The appeal is dismissed



Signed        Date 6 May 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

