
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Numbers:
OA054112015

                                     and OA054142015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 15 June 2016                          |On 16 June 2016           |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL



                                   Between


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               (1) MADHIA [J]
                                  (2) [M A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Ahmed, Counsel
      (instructed by Berkshire Law Chamber)
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS









      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
           granted by me on 10 May 2016 against the determination of First-
           tier Tribunal Judge Powell who had allowed  on  Article  8  ECHR
           grounds only the Respondents' linked appeals seeking  settlement
           under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules as the spouse and son
           of British Citizen.  The decision and reasons was promulgated on
           1 December 2015. The appeals were determined on  the  papers  as
           had been requested.


      2.    The Respondents are nationals of Pakistan, mother and son. There
           was no dispute about their relationship to their  sponsor.   The
           issue was whether or not the specified evidence required to show
           that the financial requirements had been provided with the entry
           clearance application.   The  judge  declined  to  look  at  the
           Immigration Rules but went on to find that the sponsor had shown
           he had sufficient income and allowed the appeals under Article 8
           ECHR.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted because I  considered  that  it
           was arguable that the judge appeared to have  misunderstood  the
           scope of the appeals and had arguably failed to  apply  relevant
           law such as SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  His proportionality
           assessment was arguably insufficient.


      4.    Standard directions were made  by  the  tribunal.    A  rule  24
           notice in generic terms was filed on behalf of the Respondents


      Submissions


      5.    Mr Norton for the Appellant relied on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and grant.  In summary he argued that the judge had erred
           by looking beyond the issue of compliance with  Appendix  FM-SE.
           The proportionality assessment, such as it  was,  had  not  been
           open to the judge.


      6.    Mr Ahmed for the Respondents agreed that SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA
           Civ 387 applied.  There had been a positive finding  as  to  the
           sponsor's income.  Counsel submitted that  the  Article  8  ECHR
           assessment  had  been  correctly  performed.   Mr  Ahmed  sought
           permission to cross appeal out of time as to the adequacy of the
           judge's findings, as the Respondents had contended in a  witness
           statement placed before the judge that in  fact  Appendix  FM-SE
           had been complied with, yet this had not been dealt with in  the
           decision and reasons.


      7.    Although I was satisfied that the issue of compliance  had  also
           been raised by the Respondents in a witness statement, I refused
           permission to cross appeal out of time.  It was far too late  to
           raise such  an  obvious  point.   Theatre  was  no  satisfactory
           explanation for the delay by the Respondents.  It was  also  far
           from certain that the point would succeed.


      8.    Mr Norton wished to add nothing further by way of reply.




      No material error of law finding


      9.    The decision was unsatisfactory for the reasons identified by me
           when granting permission to appeal.   Uncharacteristically,  the
           judge's decision is not easy to follow.  It must  be  remembered
           that the Respondents had elected for a decision on  the  papers,
           which often makes a judge's tasks more difficult.


      10.   It seems from [14] of the decision that  the  judge  found  that
           Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules had not been met, since  he
           would not otherwise have had any reason to  consider  Article  8
           ECHR.  This could  have  been  set  out  with  somewhat  greater
           clarity.  But before proceeding to Article  8  ECHR,  the  judge
           ought to have reminded himself expressly of  SS  (Congo)  [2015]
           EWCA Civ  387,  and  asked  whether  there  was  any  compelling
           circumstances which he had identified showing why he  needed  to
           do so.  Had he asked that question, he would surely have had  to
           answer it in the negative, since all that the Respondents had to
           do  was  to  submit  fresh   and   compliant   entry   clearance
           applications.  It was proportionate to expect  that  from  them.
           As Lord Carnwath stated at [57] of Patel [2013] UKSC 72: "It  is
           important to remember that article 8 is not a general dispensing
           power." It is of obvious importance that  the  tribunal  ensures
           that documents placed before it by appellants have been verified
           by the Secretary of State, which is one of the  reasons  why  it
           was necessary for the specified evidence provisions set  out  in
           Appendix FM-SE to be introduced.


      11.   The judge identified no reasons why it was  not  reasonable  for
           the Respondents to be required to meet  the  specified  evidence
           requirements, as with all other applicants.  Nor did  the  judge
           identify any relevant evidential flexibility  issues  which  are
           catered for within Appendix FM-SE.   The judge was not  entitled
           on the facts found to go on to consider Article 8 ECHR (save  in
           the alternative), let alone to allow the appeals on the basis he
           did.  His decision is not sustainable. The Secretary of  State's
           appeal is allowed.


      DECISION


      The making of the previous  decision  did  involve  the  making  of  a
material error on  a  point  of  law.   The  decision  is  set  aside.   The
following   decision is substituted for it:

      The original appeals are dismissed

      Signed                                  Dated 16th June 2016




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell








      TO THE RESPONDENT:
      FEE AWARD


      The appeals have been dismissed and so there can be no fee award


      Signed                                  Dated 16th June 2016




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


