
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05015/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st March 2016                            |On 18th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                          (on behalf of ECO TIRANA)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               VALBONA VALTERI
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Ahmed instructed by IAS Birmingham


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Valbona Valteri is a citizen of Albania who was born  on  8th  December
    1988.  I will in this decision refer to her  as  "the  claimant".   She
    applied for entry clearance to come to the United Kingdom as the spouse
    of Alexsander Valteri, whom I will refer  to  as  "the  Sponsor".   The
    couple had married in Albania. This was in fact her  third  application
    of  this  nature.   The  Sponsor  holds  a  British  passport  but  the
    background to the grant of that passport was that he had arrived in the
    United Kingdom aged 16 and claimed to be from Prizren in  Kosovo,  part
    of the former Republic of Yugoslavia.  On that  basis  he  was  granted
    exceptional leave to remain and subsequently indefinite leave to remain
    (on 19th January 2004) and then naturalisation as a British citizen (on
    5th July 2005). He had been born in Albania and had throughout  been  a
    citizen of that country.

 2. The claimant's application was refused  on  1st  April  2014.   It  was
    accepted that she met the requirements set out in Appendix  FM  to  the
    Immigration Rules for  entry  clearance  as  a  partner,  save  in  one
    respect.  The ECO stated that she had submitted a false document (which
    would include a genuine document which had been  fraudulently  obtained
    or genuinely  issued  on  the  basis  of  false  information)  and  the
    application was refused with regard to paragraph S-EC.2.2  of  Appendix
    FM.  So far as Article 8 ECHR was concerned, it  was  stated  that  the
    Sponsor was of Albanian origin and there was  nothing  to  prevent  him
    returning to Albania to enjoy family life there. It  was  not  accepted
    that the decision constituted interference and in any  event  would  be
    proportionate.  The claimant's second application had been  refused  on
    the same basis and an appeal against  that  refusal  dismissed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal following a hearing before Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Buckwell which took place on 29th August 2013.

 3. The claimant appealed against the refusal of 1st April 2014  contending
    that the Sponsor had made full disclosure of his  previous  nationality
    and that the discretion under the  Rules  should  have  been  exercised
    differently and also that the decision was in breach of Article 8.   It
    was submitted that the Sponsor was entitled to hold himself  out  as  a
    British citizen whilst the matter of his citizenship was  investigated.
    The appeal was heard before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hawden-
    Beal on 13th July 2015.  On that occasion the claimant was  represented
    but there was no appearance on behalf of the  then  respondent.   Judge
    Hawden-Beal heard oral evidence from the Sponsor who said that  he  had
    been returning regularly to Albania.  His  British  passport  had  been
    renewed although he had  made  a  full  and  frank  disclosure  to  the
    authorities.  His wife was now pregnant and the child was  expected  in
    September 2015.

 4. In her decision (promulgated  on  21st  July  2015)  Judge  Hawden-Beal
    stated that she  had  taken  account  of  the  determination  of  Judge
    Buckwell, who had  agreed  that  the  discretion  should  be  exercised
    against the Sponsor,  in  accordance  with  the  reported  decision  of
    Devaseelan [2002] UKIAT 702. She said that that was her starting point.
     She continued (at paragraph 10)

         "However I must take into account the fact that time has passed and
         the situation  which  was  before  Judge  Buckwell  may  well  have
         changed.  The position now, as conceded by  the  Sponsor,  is  that
         nothing has changed apart from the fact that he has a  son  on  the
         way, he has heard nothing further from the  Respondent  since  2013
         and his British passport has been renewed  for  another  ten  years
         without challenge from the Respondent".

    She went on to  indicate  that  she  could  not  take  account  of  the
    pregnancy as she could only consider circumstances appertaining  as  at
    the date of decision.  She continued (at paragraph 12) that  she  could
    however take into account the renewal of the British passport in  March
    2015 which did concern a matter arising as at  the  date  of  decision,
    namely whether the Sponsor was entitled to rely  on  and  to  submit  a
    document which he knew to be false.  The evidence before her  was  that
    as at April 2014 the Sponsor  was  still  a  British  citizen  and  the
    Respondent had not deprived him of that citizenship even though she was
    well aware of the circumstances in which it was obtained.  To date  she
    had still not done so.  By renewing his passport in March 2015  without
    demur she had effectively given him British citizenship for  a  further
    ten years.  The judge found that to be a very notable  fact  which  she
    could take into account in  determining  whether  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer should have exercised discretion differently.  There was  clear
    evidence that  the  Sponsor  had  corrected  his  details.   The  judge
    commented that the Secretary of State had had  since  2012  to  make  a
    decision on the matter of the Sponsor's citizenship and  had  not  done
    so.  She continued "I am therefore satisfied that the fact that nothing
    has been put into motion as at the date of  the  decision  should  have
    been taken into account by the Entry Clearance  Officer  when  deciding
    whether or not to exercise his discretion".

 5. The judge continued (at paragraph 14 of her decision) stating that  the
    Secretary of State has still done nothing and could  not  give  a  time
    estimate as to when something, if anything would be done which

         "Indicates to me that she does not  consider  this  to  be  serious
         otherwise she would have acted much sooner and deprived the Sponsor
         of his British citizenship instead of reaffirming  it  for  another
         ten years.  She cannot say that the  renewal  of  the  passport  is
         nothing to do with  her  department  because  the  Passport  Office
         became part of the Home Office in 2014".

    The judge went on to state (at paragraph 15)

         "Given that the Sponsor revealed this  information  in  2012  I  am
         satisfied that it cannot be said in the refusal letter that he  has
         deliberately sought to deceive about his nationality.  He has  been
         truthful about it since 2012 and has  maintained  that  information
         for nearly three years.  ...".

    She went on to consider that the Secretary of State had not acted  with
    due expedition and that the Sponsor, in an attempt to enjoy family life
    with his wife, was keeping on trying to bring her over to the UK and in
    doing so continued to use the British passport which  to  date  he  was
    entitled to do.  That  she  considered  should  have  been  taken  into
    account by the ECO.  Given the unusual circumstances she found that the
    ECO should have exercised discretion differently in the  light  of  the
    information presented and that accordingly  the  decision  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.

 6. With regard to Article 8 the judge accepted that there  was  a  genuine
    and subsisting marriage.  In the  light  of  the  dilatoriness  of  the
    Secretary of State in making a decision as to whether or not to deprive
    the Sponsor of his British citizenship, the decision, she said,  was  a
    disproportionate interference with the couple's right  to  respect  for
    their family life especially bearing in mind that there was a child  on
    the way which was likely to be born a British citizen.  The appeal  was
    accordingly allowed.

 7. The Secretary of State applied for permission to  appeal  against  that
    decision.  In the grounds it was said that the judge at first  instance
    had  given  inadequate  reasons   for   going   behind   the   previous
    determination of the Tribunal and had given  irrelevant  and  incorrect
    factors in justifying going behind the previous findings.  The  earlier
    decision  was  an  unchallenged  finding  in  respect  of  the  serious
    deception undertaken by the Sponsor, which did not  diminish  with  the
    passage of time.  There had been a failure to consider that whilst  the
    Sponsor might have made a full and frank disclosure, it should not have
    been held in his favour as he had little choice  but  to  do  so.   The
    judge had failed to consider that regardless  of  the  actions  of  the
    Secretary of State, the fact that there had  been  a  passage  of  time
    since the previous hearing did not change  the  factual  basis  of  the
    appeal which was clearly that the Sponsor had deceived  and  maintained
    that deceit over a considerable period of time.  The judge stated  that
    she was able to take into  account  a  change  of  circumstances  which
    appeared to be that the Passport Office, which the judge considered  to
    be part of the Home Office, had issued a British passport but the judge
    had made assumptions on information that was not in  fact  ever  placed
    before her and was not correct.  The Passport Office, which might  come
    under  the  overall  control  of  the  Home  Office,  was  in  fact  an
    independent agency and the Home Office had no day-to-day  control  over
    whether or not a passport was issued or renewed.  The  passport  agency
    would have no reason not to issue the Sponsor with a passport unless it
    had been informed that he had been deprived of  his  citizenship.   The
    judge had also failed to consider that whilst the passport was renewed,
    it was done so only with false particulars.

 8. As to Article 8 it was contended that the  judge  had  failed  to  take
    account of Sections 117A and 117B of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 and in particular to consider the public interest.  The
    findings under Article 8 were inadequate and had failed to put into the
    balancing  exercise  factors  adverse  to  the  Sponsor  and  claimant.
    Permission was granted on  all  grounds.  In  a  response  under  Upper
    Tribunal Procedure Rule 24 it was submitted that the judge had not made
    any material error and had given adequate reasons.

 9. At the commencement of the hearing before me, Mr Mills handed in a copy
    of the judgment of Mr Justice Ouseley in Kaziu, Bakijasi  and  Hysaj  v
    SSHD [2014] EWHC 832 (Admin) and a copy of the judgment of the Court of
    Appeal in the same cases following appeal by each of the claimants, the
    citation being [2015] EWCA Civ 1195.  Those cases concerned the ability
    of the Secretary of State to declare null and void a grant  of  British
    citizenship obtained on the basis of false information.  He also put in
    copies of previously undisclosed Home Office computer records  relating
    to the Sponsor. These showed the opening of records on 1st October 2012
    concerning consideration  of  deprivation  of  citizenship,  which  was
    subsequently amended to consideration of a declaration  of  nullity  of
    citizenship and incorporating a copy  of  a  letter  to  the  Sponsor's
    representatives written on 27th September 2012 saying that  the  policy
    on recognising a grant of citizenship as null and void was under review
    and that the writer would revert to the representatives when the review
    had been completed.  The final document put in concerned the status  of
    the Passport Office.  Mr Mills continued that the Sponsor had  admitted
    deception in 2012 and had said that he had given wrong details when  he
    had initially claimed asylum, following arrival from Albania.   He  had
    requested that the record be corrected.  Mr Mills said that the Sponsor
    would not have received exceptional leave to  remain  if  it  had  been
    known that he came from Albania.  The 2012 letter  showed  that  review
    was under way and his case was in a queue of cases  for  consideration.
    The judgments before the  Administrative  Court  and  Court  of  Appeal
    showed that the Secretary of State had been successful in her policy of
    declaring null and void a citizenship obtained by deception but  before
    matters progressed what was awaited was the outcome of  an  application
    for permission to appeal to the Supreme Court.

10. He continued that in the First-tier Tribunal the judge  had  taken  the
    view that because the Home Office had known since 2012 that the Sponsor
    had used deception and had apparently done nothing,  that  meant  there
    was no issue and that the matter should not be held against him.   That
    was factually incorrect.  The situation in the cases he had put in  was
    the same as for the Sponsor.  The judge  at  first  instance  had  been
    wrong in considering that the Sponsor's actions were of no  concern  to
    the Secretary of State.  It was only because the test cases were  going
    through the courts that no action had been taken at  this  stage.   The
    judge had inferred a change of position but that was plainly wrong.  He
    submitted that she should have been aware of  the  cases  referred  to.
    Whether that was the case or not if she made a decision  on  the  basis
    that the Secretary of State had changed her  view  that  was  factually
    incorrect.

11. The other point relied upon  by  the  judge,  he  said,  was  that  the
    Sponsor's passport had been renewed in 2015.  She  had  been  factually
    incorrect in considering the relationship between the  Passport  Office
    and the UK Border Agency or UK Visas  and  Immigration.   The  Passport
    Office was obliged to issue a passport  on  the  evidence  before  them
    unless the citizenship had been  declared  null  and  void.   The  Home
    Office view was that it was better to wait until  there  was  certainty
    about the procedure as settled by the courts before proceeding.  If the
    Passport Office had refused to issue a  passport  to  the  Sponsor,  he
    could have taken judicial review proceedings.  The judge was reading in
    factors which were simply not present.  It remained  the  intention  of
    the Secretary of State to declare the Sponsor's  citizenship  null  and
    void and at that point he would not be a British citizen.  The decision
    on suitability grounds was entirely appropriate.   He  submitted  there
    was a material error and the matter should be remitted.

12. Mr Ahmed for his part said that documents which were now  provided  had
    not been submitted previously.  The appeal had been heard on 13th  July
    2015 but there had been an earlier hearing  on  1st  December  2014  at
    which a Presenting Officer had made an application for an  adjournment.
    That had been granted and there had been specific directions made as to
    steps to be taken by the Secretary of State.  An opportunity  had  been
    given for the Secretary of State to provide  all  the  information  now
    relied on.  At that point Mr Mills referred to a response from the Home
    Office which he said had been submitted to the Tribunal dated 10th July
    2015.  He produced a copy.  Mr Ahmed continued that that letter had not
    been sent to the representatives and there was no indication  from  the
    judge that it had been received by her.  It was clear  that  there  had
    been no attendance at the hearing on the part of the Home Office and no
    written submissions.  The judge was aware of the  earlier  decision  of
    the Tribunal and had reached findings open to her.  Even  if  the  Home
    Office submissions had been before the judge it was reasonably open  to
    her to make the decision she  did.  She  gave  adequate  reasons.   She
    specifically referred to the guidance in Devaseelan but commented  that
    time had passed and nothing had been heard from the Home  Office  since
    2013 and the Sponsor's passport had been renewed.  Those  matters  were
    correct.  The passport had been re-issued on the same particulars.  The
    judgment of the Court of Appeal on which reliance was  now  placed  was
    only handed down after the date of the hearing.  The  submissions  from
    the Home Office which were now said to have been sent on 10th July  did
    not refer to the cases now relied upon.

13. The judge's findings, he said, were reasonable and  factually  correct.
    The Sponsor had said in 2012 that he  had  previously  lied.   Until  a
    decision was made that the grant of citizenship was null  and  void  he
    remained a British citizen.  He had  sought  to  correct  his  details.
    There could be no material error of fact if the evidence had  not  been
    before the judge.  In this case  the  claimant  satisfied  all  of  the
    requirements of Appendix FM and the only issue had been the  matter  of
    deception by the Sponsor.  At this point the Sponsor's recently  issued
    British passport was produced and I noted that it had  been  issued  on
    23rd March 2015 and noted his place of  birth  as  Prizren.   Mr  Ahmed
    referred to a letter from Margot James MP and a response from the  Home
    Office.  That had been in December 2013 but still nothing had  happened
    about the Sponsor's  citizenship.   The  claimant  had  done  what  was
    suggested she might do and had made a fresh application.  He  submitted
    that the judge could not be faulted.  As to Article 8 he  asked  me  to
    consider that in the context of the whole determination  and  the  fact
    that the judge had found that the claimant succeeded under Appendix FM.
     Even if I took the  child  out  of  the  equation,  the  decision  was
    sustainable.  He accepted that Section 117 of the 2002 Act had not been
    mentioned but said that even if it had it would have made no difference
    considering the Sponsor as a British citizen.

14. Having looked further into the file I traced the letter  of  10th  July
    2015 from a senior caseworker at the Presenting Officers' Unit which Mr
    Mills had earlier referred to.  That  letter  had  been  faxed  to  the
    Tribunal on 13th July 2015 (the day of the hearing) and bore  the  time
    mark 11.17.  A front sheet annexed read "Urgent  FAO  Sarah  clerk  for
    Court 7".  Mr Ahmed understood that in fact the case had been called on
    first on the day of hearing.

15. Finally in reply, Mr Mills said that Counsel for the claimant  had  not
    addressed what was incorrect in the decision.  The  central  point  was
    whether the judge had relied on a finding that the ECO and Secretary of
    State were not concerned about  the  deception.   That  was  incorrect.
    There was an ongoing review and that was clear from the letter from the
    senior caseworker.  Even if that letter  had  only  arrived  after  the
    hearing it should have been taken into account  and  the  judge  should
    have considered reconvening, but there was no mention of it.  The judge
    had been factually wrong to consider that there had been  a  change  of
    heart on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  and  also  to  regard  the
    Passport Office as being the same body as  UK  Visas  and  Immigration.
    The passport had been re-issued on the same basis which wrongly  showed
    the Sponsor being born in Prizren.  It was therefore a false  document.
    There had been pleading that the mistake  was  not  the  fault  of  the
    parties but the deceit had only  come  to  light  because  the  Sponsor
    wanted to bring his wife to this country.  The only  differences  since
    the date of the earlier decision of Judge Buckwell  were  the  lack  of
    action and the issuing of the passport.  Had the judge taken account of
    the letter from the senior caseworker  she  would  have  realised  that
    there was an ongoing intention to remove British citizenship  from  the
    Sponsor.  As to Article 8 if the claimant had not succeeded  under  the
    Rules she could not have qualified under Article 8.  There had been  no
    mention of Section 117B and in particular the public interest  and  the
    impact of the Sponsor's deception.

16. Having heard those submissions I reserved my decision which I now give.
     It  is  highly  regrettable  that  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not
    represented at the hearing before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Hawden-Beal and furthermore, that there had been no prompt response  to
    the detailed directions issued following the hearing  on  1st  December
    2014.  The manner  in  which  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were conducted on behalf of the Secretary of  State  or  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not the proper way to conduct  litigation.   That
    said, it is not  the  function  of  a  judge  to  punish  a  party  for
    inadequate conduct of litigation by reaching a decision which is not  a
    correct decision on the evidence.

17. Judge Hawden-Beal clearly decided  the  case  on  the  basis  that  the
    Secretary of State had no further interest in declaring null  and  void
    the Sponsor's British citizenship as evidenced  by  delay  and  by  the
    grant of a further British passport document.  It is the case that  she
    did have regard as her starting point the decision  of  Judge  Buckwell
    and she was not bound by his decision, particularly in  the  matter  of
    the exercise of a discretion, although she was bound to  take  it  into
    account.  In my view she did so. The thrust of the challenge on  behalf
    of the Secretary of State is that she erred factually in her assessment
    of the Secretary of  State  as  having  no  substantial  or  continuing
    interest in declaring null and  void  the  Sponsor's  citizenship,  for
    which she gave the reasons mentioned above.  The internal  Home  Office
    documents now produced by Mr Mills were not before the  judge  and  she
    cannot be criticised for failing  to  take  account  of  them.   It  is
    arguable that she should have been aware of the judgment of Mr  Justice
    Ouseley even though this was not brought to her attention but the  fact
    remains that that judgment was handed down on 26th March 2014  and  the
    case before her took place some fifteen months later.

18. What I do find of significance is the approach taken to the letter from
    the senior caseworker dated 10th July 2015.  That letter, which I found
    upon  the  Tribunal  file,  sets  out  that  according  to  information
    currently available to the Presenting Officers' Unit a  review  of  the
    Sponsor's acquisition of British citizenship was still  ongoing  and  a
    timescale for conclusion of the review could  not  be  given.   In  the
    circumstances the Tribunal was requested  to  consider  adjourning  the
    appeal pending the outcome of the review.   If  the  Tribunal  was  not
    minded to adjourn the judge was  invited  to  consider  representations
    which followed.  A copy was enclosed of the previous determination  and
    reference was made to the fact that the Sponsor admitted informing  the
    authorities that he had been born in Kosovo and accepted that  was  not
    correct and the earlier Tribunal had found that deception had been used
    and that the ECO had been correct to apply the provisions  of  Appendix
    FM paragraph S-EC.2.2(a).  That Tribunal had also  found  the  decision
    was proportionate.  The earlier decision was the starting  point.   The
    ECO again relied upon paragraph S-EC.2.2 of Appendix FM and  there  was
    no reason to find differently and the decision was proportionate.  That
    fax as I have stated was timed 11.17. That must be in  the  morning  in
    the light of the affixed instruction to the clerk for court 7.  I  have
    checked the Record of Proceedings, which does  include  time  markings,
    and it is clear that the hearing began not at 10.00 a.m. but  at  12.10
    p.m. and ended at 12.35 p.m. on 13th July  2015.   The  fact  that  the
    letter of 10th July 2015 was on the  Tribunal  file  and  includes  the
    front sheet referred to above indicates that it  was  received  by  the
    Tribunal as indicated but there is no reference to it in  the  decision
    of Judge Hawden-Beal.   The  letter  makes  clear  that  the  Sponsor's
    acquisition of British citizenship was still under  review.   That  was
    information which either was or should have been before the  judge  and
    of which she should have taken account.

19. In the light of that statement on behalf of the Secretary of  State  it
    was not open to the judge to find, as she did at paragraph  14  of  her
    decision, that the Secretary of State did not consider  the  matter  of
    the declaration of the Sponsor's citizenship as null and void as  being
    serious.  The judge erred in law in that regard.  She  was  obliged  to
    take account of all of the evidence before her.  She had also stated at
    paragraph 15 of her decision that given that the Sponsor  had  revealed
    his previous deception in 2012 "I am satisfied that it cannot  be  said
    in the refusal letter that he has deliberately sought to deceive  about
    his nationality".  I did not regard that as  a  rationally  sustainable
    finding.  The whole issue of a British passport to the Sponsor had been
    on the basis of a deception.  Whilst one can understand that the  judge
    was surprised that the British passport had been renewed, given that at
    the point of application the Sponsor  still  had  a  grant  of  British
    citizenship, that is less surprising.  Given all of these factors,  but
    most particularly the fact that the judge did not take account  of  the
    letter which either was or should have been before her from the  senior
    caseworker, I find that she erred in law in a potentially material  way
    in reaching the conclusion she did.  It goes without saying that it  is
    highly regrettable that there was no Presenting Officer at the  hearing
    to assist the judge.  If that had been the case it  is   unlikely  that
    these errors would have occurred.  I therefore set aside  the  decision
    made under the Immigration Rules.

20. With regard to the decision under Article 8 ECHR this too falls  to  be
    set aside.  The judge failed to consider Section 117A and B of the 2002
    Act in considering proportionality as she should have done.   This  has
    been made clear in various cases including  Dube  (Ss117A-117D)  [2015]
    UKUT 00090 (IAC).   Of  potentially  more  significance,  although  not
    pleaded by the Secretary of State, was the fact that the judge did  not
    consider whether it would have  been  reasonable  for  the  Sponsor  to
    return to Albania to  enjoy  family  life  there  with  his  wife,  the
    claimant.  It was for the claimant to show that  that  would  not  have
    been reasonable (see amongst other cases PG (USA) v  SSHD  [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 118 at paragraph 23).  If the claimant failed to show that  such  a
    reunion in Albania was unreasonable, then family life was  not  subject
    to sufficient impact under Article 8 for the Article to be  engaged  at
    all.

21. The appropriate course is for me to set  aside  the  decision  on  both
    grounds and to remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    complete rehearing, in accordance with Statement 7.2(b) of the Practice
    Statements of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the Upper Tribunal,
    and under the provisions  of  Section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007, the appeal is remitted accordingly and
    I make the directions below.

Notice of Decisions

The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal  involved  a  material
    error on a point of law and that decision is set aside.  The appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing  in  accordance  with
    the directions below.


The fee award made at first instance necessarily falls away also.


There was no request for an anonymity order and none is made.




Signed                              Date 14 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French


DIRECTIONS PURSUANT TO SECTIONS 12(3)(a) AND 12(3)(b) OF THE TRIBUNALS,
COURTS AND ENFORCEMENT ACT 2007


 1) The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hawden-Beal is set
    aside with no findings preserved and the appeal is to be heard afresh.

 2) The members of the First-tier Tribunal chosen to reconsider the appeal
    should not include Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hawden-Beal.

 3) The appropriate hearing centre is Birmingham.  The time estimate is two
    hours.  No interpreter has been requested.

 4) Each party shall serve upon the other and upon the Tribunal copies of
    all witness statements and other documents sought to be relied upon at
    least seven days before the hearing.


Signed                              Date 14 April 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

