
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05463/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9 January 2017                           |On 2 May 2017                   |
|                                            |                                |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                 sidra bibi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Sponsor, Mr Imran Siddique
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  On 20 February 2015 the  Entry
    Clearance Officer (hereafter the respondent)  refused  her  application
    dated 19 November 2014 for entry clearance as a spouse.  The respondent
    stated that she did not meet the  income  threshold  requirement  under
    Appendix FM and/or the related evidential requirements  under  Appendix
    FM-SE.  The appellant appealed.  In a decision sent  on  7  March  2016
    First-tier Tribunal (FtT) Judge  Heatherington  dismissed  her  appeal.
    The appellant was successful in being  granted  permission  to  appeal,
    bringing the case before me.

2.   At the hearing Mr Siddique, the sponsor and husband of  the  appellant,
    appeared on behalf of the appellant.  As the appellant was not  legally
    represented, I informed him I would do all I could  to  ensure  he  was
    able to present his wife's case effectively.  I then heard  submissions
    from Mrs Aboni and Mr Siddique.

3.   I should  record  first  of  all  that  although  the  respondent  also
    expressed doubt that the appellant was in a genuine  relationship  with
    the sponsor, this does not  appear  to  have  been  maintained  by  the
    Presenting Officer at the hearing before the FtT Judge and  the  latter
    proceeded on the basis the appellant was entitled  to  succeed  if  she
    satisfied the income threshold  and  related  evidential  requirements.
    Nor did Mrs Aboni renew any issue  regarding  the  genuineness  of  the
    relationship.  Accordingly, the appellant is entitled to succeed in her
    appeal if able to show that the judge erred in  dismissing  the  appeal
    under the Immigration Rules on income threshold and related  evidential
    requirements.

4.   The main point regarding the Rules referred in the appellant's  grounds
    is that the respondent's assessment of her income failed to  take  into
    account her own  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions  at  9.3.8  and
    Appendix FM, that self-employed income can be cash in  hand.   However,
    even assuming the points raised in the grounds regarding the  sponsor's
    income were accepted, that does not establish that the judge materially
    erred.  The respondent's refusal was also based on  a  failure  on  the
    ground of the appellant to meet the requirements of ECP 3.3(h)  to  the
    effect that  among the documents that 'must also be submitted' are:

         "(bb)    if the applicant's business is  not  required  to  produce
                annual audited accounts, the latest unaudited  accounts  and
                an accountant's certificate of confirmation ...".

     Unfortunately for  the  appellant,  although  unaudited  accounts  were
    submitted, they did not cover the entirety of the tax  year  2013-2014.
    They only covered up to August 2013.

5.   Mr Siddique submitted that unaudited accounts covering the entirety  of
    the tax year 2013-2014 were submitted.  He  said  they  were  submitted
    with his second application, although not in his first.  He is  correct
    insofar as further unaudited accounts were submitted, but that was  not
    until February 2016, in time for the  hearing  before  the  FtT  Judge.
    They were not submitted with the application nor were they even  placed
    before the respondent by the date of decision.  Accordingly, the  judge
    did not materially err in concluding that the appellant could not  meet
    the requirements of the Rules.

6.   The grounds also challenge the judge's decision  to  also  dismiss  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds, but essentially the grounds at this  point
    do no more than voice disagreement with the judge's assessment and fail
    to disclose any error of law.  Particularly  given  that  even  on  the
    couple's own evidence they had spent very little time together  in  the
    past five years,  it  was  entirely  within  the  range  of  reasonable
    responses for the judge to have concluded that the appellant had failed
    to show compelling circumstances.

7.   As I mentioned to the sponsor at the hearing, if I refused the  grounds
    of appeal (as I have), then he will need to make a further  application
    to the  respondent.   Given  that  he  has  already  submitted  copious
    documents, that will be disappointing to him.  Whilst it is  ultimately
    a matter for the respondent, I would expect that  the  respondent  will
    not seek to raise again any doubts about  the  genuine  nature  of  the
    relationship.

Notice of Decision

8.   For the above reasons the appeal is dismissed.  The FtT Judge  did  not
    materially err in law and his dismissal of the  appellant's  appeal  is
    upheld.

9.   No anonymity direction is made.



[pic]


Signed                                  Dated 28 April 2017


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal





