
IAC-AH-SAR-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05224/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th March 2015                    |On 20th March 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - bombay
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             barthi devidas bhai
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No legal representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) appeals against a decision  of  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Ghaffar (the judge) promulgated following  a
    hearing on 4th November 2014.

 2. The Respondent before the Upper Tribunal was the Appellant  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I will refer to her as the Claimant.

 3. The Claimant is an Indian citizen born on 8th December 1965 who applied
    for permission to enter the United Kingdom as the family  member  of  a
    European Economic Area national, that being  her  son  Darshan  Devidas
    Bhai.

 4. The application was refused  on  24th  March  2014  with  reference  to
    regulation 7 of The Immigration (European  Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006 (the 2006 Regulations).   The  ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    Claimant was dependent upon her son, to  whom  I  shall  refer  as  the
    Sponsor.

 5. The appeal was heard by the  judge  on  4th  November  2014  and  after
    hearing evidence from the Sponsor, the judge found  that  the  Claimant
    was dependent upon the Sponsor and allowed the appeal.

 6. This caused the ECO to apply for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds were that the judge had  made  findings  without
    giving adequate reasons for those findings.  The decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal did not provide sufficient details as to what documentary
    evidence had been considered.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Lambert and I set out  below  paragraphs  2  and  3  of  the  grant  of
    permission;

         "(ii)    The judge's decision is brief in  the  extreme,  fails  to
             address the issues raised by the Respondent and  at  paragraph
             11 is devoid of evidence  based  reasoning  for  the  findings
             made.

         (iii)    There are therefore  manifestly  arguable  errors  of  law
             disclosed by the application".

 8. The Tribunal issued directions that there should be  a  hearing  before
    the Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    erred in law such that the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 9. The Sponsor attended the hearing.  He indicated that he did not require
    an interpreter.  The Sponsor also indicated  that  he  was  content  to
    proceed with the hearing without legal representation.

10. I explained  to  the  Sponsor  the  procedure  that  would  be  adopted
    throughout the hearing.  I explained  the  role  of  those  within  the
    hearing room, and that this was an application made on  behalf  of  the
    ECO, who contended that the First-tier Tribunal had made a  mistake  of
    law.

11. The Sponsor confirmed that he had seen the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, together with the application made for permission to  appeal,
    and the grant of permission.

12. I then heard submissions from Mr Mills  who  relied  upon  the  grounds
    contained within the application for permission to appeal.  I was asked
    to find that the judge had not  followed  the  guidance  in  Budhathoki
    [2014] UKUT 00341, and  had  failed  to  make  adequate  findings,  and
    therefore the ECO was unclear as to what evidence had been  taken  into
    account, and why the appeal had been allowed.

13. The Sponsor contended  that  the  judge  had  not  erred  in  law,  and
    therefore the decision should stand.

14.  Having considered all the documents before me, and taken into  account
    the representations made by Mr Mills and the Sponsor, I found that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal was flawed by error of law and must
    be set aside.

15. In my view the judge did not address the issues raised by  the  ECO  in
    the refusal  notice.   Those  issues  should  have  been  set  out  and
    analysed, and findings made upon them.

16. The head note to Budhathoki is set out below;

         It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate  approach  to  deciding  cases.   It   is,   however,
         necessary for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the
         evidence and explain in clear and brief  terms  their  reasons,  so
         that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.

17. It is not clear what  documentary  evidence  the  judge  considered  in
    reaching his decision to allow the appeal.  The judge did not  identify
    and resolve key conflicts in the evidence, and the findings made, which
    are contained within paragraph 11 of  the  decision,  do  not  make  it
    sufficiently clear why the appeal was allowed.  The judge records  that
    there is adequate evidence of  dependency  before  him,  but  does  not
    specify what this evidence is, and then refers to the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules being satisfied, whereas this is  a  case  to  be
    decided under the 2006 EEA Regulations.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was set aside with no  findings
    preserved.  Therefore the decision needed  to  be  re-made.   Mr  Mills
    submitted  that  as  findings  of  fact  needed  to  be  made,  it  was
    appropriate to remit this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    Sponsor indicated that he was content to have the decision  re-made  by
    the Upper Tribunal.

19. I decided that it was appropriate to remit the appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal, having taken into account  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statement 7.2 which states;

         7.2  The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to  proceed
             to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to  the
             First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
             that:

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other
                  opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact-finding  which
                  is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                  re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                  objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                  to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. My view is that the extent of the judicial fact-finding required  means
    that it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal and
    it would be inappropriate for the Upper Tribunal to be the primary fact-
    finding Tribunal.

21. The appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal  will  take  place  at  the
    hearing centre at Sheldon  Court,  Birmingham.   The  parties  will  be
    advised in writing of the date.  The appeal will be heard by  a  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge other than Judge Ghaffar.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it is set aside.  The appeal is allowed to the extent that  it
is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal,  and  there  has
been no application for anonymity.  The Upper Tribunal  makes  no  anonymity
order.



Signed        Date       10th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Any fee award must be considered by the First-tier Tribunal.



Signed        Date       10th March 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
