
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/05619/2014
                                                               OA/05620/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 July 2015                       |On 20 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           Mr HARI KRISHNA RANJIT
                            MRS TEJ KUMARI RANJIT
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Z Malik, Counsel, instructed by Malik Law
Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellants

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer but nonetheless I  shall
    refer to the parties as they  were  described  before  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal, that is Mr and Mrs Ranjit as the  appellants  and  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer as the respondent.

 2. The appellants are citizens of Nepal born on 3 March 1945 and  2  April
    1954.  They appealed against  the  decisions  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer dated 24 March 2014 which refused them entry clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom as  the  adult  dependent  relatives  of  their  son  Mr
    Charanjibi Ranjit and his wife, and their son Mr Suraj Kumar Ranjit and
    his wife, who lived in the United Kingdom, with reference to paragraphs
    EC-DR.1.1 of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules HC 395.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer in his refusal stated :

         "You and your wife (NED/3526472) have applied to join your sons  in
         the United Kingdom. I note that you  stated  that  you  live  in  a
         property that is owned by you.  You said  that  you  are  supported
         financially by your sons and daughter in law in the United Kingdom.
         I am aware that you have been visiting  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
         visitor on regular basils since 2009 staying between five  and  six
         months on each visits. You have  also  stated  that  your  children
         visit you and your wife in Nepal on a frequent basis.

         You have stated that you are hypertensive and  hyperuricemic,  have
         osteoarthritis and suffer with depression. You said  that  you  are
         not able to care for yourself on a daily basis due to age  and  due
         to the  above  medical  conditions.  You  add  that  your  care  is
         currently provided by your wife.  You said that you  wife  has  her
         own health issues and cannot continue to look after you. You  claim
         that whilst you can obtain medical help from a doctor in Nepal  you
         require day to day mental and emotional support  from  your  family
         members. You add that the care you require  is  not  affordable  in
         Nepal yet you have stated that your UK sponsors can continue to pay
         for your arrangements in Nepal.

         In making my decision I note  your  recent  travel  to  the  United
         Kingdom. I am aware that domestic  help  is  readily  available  in
         Nepal and at  a  relatively  low  cost  when  compared  to  similar
         provisions the United Kingdom. I am also aware  that  your  medical
         conditions are being cared for by in Nepal by medical professionals
         as an outpatient. You have  confirmed  in  Annex  1  that  your  UK
         sponsor  or  another  close  relative  can  pay   for   your   care
         arrangements in Nepal. I am satisfied that  the  financial  support
         that you currently receive from your sponsor will continue and that
         any care if required could be provided through financial help  from
         them.  You and your wife are continuing to support and care for one
         another given each other's declaration within Appendix  1  and  are
         receiving medical  treatment  for  your  medical  condition.  I  am
         therefore not satisfied that you are unable to obtain the  required
         level of care in India.

         I therefore refuse your application under paragraph EC-DR.1.1(d) of
         Appendix FM  of the Immigration Rules (E-ECDR.2.5)."

 4. Following an appeal hearing on 5 January 2015 Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Blake allowed the appeal both under the Immigration Rules  and
    under Article 8.

 5. The Secretary of State made an application for permission to appeal  on
    the grounds that the  judge  although  identifying  that  he  was  only
    entitled to consider circumstances appertaining at the time of decision
    and identified DR (ECO - post-decision evidence) Morocco  [2005]  UKAIT
    00038, he nonetheless proceeded to incorporate evidence post-dating the
    decision which is 24 March 2014. Secondly, it was  submitted  that  the
    judge had made a perverse or irrational finding on a matter or  matters
    material to the outcome.

 6. On the one  hand  the  judge  noted  that  the  appellants  were  still
    receiving personal care from the  sponsor's  friend  in  November  2014
    [Paragraphs 73 and 74] and at [80]  the  judge  recorded  "The  sponsor
    stated that he had paid for helpers and he sent some �500 per month  to
    the appellants and sometimes more" but on  the  other  hand  the  judge
    stated that he found the background evidence supplied by the appellants
    supported the claim that there were few  care  homes  for  the  elderly
    available in Nepal".  It was submitted that it was irrational  for  the
    judge to have subsequently find at [134] that

         "I found on the fact that they were unable, even with the practical
         and financial help of their sponsors, to obtain the required  level
         of care in Nepal where they were living. I found this on the facts.
         I found that such care as they needed was not available where  they
         were living and there were no known  persons  in  Nepal  who  could
         reasonably be expected to provide it."

 7. And again at paragraph 135 the judge reasoned "I accepted the sponsor's
    evidence that such assistance as was available was  not  obtainable  at
    any price".

 8. The judge appeared to exclude his earlier finding as to  the  carer  at
    the date of decision or the few care homes referred to in the objective
    evidence.

 9. The third ground was that the judge failed to give reasons or  adequate
    reasons for findings  on  Article  8  of  the  ECHR.   However  it  was
    submitted that the judge relied on the findings made in relation to the
    same facts upon which  he  found  the  appellant  succeeded  under  the
    Immigration Rules and which were challenged.

10. It was submitted that the  judge  also  erred  at  paragraph  146,   in
    failing to provide  adequate  reasons  as  to  why  he  considered  the
    appellant's  circumstances  to  be  disproportionate  to   the   public
    interest.

11. First-tier Tribunal Judge Davidge granted permission to appeal stating

         "The respondent applies to appeal on the basis that the  judge  has
         wrongly taken into account post-decision evidence in these  out  of
         country appeals.

         I find there is some merit in the grounds which set out  in  detail
         at paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 the post-decision evidence  to  the  point
         that the judge's conclusions are arguably perverse/irrational."

12.  At  the  hearing  Mr  Malik  relied  on  Sakhar  [2014]EWCA  Civ   195
    particularly paragraph 16.  In essence Mr Malik was submitting that  an
    unqualified grant of permission was limited to the points identified in
    the points in the application. The reasons for granting  made  no  real
    reference to the perversity challenge.

Conclusions

13. Although it is good practice in effect to identify each of the  grounds
    which is granted, the grant of permission does make reference  both  to
    the   post-decision   evidence   and   to    the    judge's    arguably
    perverse/irrational findings.

14. It is clear to me on a reading of the decision that  the  findings  are
    enmeshed with references to post-decision evidence.

15. DR (Morocco) states at paragraph 27.

         "We take a different view when it comes to evidence  about  whether
         evidence of the coming to pass of  an  event  which  had  been  the
         subject of disputed predictability  or  likelihood  is  admissible.
         Evidence that it had not happened equally  would  be  inadmissible.
         The usual issue is whether the particular matter or circumstance is
         likely at the date of decision;  e.g.  obtaining  employment.   The
         subsequent obtaining of the  predicted  job  is  a  matter  arising
         afterwards and evidence about  it  is  excluded.   It  is  akin  to
         evidence being inadmissible to show that an intention has  changed.
         The fact that the new matter or circumstance eg the  job  may  have
         been predicted or reasonably foreseeable does not avoid it being  a
         matter  arising  after  the  event,  nor  is  it   a   circumstance
         appertaining at the time of decision."

16. The judge stated that  he  relied  on  the  letters  from  Dr  Lumeshwo
    Acharya, Dr Bhola Shrestha, Dr Robin Basnet and Dr Dambar Shah and that
    although he asserted that their reports "built on those  placed  before
    the ECO in March 2014 upon which the application was based", in essence
    the judge had taken into account new matters and  further  appeared  to
    ignore his own findings  in  respect  of  the  personal  care  for  the
    appellants from the friend, which did in fact continue after  the  date
    of decision.  It is clear that there were medical  conditions  relevant
    to the appellants as at the date of decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer but the fact  is  that  there  were  subsequent  diagnoses  and
    conclusions drawn from evidence which post-dated the decision  by  nine
    months.

17. It was stated that the deterioration post-decision was  foreseeable  in
    March 2014  but  this  directly  contradicts  what  was  stated  in  DR
    (Morocco).  As stated at paragraph 27 of DR (Morocco) the fact  that  a
    new matter or circumstance  may  have  been   predicted  or  reasonably
    foreseeable does not avoid it being a matter arising after  the  event,
    nor it is a circumstance appertaining at the time of the decision.

18. I accept Mr Malik's arguments that not all new evidence is inadmissible
    and that the judge is using the past tense at  paragraph  134  but  the
    fact is that his focus was on matters and diagnoses  which  had  arisen
    afterwards and that his findings are based on the doctors' reports made
    after the decision.  The report of Dr Acharya at page 194 was  dated  4
    December 2014 and the letter of Dr Bhola Shrestha at page 195 was dated
    9 December 2014.

19. When comparing the reports with the medical evidence placed before  the
    Entry Clearance Officer there is a marked difference in  the  evidence.
    The report from Dr Basnet before the Entry Clearance  Officer  referred
    to a lack of emotional and mental support for the first appellant  from
    his family members and does refer to depression but the report  of  4th
    December 2014 referred to Mr Ranjit having dementia and  that  'in  the
    last two months he has reported that he has reported  increase  in  the
    problems'.

20. The sum of the medical evidence in relation to Mrs  Ranjit  before  the
    ECO was that she had chronic mechanical back pain, was hypertensive and
    hyperuricemic and was taking medication  prescribed  by  Bir  Hospital.
    Care and support  from  the  family  was  advised.  She  also  received
    Chiropractic treatment. By the 9th December 2014 there was a  statement
    from a Dr Shrestha to the effect that 'she needs to  be  assisted  with
    her day to day work.  Mrs Ranjit is strongly instructed not to  perform
    hard house hold work as this will damage her spine.  She requires  long
    term personal care'.  Apart from the difficulties with this report this
    ostensibly is very differing evidence from  that  given  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.

21. The threshold for perversity is always high but, putting  that  on  one
    side, the difficulty with this decision is  that  the  judge,  although
    citing DR (Morocco),  took into account evidence which  post-dated  the
    decision to support one of his concluding findings follows [134]:

         "I found on  the  facts  that  they  were  unable,  even  with  the
         practical and financial help  of  their  sponsors,  to  obtain  the
         required level of care in Nepal where they  were  living.  I  found
         this on the facts.  I found that such care as they needed  was  not
         available where they were living and there was no  known person  in
         Nepal who could  reasonably be expected to provide it."

22. The judge also ignored evidence which was before him with  regards  the
    assistance of the friend until November 2014.

23. I therefore find an error of law  and  set  aside  those  findings  and
    conclusions which are relevant to post-decision evidence.   I  preserve
    the sections in relation to the recording of the evidence given and  in
    particular paragraphs 73 and 74.

24. As Mr Malik stated, there was no challenge to the  credibility  of  the
    first sponsor, Mr Chiranjibi. It was accepted that he and  his  brother
    were close to their ageing parents.

25. For the purposes of the Immigration Rules

         "E-ECDR1.1(d)

         The requirements  to  be  met  for  entry  clearance  as  an  adult
         dependent relative are that -

         "(a)     the applicant must be outside the UK;

         (b)  the applicant must have made a  valid  application  for  entry
             clearance as an adult dependent relative;

         (c)  the applicant must not fall for  refusal  under  any   of  the
             grounds in Section S-EC: suitability for entry clearance; and

         (d)  the applicant must meet all of the requirements of Section  E-
             ECDR: eligibility for entry clearance as  an  adult  dependent
             relative."

         E-ECDR 1.1

         To meet the eligibility requirements  for  entry  clearance  as  an
             adult dependent relative all of the requirements in paragraphs
             E-ECDR 2.1 to 3.2 must be met.

         ...

         E-ECDR 2.4

         The applicant or, if  the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
             sponsor's partner or grandparents,  the  applicant's  partner,
             must as a result of age illness or  disability  require  long-
             term personal care to perform everyday tasks

         E-ECDR.2.5

         The applicant, or if  the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
         sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must be
         unable, even with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,
         to obtain the required level of care in the country were  they  are
         living, because -

         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
             can reasonably provide it; or

         (b)  it is not affordable."

26. The appellants must show that they are in need of  long  term  personal
    care which is not  available  in  Nepal.   The  relevant  date  for  my
    decision is 24th March 2014.

27. The evidence within the application forms showed  that  the  appellants
    had returned to Sri  Lanka  in  late  2013  immediately  prior  to  the
    application for entry clearance on 26 February 2014.  Clearly  at  this
    point the appellants were able to travel.  Up to that  point  it  would
    appear from the application form that they had  travelled  every  year,
    that is from 2009 to 2013. There was no indication on  the  application
    form that they had travelled with escorts. The first appellant  in  his
    application form stated that he was  hypertensive,  hyperuricemic,  had
    osteoarthritis and depression and that "due to that my health condition
    is deteriorating day by day".  He confirmed that he was  under  regular
    medication due to the medical conditions and "these are less likely  to
    be elimination but expecting not to deteriorated" (sic).

28. He added that "Currently only my wife is looking after me. However  she
    herself suffers from  various  health  issues  due  to  it  is  getting
    difficulty to get care day by day".   At  paragraph  1.13  of  Annex  1
    attached to the VAF application he stated: "I can obtain  medical  help
    from doctor in Nepal.  However I am lacking  day-to-day  and  emotional
    and mental support from my family members instantly."

29. When asked at 1.16 whether his UK sponsor  or  another  close  relative
    could put in care arrangements in a country where  he  was  living,  he
    replied "yes" on the form and qualified it with "However as  there  are
    no one to help us on daily work such as cleaning, washing,  cooking.  I
    required physical and mental support from sons and daughter in laws."

30. At this point there was no mention of dementia.

31. In relation to the wife, who was 54 years old she stated that  she  was
    hypertensive, hyperuricemic, a cardiac patient and also added that  her
    condition was deteriorating day by day.

32. She added at 1.12 that her husband

         "Looks after me whenever required as he is already 69 years old and
         have other health issue. He cannot provide proper care  I  required
         in addition. Both my sons are settled in the UK with  their  family
         and have no other close relative in Nepal".

33. She also stated at paragraph 1.6 that her sponsors could pay  for  care
    arrangements in the country but as there was no one to help her and her
    husband on a daily basis with cleaning, washing, dressing up  and  that
    they needed physical and mental support from their sons and  daughters-
    in-law.  This to my mind places an emphasis on  domestic  tasks  rather
    than personal care.  At the date of the decision  the  first  appellant
    was 69 years old and the second appellant 60 years old.

34. From the evidence taken at paragraph 68 it was  clear  that  the  first
    appellant's health had deteriorated over two years but I do not  accept
    from the descriptions above that the medical conditions  of  either  of
    the appellants at the date of decision were such  that  the  appellants
    required  long-term  personal  care  to  perform  everyday  tasks   and
    therefore that they would  be  unable,  even  with  the  practical  and
    financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care  in
    the country where they are living because  it  was  not  available  and
    there was not persona in the country who could reasonably provide it  ,
    under E-ECDR 2.5.

35. At the date of the decision  there  was  simply  not  the  evidence  to
    demonstrate that at the date of the decision even  with  the  practical
    and financial help of the sponsor that either of  the  appellants  were
    unable to obtain the required level of care in Nepal.  I conclude  this
    from the medical evidence supplied as to the degree  of  their  medical
    conditions and the description of  care  needed,  the  appellant's  own
    statements in their visa applications and the evidence of  the  sponsor
    regarding the help given.

36. The evidence that was taken at paragraphs 73 and 74 that  there  was  a
    friend who had been able to give help and  assistance  to  his  parents
    until November 2014.  At paragraph  74  he  stated  that  he  had  been
    advised that this could no longer continue to help but  this  was  well
    after the decision taken by the Entry Clearance Officer.

37. No mention of this was made in the application form and it  is  to  the
    testament of the sponsor that he was candid in describing this help but
    it is clear that the appellants did receive both financial support  and
    assistance from the friend in Nepal until at least November 2014,  some
    nine months after the decision.

38. The appellants described their needs in  their  application  forms  and
    referred to the need for daily help with domestic tasks.  Together with
    the assistance from the friend and the financial remittances  from  the
    family it cannot be the case that daily assistance could not  be  found
    for these needs.

39. The sponsors claim was that the particular care  needed  the  oversight
    and emotional care of the family but I am not persuaded  that  this  is
    made out.  I turn to the medical evidence which was in existence at the
    date of decision and that is a letter from Dr  Robin  Basnet  dated  16
    February 2014 which states that  the  first  appellant  was  undergoing
    regular treatment  from  the  hospital  in  Nepal  and  he  was  taking
    medications for osteoarthritis of the knee and that he had  had  hernia
    surgery four years previously.

40. The doctor then stated

         "Being his doctor I have witnessed that  Mr  Hari  Krishnar  Ranjit
         lacks  emotional  and  mental  support  from  his  family   members
         especially because  of  physical  absence  of  both  his  sons  and
         daughters-in-law which has caused depression in him. I  would  like
         to emphasise that family care and support would  help  him  improve
         his present medical conditions."

41. I accept there was reference to medical conditions and  depression  but
    the severity was not discussed and there was no mention in this  letter
    that he required long term personal care.  I note the witness statement
    from the first appellant dated  29th  December  2014  gave  a  detailed
    account of his condition, trips to the United Kingdom and situation  in
    Nepal which was rather at odds  with  his  diagnosis  of  dementia.   I
    accept however that this may have been drafted on his behalf.

42. Clearly until the date of decision the appellants were able  to  attend
    medical appointments and receive medical care.

43. Similarly the letter dated 3 March 2014 from Dr Dambar Shah in relation
    to the second appellant stated:

         "Being her doctor I have witnessed that Mrs Tej  Kumari  Ranjit  is
         lacking family care and support in the absence of his both sons and
         daughter-in-law.

         I would like to emphasise that having family care and support would
         help her to improve her present medical condition."

44. It is clear that this was the medical evidence that  was  submitted  to
    show the medical conditions of the appellants as at  the  date  of  the
    decision.

45. A letter from the friend Mr Shrestha dated 10 December 2014  identifies
    that he had responsibility of care for the appellants  for  two  years.
    He stated: "Now the couple is alone without any help or  a  care  taker
    except me. I am sorry that I will  be  unable  to  take  care  of  them
    because I  have  to  travel  abroad  frequently  due  to  my  household
    affairs."

46. I am not persuaded on the medical evidence and the  evidence  preserved
    within the decision of Judge Blake that the appellants did require long
    term personal care in order to meet their medical needs.  Clearly  they
    had the emotional support of each other, the oversight  and  assistance
    of a family friend which continued long after the date of the  decision
    and the financial resources from the family in the United Kingdom.

47. Although it was suggested by the sponsors that there were limited  care
    homes for the elderly in Nepal, the evidence  from  the  doctors  which
    referred to their improvement and their treatment and their  conditions
    did not suggest the requirement of a care home as at March 2014.  I  do
    not accept that the medical evidence indicated that a residential  care
    home was needed for either of the  appellants.  Although  the  sponsors
    stated that such homes were culturally unacceptable it  is  clear  from
    the evidence of the sponsor that  they  do  exist  in  Nepal.   It  was
    alleged that the standards  in  such  homes  was  unacceptable  but  no
    comprehensive evidence of poor standards  or  the  level  of  care  was
    placed before me and it is for the appellant to prove his case.

48. Finally, the appellants are husband and wife and although  elderly,  as
    at the date of decision, they had the emotional support of  each  other
    and the care of a friend.  The parents  were  also  being  funded  with
    practical and financial help as at the relevant date.

49. I find the appellants cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules.

50. I do not find there were factors which were not considered by the Entry
    Clearance Officer to demand considering outside the  Immigration  Rules
    but even if I am wrong about that because of the cultural background of
    the family and the need for  the  positive  affirmation  by  states  of
    Article 8 rights, I do not accept that there is a family  life  between
    the appellants and their sponsors in this instance,  AA  v  The  United
    Kingdom [2011] ECHR 1345.  The appellants had, to the date of decision,
    led an independent and private life together, in a  different  country.
    The first sponsor came to the United Kingdom in  1999  and  the  second
    sponsor came in 2000.  The appellants are married and so too are  their
    sons.

51. Even if that were incorrect and family life were  engaged,  applying  R
    (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27, the decision was in accordance with the
    law and necessary for the protection of rights and freedoms  of  others
    through the maintenance of immigration control. The starting point must
    be the Immigration Rules which sets out the position of  the  Secretary
    of State.  As to proportionality the appellants have each other to turn
    to for support and as at the date of decision, the personal  assistance
    and care of a  family  friend  and  the  financial  assistance  of  the
    sponsors in this country which could continue.  I have  considered  the
    interests of  the  family  in  the  United  Kingdom,  Beoku-Betts  (FC)
    (Appellant) v SSHD [2008] UKHL 39, and I note that  the  sponsors  have
    difficulty in visiting but as at that date they are  able  to  keep  in
    contact with their parents via modern methods and  indeed  the  parents
    had visited them themselves. I must also engage  Section  117B  of  the
    Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and there was no indication
    that this couple could speak English and this is a factor which I  take
    into account when balancing the rights of the  individual  against  the
    public interest.  Although there was an indication that private  health
    care had been enlisted when the appellants were in the United  Kingdom,
    I am not persuaded that they would not be a burden on  the  NHS  system
    when in the United Kingdom.  At the date of decision I conclude that it
    would be reasonable to expect the appellants  and  sponsors  and  their
    family to continue conduct family life  as   has  been  done  hitherto.
    That said, if their medical conditions are now such that they meet  the
    Immigration Rules it is open to them to make a fresh application.

52. Following Huang v SSHD [2007] UKHL 11, and taking full account  of  all
    considerations, I did not consider that any family or private  life  of
    the claimant was prejudiced in a manner sufficiently serious to  amount
    to a breach of the fundamental right protected by Article 8.

53. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified.  I set aside the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007) and remake the decision  under  section
    12(2) (b) (ii) of the TCE 2007 and dismiss the appeals.

Order

Appeals dismissed.


Signed   Date 14th August 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Date 14th August

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
