
[pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05605/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11th March 2016                           |On 13th April 2016            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY

                                   Between

                                    [s n]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms T Murshad (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal against a decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Grimshaw,  hereinafter  "the  judge")
    dismissing his appeal against a decision of an Entry Clearance  Officer
    made on 26th March 2014, refusing to grant him entry clearance to  come
    to the UK for the purposes of settlement as the  infant  child  of  his
    mother and Sponsor.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe and was born on [ ]  2000.   He
    is, therefore, a  minor.  His  mother  and  Sponsor  (hereinafter  "the
    Sponsor"), [SaN] is now a naturalised British citizen.  She came to the
    UK as long ago as 5th December 2002 and claimed asylum  in  2003.   Her
    application was initially refused but, in due course, in fact  on  20th
    February 2009, she was granted indefinite leave to remain  in  the  UK.
    She subsequently naturalised on 15th March 2011.   She  says  that  the
    Appellant's father has never had any involvement with him, that she had
    lived with the Appellant prior to leaving Zimbabwe and that  after  she
    left  he  stayed  with  her  mother  (his  grandmother)  but  that  she
    unfortunately passed away in October of 2013.  Hence,  the  application
    for entry clearance.  The Sponsor explains that she was  worried  about
    the Appellant because he had been staying with a nephew  who  "has  now
    turned  18"  but  who  had  appeared  to  be  disinterested  in  taking
    responsibility for him.

 3. By way of further background, the Sponsor explained that  she  had  not
    previously been in a position to adequately maintain the Appellant  but
    had, nevertheless, sent him some money at various times since  she  had
    come to the UK.  She said that, since arriving here, she  has  had  two
    further children, a son born on [ ] 2007 and a daughter  born  on  [  ]
    2010, both of whom are British citizens.  Her daughter has neurological
    problems and the Sponsor is her carer.

 4. As indicated, the Entry Clearance Officer refused the application.   By
    the time the Appellant's appeal came before the  judge,  there  was  no
    dispute about the fact that he is the son of the Sponsor and there  was
    no dispute that the maintenance and accommodation requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules were satisfied.  The substantive Immigration Rule  in
    these circumstances is paragraph 297.  However, paragraph  320(7A)  was
    also highly relevant because the Respondent had concluded, and such was
    not in dispute before the judge, that  a  birth  certificate  filed  in
    support of the entry clearance application was a false document.

 5. The judge heard the appeal on 14th May 2015.  The Sponsor attended  and
    gave oral evidence.  Both parties were represented.

 6. As indicated, the judge  dismissed  the  appeal.   She  considered  the
    position under the Immigration Rules first of  all  and  said  she  was
    satisfied a false document had been filed in support of the application
    such that refusal, following paragraph 320(7A)  under  the  Rules,  was
    mandatory.  She explained her reasoning as to that in this way;

         "26. It may very well be the case that the Appellant, together with
             his mother and grandmother are innocent victims in the  matter
             and did not know that the birth  certificate  issued  had  not
             come from the Registrar.  However, that is not the end of  the
             matter.  The refusal notice also alleges the falsification  of
             the  document  that  purports  to  be  the  Appellant's  birth
             certificate.

         27.  I am satisfied that the Respondent has proved to the requisite
             standard  that  the  birth  certificate  submitted  with   the
             application is a false document.  The  case  of  AA  (Nigeria)
             defined a false document as one that tells a lie about itself.
              In the present case, the Respondent was asked to  rely  on  a
             document  which  purported  to  be   the   Appellant's   birth
             certificate showing that he was  related  to  the  Sponsor  as
             claimed.  I find as fact that the document  submitted  by  the
             Appellant was not a genuine  birth  certificate.   Indeed  the
             Appellant does not seek to persuade me otherwise.

         28.  Unfortunately for the Appellant the law is strict in  relation
             to the submission of a false document.  The Immigration  Rules
             provide for a mandatory refusal in  these  circumstances.   In
             other words refusal under paragraph 320(7A) is  mandatory  and
             draconian,  notwithstanding  the  Appellant,  his  mother  and
             grandmother were innocent of the fact that the  document  that
             purported to be a birth certificate, and had been obtained for
             the purposes of the application and a passport, was false."

 7. The judge went on to say that, given that she had found  the  mandatory
    refusal ground to apply, there was little point in her going on to make
    any decision in relation to the disputed aspects of paragraph 297  (the
    substantive Rule) which would, of course,  have  necessitated  findings
    concerning, in particular, whether the Appellant's Sponsor had had sole
    responsibility for his upbringing and/or whether there were serious  or
    compelling family or other considerations making exclusion of him  from
    the UK undesirable.

 8. The judge then turned to the possible applicability of Article 8 of the
    European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) outside of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  She noted that the intention behind the Rules was to  strike  a
    fair balance of interests between an individual and society as a  whole
    and said that if the requirements  of  the  Rules  were  not  met  then
    compelling circumstances  must  exist  to  justify  a  grant  of  entry
    clearance outside those Rules.  She then reasoned matters as follows;

         "32. Accordingly, the factors that are pertinent to  the  Appellant
             to support the grant of  entry  clearance  outside  the  Rules
             relate to the issue of proportionality.  I  have  gone  on  to
             consider if the refusal of entry  clearance  is  proportionate
             and thus justified under Article 8.

         33.  I bear in mind that the maintenance of immigration control and
             a fair and effective  immigration  policy  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         34.  I have gone on to consider the factors that weigh in favour of
             the Appellant.

         35.  I accept that the Appellant is a child who  is  now  aged  14.
             Clearly his interests are an important matter although not the
             primary factor when I conduct the  proportionality  assessment
             and weigh the interests of the individual  and  those  of  the
             general community.

         36.  On the totality of the evidence before me I make the following
             findings.  The Sponsor is in a position to financially support
             the Appellant and pay for his education.   The  Appellant  can
             continue to live  in  the  house  that  the  Sponsor  owns  in
             Zimbabwe.  I am aware that the Sponsor has concerns about  the
             attitude of her nephew who shares the  house.   She  describes
             him as "distant and disinterested in taking responsibility for
             being guardian to my son".  However, against that I  note  the
             Sponsor has sensibly put in hand arrangements  with  a  family
             friend, Florence, so she can keep an eye on the Appellant  and
             ensure his needs for basic necessities are met.   Despite  the
             concerns on the part of the  Sponsor  as  to  the  Appellant's
             welfare I note from the medical evidence that the Appellant is
             in good health.  The letter from Dr Kuzanga dated 6th  January
             2014 confirms that the Appellant was examined "...  and  found
             to be physically and mentally healthy all round".

         37.  I am satisfied that contact between the Appellant and  Sponsor
             can be maintained by telephone or by utilising other tools  of
             communication.  Furthermore, the Sponsor can visit  and  spend
             time with the Appellant in Zimbabwe as  she  has  done  so  on
             three occasions in the past.  There appears to be no  pressing
             need that would underpin a claim for entry  clearance  outside
             the Rules.

         38.  In short I find no evidence to justify a conclusion that there
             are compelling or compassionate features to this application.

         39.  I am mindful that my decision will be a disappointment to  the
             Sponsor.  However, when I stand back and look at the  evidence
             as a whole, the end result does not make the position  of  the
             Appellant or the Sponsor rare or compelling, warranting  entry
             outside the Rules.  The maintenance  of  family  life  may  be
             difficult but I cannot find that it  is  lost  notwithstanding
             the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  live  apart  and  in   different
             countries.

         40.  I am satisfied that the decision to refuse entry clearance  in
             this case is one that can be justified by the Respondent as  a
             proportionate   and    fair    balance    between    competing
             considerations."

 9. So, the judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

10. That was not the  end  of  the  matter  because  the  Appellant  sought
    permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  summary,  it  was
    contended in the grounds that the judge had erred in;

      a) failing to weigh in the balance, when considering Article 8 outside
         the Rules, her  view  that  the  Appellant,  the  Sponsor  and  the
         Sponsor's mother might be "innocent victims" with  respect  to  the
         false birth certificate;

      b) failing to refer to the interests of wider family members including
         the UK based children of the Sponsor one of whom is disabled;

      c) failing to consider Article 8 outside the Rules in  line  with  the
         five fold test set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27;

      d)  failing  to  adequately  consider  particular  family  and   other
         circumstances;

      e) failing to apply the judgment in Chikwamba [2008] UKHL 40;

      f) wrongly concluding that contact between the Appellant  and  Sponsor
         by way of "modern forms of  communication"  could  be  an  adequate
         substitute for normal family life.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
    and the salient part of the grant reads as follows;

         "The Grounds of Appeal disclosed an arguable error of  law  on  the
         part of the judge.  The judge made an arguable error of law in  not
         carrying out a structured approach to a resolution of the Article 8
         appeal and the judge did not carry out  the  sequential  five  step
         consideration suggested by Lord Bingham of Cornhill at paragraph 17
         of judgment in R (Razgar v The Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department) [2004] INLR 349 (HL).  In failing to do  so  the  judge
         made a further arguable error of  law  in  failing  to  accord  due
         weight to the family  life  which  the  Appellant  had  established
         before the date when the Respondent made the decision to refuse  to
         grant entry clearance.  All the suggested grounds are arguable".

12. The matter was then listed for a  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal
    (before me) so that the question of whether the  judge  had  materially
    erred in law such that her decision ought to  be  set  aside  could  be
    considered.  Representation at that hearing was as stated above.

13. Ms Murshad, for the Appellant, maintained the various points which  had
    been made in the Grounds of Appeal and did not limit herself  to  those
    points which had directly led to permission being granted.  Of  course,
    she was not required to do so.  She suggested that the judge had failed
    to adequately consider the best interest of the child  Appellant.   She
    argued the judge had failed to  consider  the  best  interests  of  his
    siblings.  Given that it had  been  accepted  that  the  Appellant  and
    Sponsor were "innocent victims" with respect to the documentation fraud
    there was nothing weighing in favour of the public interest in refusing
    entry clearance.  The judge had failed to appreciate that.   She  ought
    to  have  undertaken  a  full  consideration  of  the  requirements  in
    paragraph 297 of the Rules because the extent to which the  Rules  were
    not satisfied was a highly relevant factor when considering  Article  8
    outside of those Rules.  The judge had, it  was  said,  taken  a  "very
    cursory approach"  to  matters,  in  particular,  those  involving  the
    Appellant's best interests as a child.

14. Mr Diwnycz submitted that, in fact, the judge  had  not  clearly  found
    that the Appellant and/or the Sponsor were innocent with respect to the
    documentation fraud.  There had been no requirement for  the  judge  to
    undertake an exhaustive consideration of the paragraph 297 requirements
    given her finding that the appeal failed under the Rules in  any  event
    because of the application of paragraph 320(7A).

15. Finally, Ms Murshad invited me to set aside the judge's decision and to
    remit to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision to be remade.

16. I have concluded, after careful  consideration  and  not  without  some
    hesitation that the judge did err in law in a material manner though  I
    would wish to stress that I  reject  many  of  the  criticisms  of  the
    determination which have been advanced.

17. I will deal, albeit briefly, with some of the criticisms which I  think
    lack merit.  It does not seem to me that the judge materially erred  by
    moving straight to proportionality rather than working her way  through
    the classic Razgar steps on the facts of this case.   There  was  never
    any serious doubt that Article 8 was engaged and, similarly, there  was
    never any serious doubt that any interference  with  Article  8  rights
    brought about by the refusal of entry clearance was lawful and  was  in
    pursuance of a legitimate aim.  Accordingly, nothing  would  have  been
    served by the judge simply reciting all  of  that.   I  do  not  really
    understand the point about  Chikwamba.  Chikwamba was  a  removal  case
    involving  the  proposed  return  of  one  member  of   a   couple   in
    circumstances where it appeared inevitable that if that member  of  the
    couple did return to the home country entry clearance would be  granted
    thus enabling a return.  There just does not  seem  to  me  to  be  any
    similarity at all with this case nor does it seem to me that  there  is
    anything in the judgment of Chikwamba which could realistically  assist
    this Appellant.  Nor do I think the judge, in saying what she did about
    the likely ability of the Appellant and  Sponsor  to  maintain  contact
    with each  other,  was  suggesting  that  such  would  be  an  adequate
    substitute for full family life.  She was simply making the  point,  as
    far as it went, that contact was not shut down by the refusal of  entry
    clearance.

18. Having said the above, though, the judge did decide not to consider the
    substantive requirements of paragraph 297 because it was, in her  view,
    irrelevant to the outcome of the appeal bearing in  mind  the  decision
    she had made, and which it was inevitable she would make, with  respect
    to paragraph 320(7A).  So, she did not make findings about whether,  as
    at the date of decision, the Sponsor was exercising sole responsibility
    for the Appellant's upbringing and did not make findings as to  whether
    there were serious and compelling family or other considerations  which
    made exclusion of the Appellant undesirable.  Those were, it  seems  to
    me, matters of relevance as to the Article 8 consideration outside  the
    Rules.  I do not say, as Ms  Murshad  seemed  to  suggest,  that  there
    necessarily had to be a consideration of the Rules and a decision as to
    the extent to which the requirements of the Rules were met or not prior
    to there being a consideration of Article 8 outside the Rules but I  do
    say that those sorts of matters had to be considered somewhere  in  the
    determination because they were directly  relevant  to  the  Article  8
    position outwith the Rules.

19. As it turns out, it is readily apparent from what  the  judge  said  at
    paragraph 36 of the determination,  that  had  she  asked  herself  the
    specific question she would have concluded that there were not  serious
    and compelling family or other considerations.  I cannot, though,  find
    anything in the determination which indicates that the judge  undertook
    a consideration of or reached  findings  about  the  question  of  sole
    responsibility.  Nor did she undertake any assessment as to the  nature
    of and strength  of  the  relationship  between  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant.   Had  she  asked  herself  about  the  sole  responsibility
    question, though, she would have had to  do  so.  In  any  event,  sole
    responsibility fed into  a  consideration  of  what  was  in  his  best
    interests.  I would agree that, in this regard,  the  judge's  findings
    and the judge's consideration of the  evidence  were  not  sufficiently
    holistic.  I am, therefore, albeit quite narrowly, persuaded  that  the
    decision has to be set aside.

20. Having set aside the decision I have decided to remit to the First-tier
    Tribunal.  That is because it seems to  me  that  there  is  scope  for
    further fact-finding regarding the nature, substance  and  strength  of
    the relationship between the Sponsor and the Appellant.  There is scope
    for further findings as to his situation in Zimbabwe and what his  best
    interests are though, of course, it must be  remembered  he  is  not  a
    British citizen.  Those are all relevant to the position outside of the
    Rules. I will not preserve anything from the first decision  so  as  to
    give the new First-tier Tribunal a blank canvass but it does  not  seem
    that there is any basis upon which to argue that paragraph  320(7A)  is
    not applicable to this case.  I have set out some  directions  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal below.

Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

 1) I have set aside the decision of 3rd June 2015.  All matters are to  be
    considered entirely afresh by the new First-tier Tribunal.

 2) The time estimate for the appeal shall be two hours.  The services of a
    Ndebele speaking interpreter shall be required.

 3) The hearing shall  take  place,  subject  to  any  variation  of  these
    directions, in the Bradford Hearing Centre.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The case is  remitted
to a new and differently constituted First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway
