
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05829/2014
                                                               OA/05830/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 11 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH


                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                          SYEDA SADIA HAIDER RIVZI
                              syeda maha fatima
                       (no anonymity directions MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Saini, counsel, instructed by Saj Law Chambers


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The 1st Respondent, who was born on 3 October 1984, is  a  national  of
    Pakistan.  She married in 2006 and on 18 August 2008, her daughter, the
    2nd Respondent, was born. It is the  1st  Respondent's  case  that  her
    husband died of a heart attack on 23 February 2012.

2.   On 12 December 2012 the Respondents  applied  for  entry  clearance  as
    visitors but their applications were refused on 20 December 2012.

3.   On 7 March 2014 the 1st Respondent  applied  for  entry  clearance  for
    settlement as an adult dependent  relative  of  her  brother,  Muhammad
    Qasim Raza, who is a British citizen working in the United Kingdom. The
    2nd Respondent applied for entry  clearance  as  the  1st  Respondent's
    dependent. Their applications were refused on 21 March 2014. The  Entry
    Clearance Officer stated  that  he  was  not  satisfied  that  the  1st
    Respondent required long-term personal care to perform  everyday  tasks
    as a result of age, illness or disability. He was  also  not  satisfied
    that she was unable, even with the practical and financial help of  her
    sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in Pakistan as it was not
    available or affordable.  He also stated that he was not satisfied that
    there were serious and compelling family or other considerations  which
    made the 2nd Respondent's exclusion undesirable.

4.   The Appellant appealed on 28 April 2014. She asserted that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had failed to consider whether the requirements  of
    paragraphs 34 - 37 of  Appendix  FM-SE  had  been  complied  with  when
    considering the 1st Respondent's appeal and whether she  required  long
    term personal care to perform everyday  tasks  as  the  result  of  her
    mental condition.

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cruthers
    on 7th July 2015.  He  found  that  it  was  arguable  that  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mace had paid insufficient attention to  the  evidential
    requirements contained in Appendix FM-SE.

ERROR OF LAW HEARING

6.   The Appellants' counsel arrived late to the hearing, having  been  very
    recently asked to substitute for another member of his chambers who was
    still in another court. In her grounds of appeal the Appellant had  put
    the Tribunal and the Respondents on notice that she would  be  applying
    to rely on additional evidence which  was  not  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge. The copy of the application form was not made available
    to just prior to the hearing. However, the Respondents' counsel did not
    object to it being adduced and in any event they  had  been  on  notice
    that the Appellant would be relying on this form since they were served
    with her notice of appeal. I admitted the copy of the application  form
    under Regulation 15(2A) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  In the notice, the Appellant had explained that it had not
    been before the First-tier Tribunal Judge as she had not been  able  to
    provide a Home Office Presenting Officer for that hearing.  I find that
    the delay in producing the application form  was  not  unreasonable.  I
    also reminded myself of the overriding objectives which underpinned the
    Regulations, which include the need  to  deal  with  cases  fairly  and
    justly, avoiding unnecessary formality and avoiding delay.

7.   However, I gave counsel time to  take  instructions  on  the  document,
    which were  provided  by  the  Appellants'  sponsor  and  other  family
    members. He told me that he was instructed to continue with the hearing
    and that the 1st Respondent had not completed the application form  but
    had relied on an agent to do so. Therefore, any  inconsistencies  arose
    from errors made by that agent.

8.   The Home Office Presenting Officer noted that in  the  application  for
    entry clearance submitted on 12 December 2012 the  1st  Respondent  had
    said that she lived with her husband and worked as  a  teacher  at  the
    Khatoon-E-Pakistan English Medium School in Karachi. He submitted  that
    this contradicted her present application which said that  her  husband
    had died on 23 February 2012 and that even before  his  death  she  was
    wholly dependent upon her husband and was not working.  This cast doubt
    on the evidence given by her witnesses at the hearing before First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mace.

9.   The Respondents' counsel replied and said that he was  instructed  that
    the application in 2012 was made by an agent. He  was  also  instructed
    that the 1st Respondent was not fluent in English and  was  illiterate.
    He submitted that as the application form had not been relied  upon  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer or Entry Clearance Manager or  served  with
    the application for permission to appeal, I should attach little weight
    to it.  In addition, he submitted that the email address  on  the  2012
    application was not hers and that the telephone number was  also  wrong
    and he relied on the fact that the application form was not signed.

10.  He also submitted that paragraphs 12, 14, 15 and 16 of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision and reasons referred to  sufficient  evidence
    to establish that the 1st Respondent met the requirements of Section EC-
    DR of Appendix FM.  In addition, he asserted that it was not in the 2nd
    Respondent's best interests to be prevented from going outside or going
    to school.  In addition, he submitted that, if there were any errors of
    law in the decision and reasons, they were not  material  and  asserted
    that the evidence relied upon met the requirements of Appendix FM-SE.

11.  Paragraphs 34 to 37 of Appendix FM-SE to the Immigration Rules  details
    the evidence which an applicant needs to provide to show that he or she
    requires long-term personal care.  Paragraph 34(a) states that  medical
    evidence is needed to show that his or her physical or mental condition
    means that he or she cannot  perform  everyday  tasks.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  took  into  account  letters  written  by  Dr.  Shahid
    Daudpote, dated 2nd May 2014 and 30 December  2014.  I  note  that  she
    should only have taken into account the contents of those letters which
    were evidence of the circumstances appertaining  at  the  date  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision. Therefore, she was only entitled to
    take into account evidence relating to her  appointments  prior  to  21
    March 2014. This was restricted to  the  fact  that  she  attended  his
    surgery on 2 March 2012 when he diagnosed her as suffering  from  great
    depression and severe anxiety following the death of her  husband.   He
    did not confirm that her mental condition was such that she  could  not
    perform everyday tasks.

12.  In addition there was no evidence to establish that the 1st  Respondent
    could comply with paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE and  show  that,  even
    with the practical and financial help of the sponsor  in  the  UK,  she
    could not obtain the required level of care in Pakistan. This  evidence
    needed to be from (a) a central or local health authority (b)  a  local
    authority and (c) a doctor or other health professional. There  was  no
    evidence from a central or local health authority or a health authority
    and Dr. Daudpote simply did not address this issue.  At  most  he  said
    that she required constant care and attention. In relation to paragraph
    36 the 1st Respondent had also not  shown  why  her  family  could  not
    continue to support her in Pakistan.

13.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge's failure  to  address  these  evidential
    requirements of Appendix FM-SE amounted to an error of law. This  error
    of law also impacted on the 2nd Respondent's case  as  she  had  sought
    settlement as the 1st Appellant's dependent.

14.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge Mace  did  not  go  on  to  consider  the
    appeals in the context of Article 8 of the ECHR but, even if  she  had,
    the contents of the application form submitted in 2012 now  cast  doubt
    on whether she continues to enjoy a family life in Pakistan.

15.  Counsel for the Respondents said that he was instructed that  the  form
    contradicted  the  evidence  given  at  the  appeal  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Mace because it had been completed by an agent. However,
    in answer to question 121 of the application form  the  1st  Respondent
    had said that she had not used an agent or representative  to  complete
    the application.  The front page of the application form also said that
    she had submitted the form in person and that it had been submitted  on
    line. I accept that this is why it was not signed by her.

16.  Counsel for the Respondents said that he was instructed  that  the  1st
    Respondent was illiterate and could  not  speak  English  but  did  not
    explain why the previous application form had said that she  taught  at
    an English medium school or what evidence  was  provided  to  establish
    that she was for the purposes of application  for  entry  clearance  as
    visitors. I also note that the earlier form indicates that she  had  an
    email address connected with the school she was said  to  work  at  and
    that the core part of telephone numbers given on both application forms
    was the same.

17.  I have also taken into account the fact that there was  no  mention  of
    the 1st Respondent being in need of long term care in the letter, dated
    7 March 2014, from the Respondents'  solicitor.   Instead,  the  letter
    referred to them meeting the requirements  of  unspecified  immigration
    rules and asserted that the 1st Respondent was a widow who  was  wholly
    and solely dependent upon the sponsor and that the Respondents did  not
    have any male relative to look after them in Pakistan.

18.  I note that the Respondents had relied on a death certificate  said  to
    be of the 1st Respondent's husband but its authenticity  is  cast  into
    doubt by the new evidence now before  the  Tribunal.  This  also  casts
    doubt on the oral evidence given before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Mace
    and her findings of fact. Therefore, I find that the proper response is
    to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be  re-heard  in  the
    light of all relevant evidence, including any evidence which  may  have
    been submitted in support of the 2012 application.

19.  Taking all of this into account I find  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision and reasons did contain material errors of law, as she
    had not referred to the requirements contained in Appendix FM-SE.

Notice of Decision

1.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision  and  reasons  to  allow  the
    Respondents' appeals did include material errors of law and I set aside
    her decision.

2.   I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de  novo  hearing
    under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act
    2007 before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mace.


    [pic]
Signed   Date 9 October 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
