
[pic]
IAC-AH-CO-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/05178/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 26 June 2015                       |On 8 July 2015                        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               mr Munir Ahmed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Bajwa, Solicitor, A Bajwa & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Miss A Everett, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal  against  a  decision  by  an
    Entry Clearance Officer in Islamabad (post reference Islamabad\1737743)
    on 13 March 2014 to refuse his application for  entry  clearance  as  a
    partner under Appendix  FM  because  he  was  not  satisfied  that  his
    relationship with his sponsor was genuine and subsisting or  that  they
    intended to live  together  permanently  in  the  UK.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do  not  consider
    that the appellant should be accorded anonymity for  these  proceedings
    in the Upper Tribunal.

The Background

 2. In his application form, the appellant said that he had met his sponsor
    in the United Kingdom on 10 September 2011, and their relationship  had
    begun on 22 January 2013, which is the day that they had  got  married.
    They had lived together from 22 January 2013 to 27 February 2013,  when
    he returned to his home country of Pakistan.  At the date of  marriage,
    he was aged 33 and his sponsor was aged 44.  He indicated that  he  was
    an overstayer when they got married, as he said that he had entered the
    United Kingdom on 30 October 2008 on a family visit, but  had  remained
    in the UK until 27 February 2013.  The date of his  departure  was  the
    last date that they had seen each other.  They kept  in  touch  through
    telephone, Skype and email.

The Reasons for Refusal

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer observed that in order to demonstrate  that
    there had been a genuine and subsisting relationship since 27  February
    2013, the appellant had provided some handwritten greetings cards.   He
    had  not  provided  any  evidence,  such  as  a  stamped  envelope,  to
    demonstrate that these cards were ever sent.  It was  also  noted  that
    the cards did not exhibit any signs of where that would  indicate  they
    were posted through the international postage system.  He said that  he
    spoke to his sponsor via telephone, Skype and email,  but  he  had  not
    provided any documents to demonstrate this.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant's appeal came before Judge A W Khan sitting  at  Richmond
    Magistrates'  Court  on  3  March  2015.   Both  parties  were  legally
    represented.  The sponsor gave oral  evidence,  and  she  produced  the
    originals  of  telephone  records  from  Lycamobile  as   evidence   of
    telephonic contact with her husband in Pakistan.

 5. She had not been able to visit the appellant in  Pakistan  because  her
    son suffered from psychiatric problems, which meant that  she  was  not
    able  to  go  to  Pakistan.   She  confirmed  that  the  appellant  had
    overstayed his  visa,  but  he  had  eventually  returned  to  Pakistan
    voluntarily.  The parents did not agree to her marrying the  appellant.
    She did  not  cohabit  with  the  appellant  after  the  wedding.   The
    appellant had returned to Pakistan  due  to  his  mother's  ill-health.
    They communicated with each other mainly by telephone.  There  were  no
    photographs of them together.  The  cards  were  sent  through  friends
    going to Pakistan as the post was unreliable.

 6. In answer to questions from the Tribunal, the  sponsor  clarified  that
    although she had been married at Ilford Registry Office on  22  January
    2013, there was no Islamic wedding thereafter.  The  witness  statement
    was wrong when she said that  they  had  lived  with  each  other  from
    January to February 2013.  The appellant was living at another address.
     She believed her marriage was  genuine,  and  she  believed  that  the
    appellant held the same view.

 7. In closing submissions on behalf of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Mr
    Collins submitted there was little evidence of a genuine and subsisting
    marriage, and the parties to the marriage had never  cohabited.   There
    was no witness statement from the appellant and no statement  from  the
    person who had introduced the appellant to the sponsor.  There were  no
    photographs of the wedding or of them together on any other  occasions.
    Even if the sponsor believed the marriage was  genuine,  there  was  no
    evidence that the appellant believed this.

 8. In his subsequent decision,  the  judge's  findings  were  set  out  in
    paragraphs [10] to [12].  He was not satisfied that the  appellant  was
    able to show that he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
    the sponsor.  There was a complete  lack  of  documentary  evidence  to
    prove this other than telephone records.  While he  accepted  that  the
    sponsor had been calling various telephone numbers, including what  was
    claimed to be the appellant's telephone numbers and those of his father
    and brother, this did not constitute evidence  that  the  marriage  was
    genuine and subsisting.  While it might very well be the case that  the
    sponsor believed the marriage  was  genuine  and  subsisting  from  her
    perspective, there was nothing from the appellant in the  form  of  any
    such evidence from him.  He had not supplied a  witness  statement  and
    there was no supporting evidence from anyone within the UK.

 9. Furthermore, there was a material discrepancy between what the  sponsor
    had said in her witness statement and  what  she  said  at  the  appeal
    hearing  about  cohabiting  after  the  wedding.   He  had  noted   her
    explanation in evidence that they had not  cohabited  after  the  civil
    registry office wedding because there was no Islamic wedding.  He  also
    took into account that the appellant had overstayed  for  a  period  of
    four years.  The judge continued:

         "What I do find in the evidence  is  that  the  appellant  had  not
         produced any  credible  evidence  to  show  that  the  relationship
         between him and his partner is genuine and subsisting and  that  he
         intends  to  live  with  her  together  permanently  in   the   UK,
         notwithstanding the evidence emanating from the sponsor herself and
         even accepting that it has not been possible for her to  visit  the
         appellant in Pakistan because of her son's mental  health  problems
         which required her to be with him.  The  question  of  whether  the
         marriage  is  genuine  and  subsisting  and  whether  there  is  an
         intention to live permanently with each other must come  from  both
         parties  and  such  evidence  is  singularly   lacking   from   the
         appellant."

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

10. On 21 May 2015 Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         "It is arguable that  the  judge  failed  to  follow  the  guidance
         provided by the Upper Tribunal in  Goudey  (subsisting  marriage  -
         evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT 00041 (IAC) when assessing the evidence
         provided.  It is arguable that the judge's expectations  about  the
         evidence exceeded the relevant standard of proof, being  a  balance
         of probabilities.  Particularly, the judge failed to encounter  the
         sponsor's evidence that he found credible which  included  evidence
         about the appellant's intentions."

The Rule 24 Response

11. On 8 June 2015 Lorna Kenny of the Specialist Appeals Team  settled  the
    Rule 24 response on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer opposing  the
    appeal.  She contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  directed
    himself appropriately.  He confirmed at paragraph [10] of the  decision
    that he had  considered  the  whole  of  the  evidence  in  the  round,
    including the documents and  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor.   He  had
    applied the correct standard of proof, and no material error of law was
    revealed in the judge's finding that the appellant had  not  discharged
    the burden upon him.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

12. At the hearing before me, Mr Bajwa developed the  arguments  raised  in
    the application for permission, and Miss Everett stood by the  Rule  24
    response.

Discussion

13. At the time when the appellant married the sponsor, he was a long  term
    overstayer and his immigration status was highly precarious.  The  fact
    that the parties did not cohabit following the civil marriage  is  much
    more consistent with the marriage being one of convenience. It was  not
    a satisfactory explanation that the reason  why  the  parties  did  not
    cohabit was because there was not an Islamic wedding  after  the  civil
    marriage.  If the marriage  was  genuine,  and  the  parties  genuinely
    intended to live together permanently, there  was  no  good  reason  to
    delay  having  an  Islamic  marriage  ceremony,  and  hence  to   delay
    cohabitation as husband and wife.  On the evidence, the reason why  the
    appellant returned to Pakistan was  not  in  order  to  regularise  his
    status by making an application for entry clearance as a spouse, but to
    see his sick mother.

14. The judge did not draw out the significance of the sponsor's  admission
    that the alleged period of cohabitation referred to in the  application
    (and also in her witness statement) was untrue.  He simply referred  to
    it as a material discrepancy.  But in doing so, the judge  was  plainly
    indicating that he was taking the  sponsor's  damaging  admission  into
    account as part of his reasoning  as  to  why  the  appellant  had  not
    discharged the burden of proof.

15. Mr Bajwa placed great reliance on the fact  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer had only refused the application on a narrow ground, which  was
    the  lack  of  supporting  documentary  evidence  to  show  intervening
    devotion.  But the Entry Clearance Officer was not aware when  deciding
    the application that the assertion of marital cohabitation prior to the
    appellant's departure from the UK was an  untrue  one.   If  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer had been aware of it, he would no doubt  have  relied
    heavily on it as justifying the refusal.  In  any  event,  the  judge's
    task was to assess the evidence in its totality.   The  judge  was  not
    confined to considering the evidence which the Entry Clearance  Officer
    had taken into account.

16. Another thread of Mr Bajwa's error of law challenge was that there  had
    been procedural unfairness and  that  the  judge  had  not  taken  into
    account some photographs that had been sent to him after  the  hearing.
    These were apparently photographs taken at the registry office.   There
    were no other photographs of the couple.

17. As I informed the representatives at the hearing, there is no  evidence
    on file of photographs or other documents being received by the  First-
    tier Tribunal after the hearing.  But it is not in any event in dispute
    that the appellant married the sponsor at a registry  office.   So  the
    judge's alleged failure to take into account photographs of  the  civil
    marriage does not translate into a material error of law.  It does  not
    in any way impact on his reasoning that the  appellant  had  failed  to
    show, by reference to  his  subsequent  behaviour,  that  the  marriage
    between him and the sponsor was, at the date of the  refusal  decision,
    genuine and subsisting, and that both parties to the marriage genuinely
    intended to live together permanently as husband and wife.

18. Finally, I do not consider that there was any internal contradiction in
    the judge accepting that the sponsor had,  or  might  have,  an  honest
    belief that her marriage to the appellant was genuine  and  subsisting,
    but not accepting that she was right  in  this  belief.   As  discussed
    earlier, there was an in-built asymmetry in the relationship,  in  that
    the sponsor did not need to marry the appellant in order to continue to
    enjoy her settled life in the United  Kingdom,  whereas  the  appellant
    very much needed to marry the sponsor (or  someone  else  with  settled
    status and financial means) in order to have any prospect of be able to
    remain here lawfully, or of being able to obtain entry clearance  as  a
    spouse in due course.  When the appellant's adverse immigration history
    is taken into account, together with  the  damaging  admission  of  the
    sponsor that there was no cohabitation following the civil marriage, it
    is abundantly clear that the judge did not apply too higher a  standard
    of proof when finding against the appellant.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal by the  appellant  to  the
Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

