
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/05579/2013
     OA/05582/2013
     OA/05586/2013
     OA/05589/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21st October 2014                         |3rd November 2014             |
|                                             |..............................|
|                                             |.........                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

                        NILOFA ALAM (FIRST APPELLANT)
                      SHAHMIMUL ALAM (SECOND APPELLANT)
                        NAYMUL ALAM (THIRD APPELLANT)
                       SUMIYA ALAM (FOURTH APPELLANT)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - DHAKA

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr M Azmi, instructed by Messrs Samad & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Smart, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Bangladesh born respectively on 1st  May
    1972, 20th January 1995, 14th July 1998 and 3rd June 2007.   The  First
    Appellant is married to the Sponsor Shah Alam, who is  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom.  The First Appellant and Sponsor are the parents of the
    other Appellants.

 2. In November 2012 the Appellants applied for entry clearance to come  to
    the United Kingdom for settlement as the wife and children respectively
    of the Sponsor.  Those applications were refused on 21st  January  2013
    as the ECO was  not  satisfied  that  the  Sponsor  met  the  financial
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.  The Appellants  appealed  under
    Section 82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. In a review carried out  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  after  the
    lodging of the Notices of Appeal the refusal on financial  grounds  was
    maintained but the ECM went on  to  comment  on  the  English  language
    certificate provided by the First Appellant in the following terms:

         "I acknowledge that Appellant 1 provided  a  copy  of  her  English
         language  certificates  in  speaking  and  reading,   writing   and
         listening.  However although  the  authenticity  of  the  City  and
         Guilds certificate  was  not  challenged  by  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer at the time of decision I would highlight  that  subsequent
         investigations conducted by  City  and  Guilds  and  UK  Visas  and
         Immigration Dhaka  have  revealed  inconsistencies  in  testing  in
         Bangladesh.  As a result of these investigations I am not satisfied
         that the documents which the Appellant has provided  satisfactorily
         demonstrate that she has obtained the qualifications  mentioned  on
         the certificate.  The inconsistencies  of  testing  have  now  been
         addressed by City and Guilds in Bangladesh who have agreed to offer
         free re-testing to all affected visa applicants.  The Appellant has
         been issued with a letter explaining this and has  been  offered  a
         gratis re-test; a copy of this letter is included with  the  appeal
         bundle.  I would politely request that the Immigration Judge refers
         to the information provided under Section  108  and  considers  the
         doubts over the  English  language  requirement  when  hearing  the
         case."

 4. The appeal was heard before First-tier Tribunal Nixon on  6th  November
    2013.  At the commencement of the hearing  the  judge  indicated  that,
    having looked at the documents provided, she  was  prepared  to  accept
    that the Appellants met the financial requirements of  the  Immigration
    Rules and the only issue was whether the First Appellant  had  provided
    an acceptable English language  certificate.   She  recorded  that  the
    Appellant's representative said that the First Appellant had  been  due
    to sit a further test on 4th November 2013  but  due  to  a  three  day
    strike in Bangladesh it had  been  cancelled  and  he  applied  for  an
    adjournment to enable her to take the test.  He said that she  had  not
    booked to take the test earlier as she had been pre-occupied  with  the
    children's examinations and she had not booked it before that  time  as
    she had needed to 'prepare for the test' and booking the test took time
    as there were so many applicants.  The judge  refused  the  application
    for an adjournment stating that she did not accept the explanation that
    the Appellant needed to prepare for the  test  for  the  preceding  six
    weeks as she claimed to already have passed such a test.  At that stage
    she recorded (in paragraph 5 of her determination) "as a consequence Mr
    Samad indicated that the appeal would be on human rights  only  as  the
    Appellant could not meet the requirements under the Rules."

 5. In her conclusions the judge noted (at paragraph 15(4)) that the  First
    Appellant  had  failed  to  obtain  an  acceptable   English   language
    certificate  and  could  not  meet  the  criteria  laid  down  by   the
    Immigration Rules.   With  regard  to  Article  8  she  looked  at  the
    questions posed by Lord Bingham at paragraph 17 of Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    27.  She found that family life was established but  then  stated  that
    she did not find that there would be any interference by  dint  of  the
    refusal.  The Sponsor had chosen to leave his family in 2003 to come to
    the UK and had only returned on a few occasions to  visit  them.   They
    had continued to have a relationship via modern  communication  methods
    for a decade and there was nothing  to  suggest  that  this  could  not
    continue.  She did not perceive any breach of Article  8  rights.   She
    considered the best interests of the children would be to  remain  with
    their mother with whom they had spent all of their lives in the country
    where they had always lived.  The appeals were dismissed both under the
    Immigration Rules and with regard to Article 8 ECHR.

 6. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal.  It was  contended  in
    the grounds that

       a)   The judge had made a material misdirection of law or  there  had
          been a procedural irregularity as the English language requirement
          had not been raised in the Grounds of Refusal but only in the  ECM
          review and there had been a reference to Section 108 of  the  2002
          Act.  It was not apparent from the determination whether the judge
          had had sight of the information the  ECM  was  referring  to  and
          whether she had dealt with the matter under Section 108.   It  was
          difficult to see how a re-test would have been  relevant  as  that
          would have been post-decision.  It was said  that  the  judge  had
          erred in her approach.

       b)   The judge made a  misdirection  with  regard  to  Article  8  in
          finding that family life was established but  there  would  be  no
          interference by reason of the refusal, reliance being placed  upon
          AG (Eritrea) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 801.

       c)   She made a material misdirection  of  law  in  her  approach  to
          proportionality and by not following  case  law  in  that  regard.
          Failing to consider whether the state could justify the  exclusion
          of foreign spouses necessary and proportionate  in  pursuit  of  a
          legitimate aim.

       d)   She made inadequate findings on a material issue  as  the  judge
          had not given adequate consideration to the best interests of  the
          children.  Permission was initially refused  by  a  Judge  of  the
          First-tier Tribunal but  the  application  was  renewed,  slightly
          expanded, to this Tribunal.

 7. Permission was granted on 31st  March  2014  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Connor.  He found it arguable that the judge at  first  instance  had
    erred in finding that  the  ECO's  decision  would  not  amount  to  an
    interference with the  Appellant's  rights  to  family  life  with  the
    Sponsor, having regard to AG (Eritrea).  The judge did  not  appear  to
    have considered proportionality.  The issues raised in (d) and (c) fell
    to be considered together.  He could see no merit  in  Ground  (a)  but
    permission was not refused.  Following that  grant  of  permission  the
    respondent filed a response under  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rule  24
    contending that the judge directed herself appropriately and any  error
    under Article 8 was not material as the Appellants would  have  had  to
    have shown compelling or exceptional circumstances in order to succeed.



 8. At the commencement of the hearing before me I mentioned to Mr  Azmi  a
    letter, which was on the Tribunal file, from the Head of  International
    Operations at the City and Guilds of London Institute  dated  20th  May
    2013, addressed to UK Visas and Immigration in Dhaka and concerning the
    recognition  of  City  and  Guilds   International   English   language
    certificates.  The central paragraph of that letter reads as follows

         "In respect to  City  and  Guilds  IESOL  and  ISESOL  certificates
         presented as evidence of English language proficiency  as  part  of
         all new and pending visa applications the following shall apply:

         (1)  All certificates  relating  to  an  examination  conducted  in
             Bangladesh with an issue date prior to 1st October  2012  will
             not be accepted as evidence of  a  pass  in  English  language
             proficiency for visa applications.

         (2)  All certificates from the following City  and  Guilds  centres
             will not be accepted as evidence of a pass in English language
             proficiency for visa applications regardless of date of issue:
             821460 - Advanced Hotel  Management  Institute;  821469  Tommy
             Miah's Hospitality Management Institute; 821470 UK  education.



         The above policy has been agreed to protect the  integrity  of  the
         City and Guilds examination system.   Applicants  affected  by  the
         policy will be required to be re-tested by City and Guilds  as  any
         original certificates submitted as part of visa application will be
         cancelled."

 9. The certificate relied on by the First Appellant in her application was
    dated 9th September 2012.   The  centre  involved  was  Advanced  Hotel
    Management Institute centre number 821460.  Mr Azmi had not  previously
    seen that letter.  He questioned what information had been  before  the
    judge.  There  had  been  no  reference  in  the  determination  to  an
    application under Section 108 of the 2002 Act.  He also sought leave to
    adduce a certificate showing that the  Appellant  had  now  passed  the
    English language test, the new certificates being  dated  9th  December
    2013.  Both representatives accepted that there had been  no  challenge
    to the judge's findings with regards to the financial  requirements  of
    the Rules.

10. Mr Azmi continued that the ECM had offered  a  re-test  for  the  First
    Appellant which suggested that if she had supplied a new certificate it
    would have been accepted.  He said it was also difficult to see whether
    the ECM was raising an allegation of forgery or not.  All that was said
    was that there were inconsistencies.   There  was  no  mention  of  the
    Section 108 procedure in the determination.  The judge had not followed
    the guidance in  the  reported  determination  OA  (Alleged  Forgery  -
    Section 108 Procedure) Nigeria [2007]  UKAIT  00096.   It  was  unclear
    whether the judge had considered documents from City and Guilds or not.
     He submitted there was an error of law in that regard.

11. With regard to Article 8 the judge had found there was no  interference
    and therefore proportionality was not considered.  That he said was  an
    error of law as there was clearly a relationship between the  Appellant
    and her children and her husband and their father and the question  was
    whether  the  Secretary  of  State  could  justify  as  necessary   and
    proportionate their exclusion.  The decision clearly had an  impact  on
    family life.

12. In response Mr Smart relied upon the Rule  24  response  and  submitted
    there was no error.  With regard to Section 108 of  the  2002  Act  the
    judge had not mentioned it because it was not alleged that  there  were
    forged documents.  The First  Appellant  claimed  to  have  passed  the
    English language test but the certificate had been  withdrawn  by  City
    and Guilds.  The judge looked at the explanation and considered  why  a
    re-test had not been booked earlier.  She was  clearly  concerned  that
    the Appellant said that she needed six weeks to study for the  re-test.
    She was entitled to reach the conclusions she did.  The  representative
    at the hearing had accepted that the requirements of the Rules were not
    met and had gone on to argue Article 8 issues.

13. Mr Smart accepted that the consideration of Article 8 had  been  brief.
    It was the case that one of the children had reached the age of  18  in
    January of 2013 but the relevant date was the date of decision.  It was
    a situation of the family's  own  choosing  and  clearly  that  weighed
    significantly with the judge.

14. In reply Mr Azmi said that in the  ECM  review  there  was  a  specific
    reference to Section 108 and therefore indirect allegations of  forgery
    and the judge had not expressly referred to  any  documents.   He  said
    that the current test certificate had been  submitted  to  the  ECO  in
    Dhaka but no response had been received.  If I found an  error  of  law
    with regard to the Section 108 point he  said  the  appropriate  course
    might be to remit the matter to the ECO in Dhaka to reconsider.

15. As to Article 8 the older child was now over the  age  of  18  but  was
    under 18 at the date of application.  The financial  requirements  were
    met.  The English language requirements for the First Appellant had now
    been met.  There was a clear desire of the family to  be  together  and
    the Sponsor could  support  them.   The  wife  could  now  satisfy  the
    requirements of being able to speak English.  The best interests of the
    two younger children would be to be with their father.

16. A final point raised by Mr Smart was that Section 117B of the 2002  Act
    now set out expressly that it was in the public interest  that  persons
    who sought to enter or remain in the United Kingdom were able to  speak
    English.  His contention was that this requirement applied not only  to
    adults but also to children.   Mr  Azmi  commented  that  he  would  be
    surprised if that was the intention of the legislation.

17. The first issue raised in the grounds of appeal related to the  English
    language certificate in respect  of  the  first  appellant.   This  was
    clearly referred to in the ECM review.   It  is  unfortunate  that  the
    judge did not refer specifically to it but on balance I find  that  the
    letter of 20th May 2013 was before her.  It was  already  on  the  file
    before me and there was no correspondence indicating that it  had  been
    produced other than by the Presenting Officer at the hearing  at  first
    instance.  On a fair reading the import of  that  letter  is  that  the
    certificate issued to the First Appellant could not be relied upon  and
    was invalid.  The certificate was dated before  1st  October  2012  and
    furthermore the centre which had presented the First Appellant was  one
    of those specifically mentioned as not  being  accepted  for  producing
    evidence of a pass notwithstanding the date.  That  was  an  assertion,
    supported by evidence, that the certificate presented  was  not  to  be
    relied upon and did not  meet  the  requirements  of  the  Rules.   The
    certificate had been invalidated by  the  City  and  Guilds  of  London
    Institute and an offer made for a free re-test to take place.

18. There is no indication that the Section 108 procedure  was  invoked  at
    the hearing and there was no reason that it should  have  been  as  the
    letter from City and Guilds contains no secret information.  It  is  of
    significance that at the  hearing  the  Appellants'  representative  Mr
    Samad did not seek to argue that the original certificates  were  valid
    but only sought an adjournment for a further test to be taken.  Had  it
    not been accepted on behalf of the First Appellant  that  the  original
    certificate was invalid he could not possibly have pursued that  route.
    As it was he indicated that the appeal would be on human rights grounds
    only.  I share the view of Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor that there  is
    no substance in the Section 108 point.

19. It is then argued that the judge erred in her approach  to  Article  8.
    She accepted that there was family life existing between  the  Sponsor,
    his wife the First Appellant, and the children.  However she found that
    there would not be an interference with that relationship as  a  result
    of the refusal.  That view was arguably in error taking account of  the
    comments of Lord Justice Sedley in AG (Eritrea) as the interference (or
    lack of respect) was more than simply technical or academic.

20. The point was raised in the Rule 24 reply that any error on the part of
    the judge in this regard was not material as it had not been shown that
    there were compelling or exceptional circumstances  to  go  beyond  the
    Rules (it has been noted that these applications were made in  November
    of 2012 some  time  after  the  amendments  to  the  Immigration  Rules
    introduced in July of that year).

21. There has been a good deal of recent jurisprudence on the  question  of
    going beyond the Rules to consider Article 8 issues.  The  guidance  in
    Gulshan (Article 8 - New Rules - Correct Approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640
    and Nagre v SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) indicates that if an Appellant
    does not meet the requirements of the  Rules  there  need  to  be  good
    grounds shown for going beyond  the  Rules  to  consider  issues  under
    Article 8 and only if there are compelling circumstances or the results
    would be unjustifiably harsh consequences should the appeal be  allowed
    on that basis.  That approach has been approved by the Court of  Appeal
    in Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558, although in MM (Lebanon) and
    Others v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 985 Lord  Justice  Aikens  (at  paragraph
    128) stated that he could not see much utility in  imposing  a  further
    intermediary test; if an applicant could  not  satisfy  the  Rule  then
    there either was or was not a further Article 8 claim.

22. In considering whether the judge erred materially in failing to  go  on
    to consider proportionality under Article 8 I have had  regard  to  the
    remainder of the steps outlined by Lord  Bingham  at  paragraph  17  of
    Razgar  [2004] UKHL 27.  The decision (as amplified by the ECM)  is  in
    accordance with the law, being made under Statute and  the  Immigration
    Rules.  It is in pursuance of legitimate aims being fair and consistent
    immigration control, which would come within the ambit of prevention of
    disorder or crime, maintenance of the economic wellbeing of the country
    and protection of the rights and freedoms of others.  It  is  now  made
    explicit by Section 117B(1) of the 2002 Act  that  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration controls is in the public interest.

23. In considering proportionality I note that the judge  did  address  the
    best interests of the children (although she  did  not  expressly  deal
    with  proportionality  as  such).   She  considered  that  their   best
    interests were served by remaining with their mother with whom they had
    spent all of their lives in the country in which they had always lived.
     Whilst that view might be expanded it is not irrational  or  perverse.
    The children are living in the environment they have been  in  for  the
    whole of their lives.  They have been provided for by their father  who
    works in the UK.  The decision of the parents to conduct  their  family
    life in that manner was their own to take and the  father  is  able  to
    keep in touch with the family and to visit.  There is  no  evidence  of
    any neglect or abuse of the children or that there are unmet needs that
    should be catered for.  I have considered the guidance in Mundeba  (S55
    and Paragraph 297(i)(f)) Democratic Republic of Congo  [2013]  UKUT  88
    that continuity of residence is  another  important  factor.   For  the
    children now to come to the United Kingdom would involve disruption  in
    their living  arrangements,  their  friendships  and  their  education.
    Viewing their interests as a primary  consideration  it  has  not  been
    shown that their welfare militates towards a grant of entry clearance.

24. It is accepted that the Sponsor as at the date of decision was able  to
    meet the financial  requirements  of  the  Rules.   However  the  First
    Appellant was not in possession of an English language test certificate
    which was regarded as valid.  The judge was clearly concerned  that  it
    was claimed that the First Appellant would have required a further  six
    weeks' study before she could take a re-test.  That she has now  passed
    the test (in December of 2013) does not show that she had the necessary
    accomplishments as  at  the  date  of  application  or  decision.   The
    significance of the English language test and the fact that it is not a
    disproportionate requirement has been established in Bibi and Another v
    SSHD [2013] EWCA Civ 322.  As was pointed out by Mr  Smart  it  is  now
    explicitly stated at Section 117(B)(2) of the 2002 Act that  it  is  in
    the public interest that persons who seek to enter  or  remain  in  the
    United Kingdom are able to speak English.  I make no comment on whether
    that  requirement  applies  also  to  minors.   These  were   composite
    applications made together on the basis that if successful both parents
    would be  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  their  children.   The  First
    Appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules in respect of  the
    English language qualification.  Viewing the  issues  as  a  whole  the
    refusal of the applications was  not  a  disproportionate  interference
    with family life.  I have therefore come to the view that  although  it
    is arguable that the judge should have considered  proportionality  her
    failure to do so was not material to the outcome  on  the  facts  which
    stood before her.

Notice of Decisions

25. The judge at first instance did not make a material error on a point of
    law and her decision that the  appeals  be  dismissed  both  under  the
    Immigration Rules and under Article 8 ECHR therefore stands.

No anonymity order was requested and none is made.






Signed                              Date 31 October 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French

