
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Numbers:
OA/05089/2014

                                                    OA/05090/2014

                                                    oa/05093/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 25th January 2016                      |  On 4th March 2016               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                            mr Mohammed Alhalabi
                         miss Samaya Samaya Alhalabi
                             miss Ayah Alhalabi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr C Jacobs (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.    The  appellants'  appeals  against  decisions  to  refuse  them  entry
    clearance to join their mother, a refugee in the United  Kingdom,  were
    dismissed by a First-tier Tribunal Judge in a decision  promulgated  on
    20th January 2015.  That decision was set aside, as containing material
    errors of law, in a decision promulgated on  20th  January  2016.   The
    decision came before me  on  25th  January  this  year  to  be  remade.
    Certain findings of fact made in the First-tier  Tribunal,  which  were
    not in issue, were preserved.

2.   The critical question, for the purposes of the Immigration Rules  ("the
    rules"), is whether the appellants formed part of their mother's family
    unit at the time she fled Syria and so fell within  paragraph  352D(iv)
    of the rules.

3.   Mr Jacobs relied upon the skeleton argument he  prepared  in  readiness
    for the error of law hearing in November 2015.  A bundle  of  documents
    relied upon by the appellants contained a short witness statement  made
    by the appellants' mother, in which she  set  out  the  extent  of  the
    contact she has maintained with  them  since  arriving  in  the  United
    Kingdom and details of journeys to  visit  them  in  Lebanon  in  2014,
    Turkey in July 2015 and again in Lebanon in October that year and  copy
    documents regarding her travel arrangements and a substantial number of
    "WhatsApp" messages, in Arabic and (largely)  in  English  translation.
    The messages recorded contact between each of the appellants and  their
    mother.  Also before me were  photographs,  amounting  to  30  in  all,
    showing the appellants with their mother during the visits she made  to
    Turkey and Lebanon.

4.   The appellants'  sponsor,  Ms  Fatima  Abdou,  gave  evidence.   I  was
    satisfied that she and the interpreter, Mr  A  Kachou  understood  each
    other in Arabic (Middle Eastern) and they confirmed to me that this was
    so.

5.   Mr Jacobs opened the case by recalling the findings  of  fact  made  by
    the First-tier Tribunal which were not in issue.  The appellants  lived
    with Ms Abdou from their birth in Syria until 2009.  Ms Abdou  and  the
    children were then separated following her divorce, Syrian law awarding
    custody of the children to their father as  they  were  teenagers.   Ms
    Abdou attempted to stay in contact with  the  children  before  fleeing
    Syria and re-established  contact  following  her  arrival  here.   The
    children moved to the care of their maternal grandmother in  2011.   Ms
    Abdou maintained her stance that the children's father disappeared, the
    First-tier Tribunal judge making an adverse finding  in  this  context.
    In any  event,  it  appeared  from  the  available  evidence  that  the
    children's father agreed that they should leave Syria to be with  their
    mother.

6.   Ms Abdou adopted the witness statement she made on 20th  January  2016.
    In it, she described three visits made to see her  children  since  she
    arrived in the United Kingdom.  The first was to Lebanon  in  2014  and
    there were two visits the following year, to Turkey in July and Lebanon
    in October.  Ms Abdou said that  the  children  still  lived  with  her
    mother.  She then explained the photographs, which showed her with each
    of her children during the visits.  Mr  Jacobs  numbered  each  of  the
    photographs as they were placed before  Ms  Abdou  and  added  a  short
    description.   I  have  recorded  the  numbers   and   summarised   the
    description of each item in the Record of Proceedings.

7.   Ms Abdou said that she has  many  photographs  but  was  only  able  to
    obtain copies of the ones she brought along.  Her telephone contained a
    lot of them.

8.   The "WhatsApp" records in the bundle showed telephone contact with  her
    children.  She would speak to them every day so long  as  the  internet
    was available, talking to them until the internet "dropped down".   The
    most recent telephone call was at 3 a.m. on 25th January 2016 (the  day
    of the hearing).  The records showed the names of each of her  children
    and "Fufu", Ms Abdou herself.

9.   In cross-examination by Ms Pal,  Ms  Abdou  said  that  she  maintained
    contact with her children by the same means prior  to  2015,  when  the
    records  in  the  bundle  began.   Ms  Pal  asked  why  there  were  no
    transcripts of earlier conversations.  Ms Abdou replied  that  she  had
    brought papers to  court  but  was  unable  until  recently  to  obtain
    translations.  It was her mother who brought the children to Turkey and
    Lebanon for the visits.  The children were now back  in  Syria,  living
    with her mother.

10.  There was no re-examination.

11.  In submissions, Ms  Pal  said  that  the  key  issue  was  whether  the
    children formed part of their  sponsor's  family  unit  when  she  left
    Syria.  The  decisions  to  refuse  entry  clearance  were  before  the
    Tribunal.  The ECO was not satisfied on the evidence which  accompanied
    the application.  The evidence of the visits and the substantial  level
    of contact between the appellants and  their  sponsor  had  substantial
    weight and bore on both the critical question under the rules  and  the
    extent of the family life claimed.

12.  Mr Jacobs said that there was indeed family life and  the  evidence  of
    the visits and contact shed light on the  circumstances  as  they  were
    when the appellants' sponsor fled Syria and when the  applications  for
    entry clearance were made.  It was not  in  issue  that  by  2011,  the
    children were  residing  with  their  maternal  grandmother  and  their
    sponsor fled Syria in November that year.  The children were with their
    mother's side of the family.  As noted in the error  of  law  decision,
    this left open the question  of  whether  paragraph  352D(iv)  applied,
    notwithstanding the adverse findings made by the  judge  in  dismissing
    the appeals.  The family unit survived divorce and the  impact  of  the
    discriminatory Syrian code.  The  evidence  showed  that  there  was  a
    strong maternal bond.  The children were only apart from  their  mother
    for a short period of time, between 2009 and 2011, when  they  returned
    to her side of the family.  The evidence showed that she made  attempts
    to contact them although the extent of those attempts  was  doubted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal judge.   The  fact  that  the  entry  clearance
    applications were made at a time when the  children  lived  with  their
    maternal grandmother also pointed to the survival of the family unit.

13.  Guidance was given in BM [2007] UKIAT 00055.  A purposive  construction
    of paragraph 352D was required and the benefit of  that  paragraph  was
    not limited to children who lived in the same household as the refugee.
     In the present appeal, there was no evidence suggesting any  cessation
    of responsibility on  the  part  of  the  appellants'  mother  and  the
    separation of mother and children was  a  consequence  of  the  custody
    award under Syrian  law.   Access  was  very  difficult.   The  divorce
    clearly did not displace the  family  unit.   The  appellants  did  not
    suggest that the divorce  code  was  persecutory  but  it  clearly  was
    discriminatory.  The custody order in their father's favour  could  not
    lawfully be a bar to the operation of paragraph 352D.  In any event, it
    appeared that the appellants'  father  supported  the  entry  clearance
    applications.  The appeal fell to be allowed under  paragraph  352D  of
    the rules and, alternatively, under Article 8.

14.  At the end of the  hearing,  I  announced  my  decision  to  allow  the
    appeals under the rules.

Findings and Conclusions

15.  In these appeals, the burden lies with  the  appellants  to  prove  the
    facts and matters they rely upon and the standard of proof is that of a
    balance of probabilities.  As these are entry  clearance  appeals,  the
    Tribunal may consider only the circumstances "appertaining at" the time
    of the adverse decisions, by virtue of section 85A  of  the  2002  Act,
    preserved for these purposes.  Entry clearance was refused in each case
    on 20th March 2014, those decisions being upheld following a review  in
    August that year, the overseas post concluding that the appellants were
    not part of their sponsor's family unit at the time she left Syria.

16.  Ms Abdou's evidence, the photographs and  the  "WhatsApp"  records  all
    show the extent of the contact maintained by  the  appellants'  sponsor
    with her children  since  her  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    evidence shows an entirely natural, and strong,  maternal  relationship
    which  does  indeed,  as  Mr  Jacobs  submitted,  shed  light  on   the
    circumstances "appertaining at" the date of refusal of entry clearance.

17.  As noted above, the key question is whether the appellants formed  part
    of their mother's family unit at the time she fled  Syria  in  November
    2011.  Taking into account the findings of fact made by the judge which
    were not in dispute and adding to the picture the evidence before me, I
    conclude that the children were part of Ms Abdou's family unit  at  the
    relevant time.  The children lived with their mother from  birth  until
    2009 and were then separated from her in  consequence  of  her  divorce
    from their father and  the  award  of  custody  to  him.   The  country
    evidence before me, which included the United States' State  Department
    Report on Syria, shows (and it has not been disputed by  the  Secretary
    of State) that Syrian law is discriminatory in this regard.

18.  In any event, by 2011 the children were placed with Ms Abdou's  mother,
    who  provided  essential  support  to  enable   the   entry   clearance
    applications to be made from Lebanon.  The evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was that Ms Abdou made  determined  efforts  to  maintain
    contact with her children.  The judge made an adverse finding regarding
    this part of the case but, even giving due weight to his  finding  that
    the whereabouts of  the  appellants'  father  is  probably  known,  the
    evidence simply does not show that Ms Abdou gave up responsibility  for
    her children or that she and they were separated to such an extent that
    she played no part in their lives or had a very reduced  role.   Taking
    into account the movement of the children to Ms Abdou's mother in  2011
    and the clear engagement in their lives  during  the  applications  for
    entry clearance, I find that the appellants did form part of her family
    unit prior to her flight from Syria,  for  the  purposes  of  paragraph
    352D(iv) of the rules.  As is clear from BM, this is a question of fact
    and the benefit of the rule is not confined to children who have  lived
    in the same household as a refugee.  The reduction in  contact  between
    the appellants and their mother between 2009 and 2011 was, I find,  not
    a matter of choice at all.  It was a consequence of the divorce and the
    discriminatory code.

19.  The appeal is allowed under the rules.  There is no  need  to  consider
    Article 8 in any detail, save that I accept Mr Jacobs' submission  that
    the evidence does show family life and,  as  the  requirements  of  the
    rules are met in relation to family reunion, refusal of entry clearance
    would plainly be a disproportionate step.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction has been sought and none is made.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed  the  appeal,  I  make  a  fee  award,  exercising  powers
available to the First-tier Tribunal, in respect of any fee which  has  been
paid or is payable in these proceedings.


Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell


