
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: OA/05436/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On November 16, 2015                 |On November 19, 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              MR SHEKHAR LIMBU
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
Appellant   Mr Wilford, Counsel, instructed by Kent Immigration and Visa
                    Advice
Respondent  Mr Bramble (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nepal On  March  3,  2014  the  appellant
    applied for leave to  enter  on  the  basis  of  family  life  and  the
    "Ghurkha" policy. The respondent refused the application but  on  March
    31, 2014. The appellants appealed these decisions  on  April  22,  2014
    under section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
    but the respondent maintained her position following an entry clearance
    manager's review on August 20, 2014.

 2. The appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Mayall  on
    January 14, 2015 but  he  refused  the  appellant's  appeal  under  the
    "Ghurkha" policy and ECHR legislation  in  a  decision  promulgated  on
    February 12, 2015.

 3. The appellant appealed  that  decision  and  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Lever found an arguable error in law  based  on  finding  that
    there was no family life between the appellant and his parents and  the
    approach to proportionality and in particular Section 117B of the  2002
    Act.

 4. The respondent opposed the error and filed a  Rule  24  response  dated
    June 11, 2015.

 5. The matter was listed before me for legal arguments.

 6. The First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make  an  anonymity  direction  and
    pursuant to Rule 14 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I see no reason to make an order now.

    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Mr Wilford submitted the Tribunal had erred  by  failing  to  recognise
    that the appellant and his parents enjoyed family life that went beyond
    mere emotional ties. The Tribunal had accepted the appellant was  still
    supported by his parents and they had regular communications and up  to
    the time the appellant's parents and sister came to the United  Kingdom
    they had all been living as a family. He referred to  the  test  to  be
    applied as set out in Kugathas  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department  [2003]  EWCA  Civ  31  and  submitted  the  appellant   had
    demonstrated that the support he received amounted to real or effective
    or committed support. The Courts in Ghising and others  (Ghurkhas/BOCs:
    historic wrong; weight) [2013] UKUT 00567 (IAC), Gurung & Others v SSHD
    [2013] EWCA Civ 8 and Patel v ECO [2010] EWCA Civ 17 had  extended  how
    "dependence" should be interpreted and the Tribunal had  erred  it  the
    approach it had taken in paragraphs [53] to [55] of  its  decision.  He
    further submitted that if the Tribunal erred in its approach to article
    8(1) ECHR it had further erred in its approach  to  article  8(2).  The
    Court made clear in Ghising that if family life  was  established  then
    historic  injustice  would  make  refusal  of  entry  disproportionate.
    Section 117A-D of the 2002 Act did not represent any  kind  of  radical
    departure from the position established in Ghising and  the  Tribunal's
    approach in paragraph [70] also amounted to a material error.

 8. Mr Bramble submitted there was no error and the submissions amounted to
    a mere disagreement. It could not be said the  Tribunal's  approach  to
    family was flawed. Each case was case sensitive and  the  Tribunal  had
    considered all of the facts and reached a conclusion that was  open  to
    it. The Tribunal had had regard to all of the evidence and balanced all
    of the evidence as  evidenced  by  its  approach  from  paragraph  [41]
    onwards in its decision. The Tribunal found the decision it had to make
    a finely balanced one but ultimately it reached  a  decision  that  was
    open to it concluding at paragraph [54] there was no  family  life.  If
    there was an error on the issue of family life the  Tribunal  correctly
    considered the evidence when considering proportionality under  article
    8(2). There was no error in law.

 9. Following these submissions, I reserved my decision.

    DISCUSSION

10. The Tribunal was dealing with a claim by a family member  of  a  former
    Ghurkha soldier. The sponsors' evidence was set out between  paragraphs
    [10] and [33] of the Tribunal's decision and the grounds of  appeal  do
    not suggest the Tribunal's record of the evidence was lacking.  Between
    paragraphs [42] and [56] the Tribunal examined the  evidence  and  gave
    reasons for its findings.

11. Mr Wilford, who also represented the appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal,  submitted that the Tribunal's approach to the  evidence  was
    materially flawed.

12. The Court of Appeal in Gurung considered "family life" and stated -

         "45.     Ultimately, the  question  whether  an  individual  enjoys
         family life is one of fact and depends on a  careful  consideration
         of all the  relevant  facts  of  the  particular  case...  in  some
         instances an adult child  (particularly  if  he  does  not  have  a
         partner or children of his own) may establish that he has a  family
         life with his parents. It all depends on the facts.

         46.      ... Paras 50 to 62 of  the  determination  of  the  UT  in
         Ghising contains a useful review of some of the  jurisprudence  and
         the correct approach to be adopted. It concludes at  para  62  that
         the different outcomes in cases with superficially similar features
         emphasises to us that the issue under Article 8(1) is highly  fact-
         sensitive."

13. The Tribunal took this approach  when  considering  whether  there  was
    family life. The Tribunal  was  aware  the  appellant  lived  with  his
    parents before they came to the United Kingdom in 2012 and it was  also
    aware  the  appellant  received  his  father's  Ghurkha   pension   and
    maintained contact with his family. However, the Tribunal balanced this
    against the fact the appellant was 26 years of age and concluded he was
    leading an independent life. The  issue  argued  today  surrounds  this
    approach.

14. At paragraphs [47] to [50] of Gurung the Court of Appeal considered the
    appeals of two applicants who were 24 and 26 years  of  age  and  whose
    parents came to live in the United Kingdom in circumstances similar  to
    the facts of this appeal. Like  the  appellant  those  applicants  were
    students and were both funded by their fathers. The First-tier Tribunal
    (in Gurung) concluded:

      a. There was little evidence of  family  life  between  them  although
         there was evidence the father supported  the  applicants  but  that
         this was expected in Nepalese culture.

      b. There was nothing to suggest a bond over and above that usually  to
         be expected from the relationship between adult parents  and  their
         children.

15. Mr Wilford has argued the Tribunal erred in law in  failing  to  attach
    any (or any adequate) weight to the fact that the appellant had  always
    lived with his parents as a family unit. It was argued before the First-
    tier Tribunal that the family unit, with a strong  emotional  bond  and
    elements  of  financial  dependency,  enjoyed  family  life  while  the
    appellant grew up and as in Gurung it was argued it  was  not  suddenly
    cut off when he reached his majority.

16. The critical issue was whether there was sufficient dependence, and  in
    particular sufficient emotional dependence, by  the  appellant  on  his
    parents to justify the conclusion that he enjoyed family life.

17. That was a question of fact for the First-tier  Tribunal  to  determine
    and the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to conclude that, although the
    usual emotional bonds between  parents  and  child  were  present,  the
    requisite degree of emotional dependence was absent.

18. Every case is fact sensitive and in assessing whether there has been an
    error in law I have to consider whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    regard to all of the fact sensitive issues  and  thereafter  approached
    the appellant's claim applying the correct test.

19.  The  mere  fact  the  appellant's  father  financially  supported  the
    appellant did not automatically mean there was family life and  as  the
    courts have  made  clear  being  a  Ghurkha  dependent  does  not  mean
    automatic entry to the United Kingdom.

20. This appellant had lived apart from his parents for three years  albeit
    not through choice. The First-tier Tribunal was aware of the  level  of
    contact between the parties, the background  and  all  of  the  current
    circumstances but was not satisfied  there  was  family  life.  As  the
    courts have made clear each case has to be considered on its merits.

21. I am  not  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  deal
    adequately with the issue of family life. The Tribunal set out all  the
    relevant factors and demonstrated it was clearly aware  of  the  family
    circumstances and in particular those in which his  father  and  mother
    came to live in the United Kingdom while he remained in Nepal.

22. The Tribunal took into account the  appellant's  age  at  the  date  of
    decision and the fact that his father was  paying  everything  for  his
    upkeep. The Tribunal was entitled to  reach  the  conclusion  that  the
    appellant had failed to show anything behind  the  normal  relationship
    between adult children and his parents.

23. The Tribunal's findings about the appellant living  independently  must
    be read in the context of the evidence as a whole and does not indicate
    any misdirection or misunderstanding of the family position.

24. It is therefore not the case as  the  grounds  allege  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the family as a whole or make a lawful article  8(1)
    assessment.

25. Accordingly, I find that as Mr Wilford's argument on article 8(1) fails
    there is no merit to his argument on article 8(2).




    DECISION

26. There is no error in law. I dismiss the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed:     Dated:

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

