
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/05453/2013
                                                               OA/05458/2013
                                                               OA/05461/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 July 2014                               |On 1st Aug 2014              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVID TAYLOR

                                   Between

                             HORACE DORCAS GLENN
                             OMIEKE OMARIO GLENN
                                FEMINA GLENN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr B Adekoya, legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellants  are  all  citizens  of  Jamaica  and  are  now   aged
    respectively  20,  18  and  17.   They  have   appealed   against   the
    determination (promulgated 30 April 2014) of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Majid who dismissed their respective appeals  against  the  refusal  of
    their applications for entry clearance to the UK.  They had all applied
    for settlement here to join  their  mother  (and  sponsor)  Mrs  Simone
    Williams who has been resident in the UK since 2002.

2.   The first appellant was  over  the  age  of  18  at  the  time  of  the
    application.  The second and third appellants were  under  18  and  the
    Entry Clearance Officer refused their applications on  the  grounds  of
    lack of sole responsibility by the sponsor.

3.   At the commencement of the appeal hearing it was acknowledged  by  both
    representatives  that  the  determination  of  Judge  Majid   contained
    numerous errors of law and should be set aside.  I have read his  short
    determination  and  I  have  to  say,  with  regret,  that  I  find  it
    incomprehensible.  Nowhere does it set out details of  the  application
    or the reasons for refusal.  Nowhere does it summarise the evidence  on
    which the determination is apparently made.  Nowhere  are  any  reasons
    given for his dismissal of the claims.  Nowhere does the judge consider
    human rights issues; indeed the words "human rights" appear nowhere  in
    the determination notwithstanding the curious reference in paragraph 17
    of the determination to "the fact that the British economy  is  not  in
    good shape  and  it  is  entitled  to  control  immigration  into  this
    country".

4.   The determination must be regarded as  a  nullity.   It  is  devoid  of
    reasoning.  That is an error of law and I must accordingly set it aside
    in its entirety.

5.   In relation to the second and third  appellants,  Mr  Deller  helpfully
    drew my attention to paragraph 197(vi)(a) of the Immigration Rules  and
    indicated that it was probably the  case  that  the  question  of  sole
    responsibility was in any event irrelevant.   There  is  some  evidence
    that the father of the appellants died in 2009 and if that  is  so  the
    second  and  third  appellants  may  be  entitled  to  entry  clearance
    regardless of the question of sole responsibility.   As  to  the  first
    appellant the main issue is likely to be an Article 8 family life claim
    if he were otherwise to be left alone in Jamaica.

6.   There must be a full rehearing  of  the  appellants'  appeals.   Having
    regard to the overriding  objective  recorded  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Rules, in all the circumstances that is most conveniently  achieved  by
    my remitting this appeal for rehearing to the First-tier Tribunal.

7.   Accordingly my decision is that the  determination  of  the  First-tier
    Judge contains such errors of law that I must and do set  it  aside  in
    its entirety.  I remit the matter for rehearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Taylor House (before any judge other than Judge Majid).



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge David Taylor
1 August 2014
