
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number:     OA/05526/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                   |Determination Promulgated|
|On: 18th June 2014                     |On: 11th August 2014     |
|                                       |                         |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                           Iwinnosa Gift Ekhaguere
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer, Lagos
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Sadiq, Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria.  She has  permission  to
       appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Edwards
       to dismiss her  appeal  against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
       refuse her entry clearance as a family member of an EEA national
       exercising treaty rights.

    2. The Appellant sought leave to enter to join her  mother  in  the
       UK. Her mother is also  a  Nigerian  citizen  who  was  formerly
       married to an EEA national. The  Appellant  submitted  that  her
       mother has a retained right of residence and that as such she is
       entitled, by virtue of Regulation 10(5)(c) read with  Regulation
       10(6), to a right of residence with her mother.

    3. The  Respondent  did  not  accept  this  to  be  the  case.  The
       application was simply refused on the basis that  the  Appellant
       is not a family member of  an  EEA  national  exercising  treaty
       rights.

    4. Judge Edwards did not accept it either. He found the Sponsor  to
       be a person with retained rights of residence but found that the
       Appellant could not qualify under Regulation 7. The Sponsor  and
       her EEA spouse are long since divorced and it follows  that  the
       Appellant cannot be considered to be a family member. In respect
       of the argument advanced by the  Appellant  Judge  Edwards  said
       this:

         "That leaves Regulation 10. While the Sponsor qualifies under this,
         I do not see that the appellant does. For one thing, she is not  in
         the UK as is required by Regulation 10(5)(b) and I cannot  see  how
         she can have  greater  rights  than  those  the  sponsor  currently
         enjoys"

On that basis he dismissed the appeal.

    5. The Appellant now appeals on  the  ground  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal misinterpreted Regulation 10. It does not  require  the
       Appellant to be in the UK.


My Findings

    6. Regulation 10 reads:

         10.  (1)  In these Regulations, "family member who has retained the
         right of residence" means, subject to paragraph (8), a  person  who
         satisfies the conditions in paragraph (2), (3), (4) or (5).


         (2) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-
         (a)he was a family member of a qualified person when the  qualified
         person died;
         (b) he resided in the  United  Kingdom  in  accordance  with  these
         Regulations for at least the year immediately before the  death  of
         the qualified person; and
         (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6).


         (3) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-
         (a) he is the direct descendant of-
           (i) a qualified person who has died;
           (ii) a person who ceased to be a qualified person on ceasing to
           reside in the United Kingdom; or
           (iii) the person who was the spouse or civil partner of the
           qualified person mentioned in sub-paragraph (i) when he died or
           is the spouse or civil partner of the person mentioned in sub-
           paragraph (ii); and
         (b) he was attending an educational course in the United Kingdom
         immediately before the qualified person died or ceased to be a
         qualified person and continues to attend such a course.


         (4) A person satisfies the conditions in  this  paragraph  if  the
         person is the parent with actual custody of a child  who  satisfies
         the condition in paragraph (3).


         (5) A person satisfies the conditions in this paragraph if-
         (a) he ceased to be a family member of a qualified person on the
         termination of the marriage or civil partnership of the qualified
         person;
         (b) he was residing in the United Kingdom in accordance with these
         Regulations at the date of the termination;
         (c) he satisfies the condition in paragraph (6); and
         (d) either-
           (i) prior to the initiation of the proceedings for the
           termination of the marriage or the civil partnership the
           marriage or civil partnership had lasted for at least three
           years and the parties to the marriage or civil partnership had
           resided in the United Kingdom for at least one year during its
           duration;


           (ii) the former spouse or civil partner of the qualified person
           has custody of a child of the qualified person;


           (iii) the former spouse or civil partner of the qualified person
           has the right of access to a child of the qualified person under
           the age of 18 and a court has ordered that such access must take
           place in the United Kingdom; or


           (iv) the continued right of residence in the United Kingdom of
           the person is warranted by particularly difficult circumstances,
           such as he or another family member having been a victim of
           domestic violence while the marriage or civil partnership was
           subsisting.


         (6) The condition in this paragraph is that the person-
           (a) is not an EEA national but would, if he were an EEA
           national, be a worker, a self-employed person or a self-
           sufficient person under regulation 6; or
           (b) is the family member of a person who falls within paragraph
           (a).

    7. Mr Sadiq contends that the Appellant  benefits  from  Regulation
       6(b) because she is the family member of her mother who  is  the
       person mentioned at 10 (6)(a) read with 10(5).  I  am  afraid  I
       cannot agree. Regulation 6 is not free standing. As can be  seen
       from Reg 10(2)(c) and 10(5)(c) all regulation 6 does is  add  to
       the factors that  confer  a  retained  right  of  residence  the
       requirement that the person also be acting as if he  or  she  is
       exercising treaty rights.    This  is  confirmed  by  Regulation
       10(1) which limits the  definition  of  a  'family  member  with
       retained rights' to  those  individuals  falling  within  10(2)-
       10(5).

    8. Judge Edwards was correct to say that the  individual  described
       at 6(b)  needs  to  be  in  the  country  to  benefit  from  the
       provision. She also needs to have met the  requirements  in  for
       instance, Regulation 5: had she been living with her mother  and
       stepfather prior to the termination of the  marriage  she  could
       have met the conditions at 5(a)-(d).

    9. There is no error in the determination.



Decision

   10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error of law
       and the findings are upheld.





                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                             2nd August 2014
