
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05966/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 April 2015                              |On 1 May 2015                 |
|Dictated 21 April 2015                        |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GIBB


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, LEBANON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 OSAMA AMHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Moran, Immigration Caseworker, of Alex Moran
                    Immigration and Asylum


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    Although  the  appellant  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer, I will refer to the parties  as  they  were  at  the
    First-Tier.

2.   The appellant, a Syrian citizen, applied for entry  clearance  to  join
    his wife and their six children in the UK.  His wife and  children  are
    all British citizens, but the family had  been  living  in  Syria,  the
    appellant's wife (who had a Syrian father and a British mother)  having
    returned to live in Syria  when  she  was  16.   The  family  lived  in
    Damascus for nearly twenty years, and the appellant worked as a steward
    on the Syrian State Airline.

3.   The appellant's wife and children came to the UK in July 2013,  because
    of the dangers resulting from the civil  war.   The  appellant's  entry
    clearance application was refused on 22 April 2014, but his appeal  was
    allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge D Ross, in a decision  promulgated
    on 30 November 2014.  The appeal was  allowed  on  Article  8  grounds,
    outside the  Immigration  Rules,  it  having  been  conceded  that  the
    appellant's wife could not meet the income requirements within Appendix
    FM.

4.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Brunnen,
    on 5 January 2015.  The  grounds  of  appeal  (six  grounds)  had  been
    concerned with whether the judge had correctly considered the rights of
    the appellant rather than the other  family  members;  whether  he  had
    adequately considered the Immigration  Rules  as  his  starting  point;
    whether he had erred in making findings about the risk to returnees  in
    Syria; whether he had erred in his  treatment  of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's family were not refugees;  whether  he  had  erred  in  his
    approach to the fact  that  the  appellant's  wife  and  children  were
    reliant on benefits; and whether he  had  erred  in  referring  to  the
    children's interests as "the  primary  consideration"  rather  than  "a
    primary consideration".

Error of Law

5.   I indicated to the parties, at the start,  that  my  initial  view,  on
    reading the papers in advance of the  hearing,  was  that  the  grounds
    appeared unlikely to succeed in establishing a material error of law.

6.   Ms Everett made submissions which can be summarised  as  follows.   She
    did not rely on  the  fourth  ground,  which  appeared  to  her  to  be
    nonsensical.  This was because it was clearly  impossible  for  British
    citizens to apply for asylum in the UK.  She did, however, rely on  the
    other grounds.  It would have been better for the judge  to  have  said
    more about the situation in Syria.   Read  in  isolation,  the  judge's
    decision did not spell out what the risks were in that country, even if
    this was a matter of common knowledge.

7.   Mr Moran, for the appellant, pointed to the fact that  the  appellant's
    bundle before the First-tier  Judge  did  contain  the  Foreign  Office
    travel advice for Syria, which was emphatic in its  advice  to  British
    citizens that they should not travel to any part of  Syria,  for  their
    own safety.

8.   As I indicated at the hearing, I have decided that the  judge  did  not
    err in law, and that  there  is  no  basis  for  interfering  with  his
    decision.

9.   It is certainly the case that decisions to allow appeals on  Article  8
    outside the Rules, particularly in  entry  clearance  appeals,  can  be
    described as unusual, and controversial.  It is also the case, however,
    that the door has not been closed, in legal terms, to  the  possibility
    that entry clearance appeals should be allowed in this way  in  certain
    circumstances.  It is also well-established that there will only  be  a
    basis to interfere with a decision where  an  error  of  law  has  been
    established.  It also appears to me that, on the very unusual facts  in
    this appeal, many judges would have taken the same approach as this one
    did.  Whether other judges would or would not have taken this  approach
    is, of course, not the issue  to  be  addressed:  all  that  counts  is
    whether a material error of law is established.

10.  The most common errors in appeals that have been allowed on  Article  8
    grounds outside the Rules, that appear in the  Upper  Tribunal,  are  a
    failure to appreciate and apply the current  law  on  the  relationship
    between the Immigration Rules and Article 8 outside the  Rules;  and  a
    failure to refer to and consider the public interest considerations  in
    the new Part 5A of the 2002 Act (as amended by the 2014 Act).   Neither
    point  applies  in  this  case.   The  judge  clearly   and   correctly
    identified, at the start of paragraph 8, that the  starting  point  was
    Appendix FM, and that it was significant that the appellant's wife  did
    not meet the earnings requirement.  The judge then  correctly  set  out
    the current legal framework in paragraphs 8 and 9, and directed himself
    that it would only  be  in  a  rare  or  exceptional  case,  where  the
    consequences of the refusal would be unduly harsh,  that  an  appellant
    could succeed outside the Immigration Rules on Article 8  grounds.   In
    addition, at paragraph 9, the judge refers  explicitly  to  the  public
    interest factors in the 2002 Act, and goes on later in the decision  to
    engage with them directly.

11.  It cannot be said, therefore, that there was any error of  law  in  the
    overall legal framework  applied;  in  a  failure  to  start  with  the
    Immigration Rules; in a failure to give weight to the ability  to  meet
    the requirements of the Rules; or in a failure to give  weight  to  the
    public interest considerations in the 2002 Act.

12.  Turning to the specific challenges the first ground appears  to  me  to
    be misguided.  This ground attempts to draw a fine distinction  between
    the Article 8 rights of the appellant on the one hand, and those of his
    wife and children on the other.  This appears to me to be an artificial
    distinction.  The point at issue was precisely  whether  the  appellant
    and the rest of his family could be reunited.  This was  the  question,
    but the judge was entitled to regard the central point as  whether  the
    entry clearance refusal amounted  to  a  disproportionate  interference
    with the appellant's right to respect for family life.

13.  The second ground has clearly not been made out.  As I  have  said  the
    judge did take the Immigration Rules as his  starting  point,  and  did
    have proper regard to  them.   The  third  ground  was  concerned  with
    findings on risk without considering the general position of  returnees
    to Syria.  This appears to me to be a weak point.   The  most  that  Ms
    Everett could say was that the judge could have spelt  out  in  greater
    detail the situation in Syria, but this is not a point that appears  to
    me to have much force to it.  I also accept the point made by Mr  Moran
    that evidence was available before the judge in the form of the Foreign
    Office travel advice.

14.  The fourth ground was not relied on.  The fifth ground, in relation  to
    the appellant's wife and children claiming benefits, appears to  me  to
    be a matter of weight.  It is well-established that  issues  of  weight
    will not amount to errors of law.  The judge gave some  weight  to  the
    point, in negative terms, but also gave some weight to the  expectation
    that the appellant, if allowed to join his family in the UK, would seek
    to work in order to support them.

15.  The sixth ground appears to me to seek to place far too  much  emphasis
    on a single word.  The paragraph of the decision (paragraph 10) has  to
    be read as a whole.  The judge referred  to  the  fact  that  the  best
    interests of the children could be outweighed by other  considerations,
    and also referred to paragraph 29 of ZH, and the issue  of  whether  it
    would be reasonable to expect the children to live in another  country.
    In short the judge correctly addressed himself to  relevant  authority,
    and summarised the impact of that authority correctly.   The  attempted
    criticism rests on an attempt to take one word in  isolation  from  the
    rest of the paragraph, and this does not appear to me to  be  a  proper
    approach.

16.  For all of these reasons it appears to  me  that  there  is  no  proper
    basis to find that the judge erred in law in a manner material  to  the
    outcome.  The grounds amount to a disagreement with that outcome, and a
    series of complaints about matters of weight, but such  points  do  not
    amount to material legal errors.  As a result there is no basis for the
    decision to be set aside.

17.  I was informed at the hearing that the  work  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officers in Beirut has been transferred to Jordan, but  the  judge  did
    not make a direction, and I was not invited to do so.

18.  There was a cross-appeal in relation to costs, on which  permission  to
    appeal was refused.  Neither side made any reference to  anonymity,  or
    to the fee award.  A whole fee award was made by the  judge,  and  this
    also remains in force.

Notice of Decision

19.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.

20.  No error of law having been established, the judge's decision  allowing
    the appeal on Article 8 grounds stands.

21.  No anonymity direction made.



Signed        Date 21 April 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Gibb

