
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05156/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th January 2017                           |On 20th January 2017          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR



                                   Between

                                    S T C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - pretoria

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mutebuka, Solicitor of Mutebuka & Co Immigration
Law
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Saffer
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 29th June 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 25 September 1999.   She
    applied to come to the UK as the dependant daughter  of  T,  a  British
    national, but was refused entry clearance  on  a  number  of  different
    grounds. The entry clearance officer was  not  satisfied,  inter  alia,
    that the sponsor had shown that he had  sole  responsibility  for  her,
    that she did not have other relatives who were able to care for her and
    that the sponsor had the ability to maintain her.

 3. The judge accepted the evidence that the sponsor had left  Zimbabwe  in
    2002 leaving the appellant in the care of her mother. However  he  paid
    her primary school fees and since  then,  her  secondary  school  fees.
    There was no other financial provision for  her  until  2010  when  her
    mother disappeared.

 4. Since that date her mother has had nothing to do with S,  and  she  has
    resided with her uncle, who is in fact a cousin of the  sponsor  rather
    than his brother, and another child, G who, by the date of decision was
    herself an adult.

 5. The judge wrote as follows:-

         "I accept that in April 2014 (which was after the  respondent  made
         her decision) evidence was produced to support the assertion that T
         was interested in S's schooling and was the main point of  contact.
         That evidence casts light on the circumstances appertaining at  the
         date of decision.  It was clear that B was  also  involved  in  her
         schooling as the emergency contact.  I  note  in  this  regard  his
         letter (10 April 2014 which was sent after the  refusal  but  casts
         light on the circumstances appertaining at the  date  of  decision)
         that S was lacking supervision and  support  from  T.   I  have  no
         reason to doubt this sentiment as if it was true it is hard to  see
         why the letter  would  have  been  submitted  by  the  family.   It
         supports the assertion made by T when the application was submitted
         that B executed his responsibilities as  guardian  diligently.   It
         also supports the school evidence that T was the main  rather  than
         the sole  person  concerned  in  her  welfare  and  well-being.   I
         therefore find that  in  March/April  2014  T  did  not,  in  those
         circumstances, have sole responsibility for her schooling or indeed
         any other aspect of her life as they were shared at least with B.

         In March/April 2014 G had  just  finished  her  A  levels  and  had
         married.  That indicates that she was then at least 18.   In  those
         circumstances I am satisfied that she was  also  at  that  time  an
         adult able to provide care and support for S.  G was the  recipient
         of money for S from November 2013 to April 2014.   I  am  satisfied
         that this was because G was also  sharing  responsibility  for  her
         care.  I do not accept what G said about being  unable  to  provide
         care and support for S as G (according to T) was returning  to  her
         family.  S and G are first cousins.   I  do  not  accept  that  her
         family would not also have been  willing  in  March/April  2014  to
         support S as there was no reason they would not,  especially  if  T
         began to provide financial support which the documents showed  that
         he did from November 2013.  I do not  accept  that  in  March/April
         2014 Reverend Samambwa or the Church would have  allowed  S,  a  14
         year old congregant and worshipper, to  be  abandoned  and  without
         adult support given their  involvement  with  the  family  and  the
         pastoral care they espouse.  They did however not need to give  the
         support she had been getting from B and G.  I do not accept that  G
         had moved away in March 2014 as she was still receiving money for S
         in April 2014."

 6. He concluded that the appellant was not living in serious or compelling
    circumstances which made her exclusion undesirable  but  accepted  that
    the sponsor was in a position to provide financially  for  her  if  she
    were to be granted entry clearance.

 7. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  in  somewhat  vague  and
    rambling grounds.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge  Easterman
    on 21st November 2016 who observed that, from the  findings  quoted  in
    the  paragraphs  above,  it  was  unclear  as  to   who   had   overall
    responsibility for the child.

 8. Mrs Petterson submitted that the judge had given reasons for his belief
    that  responsibility  for  the  child  was  shared  with  relatives  in
    Zimbabwe.

Consideration of whether the Judge erred in Law

 9. In TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
    00049 the Tribunal held that where both  parents  were  involved  in  a
    child's upbringing it would be exceptional that one of them would  have
    sole responsibility.

10. However, at paragraphs 49 and 50 the Tribunal said:-

         "49. Where one parent has disappeared from the child's life and  so
             relinquished or abdicated his (or her) responsibility for  the
             child, the starting point must be that  it  is  the  remaining
             active parent who has 'sole responsibility' for the child. The
             fact that the remaining active parent is in the  UK  makes  no
             difference to this.  Of course, the geographical separation of
             the parent from the child means that the  day-to-day  care  of
             the child will necessarily be undertaken by others - relatives
             or friends abroad - who look after the child. Here, the  issue
             under the Immigration Rules is  whether  the  UK-based  parent
             has, in practice, allowed the parental responsibility for  the
             child to be shared with the carer abroad. This is, of  course,
             the question we see most frequently in the case law.

         50.  The cases, particularly  Nmaju  and  Cenir  in  the  Court  of
             Appeal,   make   clear   that   the   touchstone   of    'sole
             responsibility' is the continuing control and direction by the
             parent in the UK in respect of the 'important decisions' about
             the child's upbringing. The  fact  that  day-to-day  decision-
             making for a child - such as  'getting  the  child  to  school
             safely and on time, or putting the child  to  bed,  or  seeing
             what it has for breakfast, or that it cleans its teeth, or has
             enough clothing, and so forth' (Ramos, per Dillon LJ at p 151)
             - rests with the carers abroad is not conclusive of the  issue
             of 'sole responsibility'. However, if the UK-based parent  has
             allowed the carer abroad to make some 'important decisions' in
             the child's upbringing, then it may readily be said  that  the
             responsibility for the child has become 'shared'."

11. The judge did not approach his analysis of  whether  the  relatives  in
    Zimbabwe had day-to-day care of the child or shared responsibility  for
    her through the correct prism.

12. Having accepted that her mother had  disappeared,  the  starting  point
    should have been that the remaining active parent was the one  who  had
    sole responsibility for the child.  The confusion in the  judge's  mind
    is evident from his comment that  it  was  clear  that  the  uncle  was
    involved in her schooling as the emergency contact. It is obvious  that
    he would have to be the emergency contact and the fact that he was  has
    no bearing on whether he had shared responsibility for her.  Similarly,
    the fact that the appellant's cousin was living in the same  household,
    and for a brief period of time, some five months, was the recipient  of
    money for her, is not indicative that she was involved in the important
    decisions in S's life.  If anything it is indicative that  the  sponsor
    did not feel able to rely upon his cousin to behave responsibly towards
    his child.

13. The judge failed to apply relevant caselaw  and  the  decision  is  set
    aside.

The Rehearing

14. Mrs Petterson indicated that she  had  no  wish  to  cross-examine  the
    sponsor and submitted that, while she accepted  that  the  sponsor  was
    financially  supporting  the  appellant,  this  was   insufficient   to
    establish sole responsibility which in her view  was  shared  with  the
    other adults with whom the appellant lived.

15. Mr Mutebuka took me through the evidence from the school and  from  the
    appellant and submitted that sole responsibility had been established.

Findings and Conclusions

16. At paragraph 52 of TD the Tribunal set out the approach to questions of
    sole responsibility under the Immigration Rules and held as follows:-

         "i.  Who has 'responsibility' for a child's upbringing and  whether
             that responsibility is  'sole'  is  a  factual  matter  to  be
             decided upon all the evidence.

         ii.  The term 'responsibility' in the Immigration Rules should  not
             to be understood as a  theoretical  or  legal  obligation  but
             rather as a practical one which, in each case, looks to who in
             fact  is  exercising  responsibility  for  the   child.   That
             responsibility may have been for a short duration in that  the
             present arrangements may have begun quite recently.

         iii. 'Responsibility' for a child's upbringing may be undertaken by
             individuals other than a child's parents  and  may  be  shared
             between different individuals: which  may  particularly  arise
             where the child remains in its own  country  whilst  the  only
             parent involved in its life travels to and lives in the UK.

         iv.  Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in  the
             upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional  that  one  of
             them will have sole responsibility.

         v.   If it is said that  both  are  not  involved  in  the  child's
             upbringing, one of the indicators for that will  be  that  the
             other has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility.  In  such
             cases, it may well be justified to find that  that  parent  no
             longer has responsibility for the child.

         vi.  However, the issue of sole responsibility is not just a matter
             between the parents. So even  if  there  is  only  one  parent
             involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may  not  have
             sole responsibility.

         vii.   In   the   circumstances   likely   to   arise,   day-to-day
             responsibility (or decision-making) for  the  child's  welfare
             may necessarily be shared with others (such  as  relatives  or
             friends) because of the geographical  separation  between  the
             parent and child.

         viii.    That, however, does not prevent  the  parent  having  sole
             responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.

         ix.   The  test  is,  not  whether  anyone  else   has   day-to-day
             responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control
             and direction of the child's upbringing including  making  all
             the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.   If   not,
             responsibility is shared and so not 'sole'."

17. At page D22 of the respondent's bundle  there  is  a  letter  from  The
    Reverend Samambwa stating that the sponsor was in constant  touch  with
    the church authorities regarding S's spiritual  wellbeing,  growth  and
    guidance and he remained the only parent known to them.  He  understood
    that the mother got married elsewhere and deserted her at her  father's
    residence in 2010.

18. There are a number of letters from Kwekwe High  School  confirming  the
    payment of their tuition fees and confirming that Mr T is  the  child's
    sole parent and the main focal point of contact regarding  S's  welfare
    and wellbeing at the school.  He makes the  effort  to  communicate  by
    means of telephone during school consultative days, parents'  days  and
    randomly thereafter.  He  has  a  profound  interest  in  S's  academic
    achievements despite distance.  Her uncle is  the  emergency  point  of
    contact and it can be pretty difficult to link him, especially as he is
    out of the city.

19.  There  are  also  a  number  of  other  letters  confirming  that  the
    appellant's mother has no contact with her, together with letters  from
    her uncle B.  He said that he had looked after  her  for  a  very  long
    time, initially as a temporary arrangement  which  has  overstayed  its
    welcome and  he  was  disappointed  because  he  has  not  been,  as  a
    consequence, free to search for employment.  He was  supposed  to  have
    relocated to South Africa to look for work on  a  permanent  basis  and
    time is running out for him to explore other opportunities.  He  was  a
    single man and had reached the age when he wanted to  settle  down  and
    have a stable relationship and could not  manage  to  do  so.   He  was
    unwilling to continue to look after S.

20. Mrs Petterson did not make any submission in relation to credibility.

21. The evidence from the  school  establishes  that,  not  only  does  the
    appellant's father pay S's fees, but he is their point  of  contact  in
    relation her progress, and he takes an active interest in her  studies.



22. The school make a clear distinction between the relationship which they
    have with the sponsor and that with her uncle, whom they  refer  to  as
    the emergency contact and with whom it is difficult to communicate.

23. That evidence is supported by the letter from the church which confirms
    the sponsor's concern with the appellant's spiritual welfare.

24. It is also confirmed by the letters from B who, is a  relatively  young
    man himself, and clearly feels that his initial offer to look after the
    appellant temporarily is no longer practicable.  There is no  basis  at
    all upon which to conclude that B  has,  at  all  material  times,  had
    anything other than day-to-day care of his niece/cousin.

25. Applying the guidance set out in TD, I conclude that B has  never  been
    involved in the decision making with respect to S's education,  or  her
    religious practice, and he has not  exercised  any  responsibility  for
    her, which has  remained  solely  with  her  father  since  her  mother
    disappeared in 2010.

26. Mrs Petterson confirmed that this is the only outstanding issue.

27. Since there has been an extraordinarily lengthy delay in this  case  it
    is hoped that entry clearance can be issued without further delay.

Notice of Decision

28. The original judge erred in law.  His decision is  set  aside.   It  is
    remade as follows.  The appellant's appeal is allowed.









Direction regarding anonymity -  rule  13  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2014



Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  appellant  has
been granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family. This direction  applies
both to the appellant and  the  respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed[pic]                             Date 19 January 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

