
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/05475/2015
                                                               OA/06575/2015
                                                               OA/06581/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 September 2016                  |On 28 November 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHANA


                                   Between

                                 SHAHBAZ [Q]
                                   [S S1]
                                   [S S2]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss P Glass, Counsel, instructed by Abbott
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellants are nationals  of  Pakistan  who  appealed  against  the
    decision of the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  made  in  Islamabad  on  17
    February 2015 to refuse  their  applications  for  entry  clearance  as
    partner and dependants under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

2.   The judge dismissed the appellants' appeals and  permission  to  appeal
    was granted by Designated  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McCarthy  in  a
    decision dated 29 July 2016.

3.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  appellants  do  not  meet
    the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  as  they  have  not  provided  bank
    statements for a period of six months up to the date of the appellants'
    application of 30 October 2014 and dismissed the appeal.

4.   At the hearing Mr Bramble very helpfully  accepted  that  there  is  an
    error of law in the decision and  that  if  one  was  to  consider  the
    reasons for refusal letter, all the issues  raised  therein  have  been
    satisfied by the appellant.

5.   One of the issue in this appeal  was  whether  there  is  a  subsisting
    relationship and this has been satisfied because the ECM accepted  that
    there was a subsisting relationship.  The  ECM  further  accepted  that
    funds came from the sale of property. The only other issue was  whether
    the bank statements had been provided  for  six  months  prior  to  the
    application made on 30 October  2014.  This  has  also  been  satisfied
    because the statements for the required six months' have been produced.
     I therefore find that all the concerns of  the  respondent  have  been
    met. This was not disputed by the Senior Presenting Officer.

Notice of Decision

6.   I therefore set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
    having a material error of law.  I remake the decision  and  allow  the
    appellants appeals under the Immigration Rules. This is a linked appeal
    and there are three appellants.  The appeals of  all  three  appellants
    are allowed.

    No anonymity direction is made.

Signed                                  Date: 24th day of November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Even though I have allowed the appeal, I make no fee order.

Signed                                  Date     24th day of November 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chana
