

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/05450/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Laganside Courts Centre, Belfast     |Determination Promulgated    |
|on 14 April 2014                              |on 23 April 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                The President, The Hon. Mr Justice McCloskey

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               ABDI HASSAN ALI
                                                                  Respondent




Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs M  O'Brien,  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (Nairobi,
                  Kenya)
For the Respondent:    Mr  McTaggart  (of  Counsel)  instructed  by  Francis
                  Hanna and Company, Solicitors



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  This appeal has its origins in a decision made by the Entry  Clearance
    Officer of Nairobi, the Appellant  herein,  dated  10th  January  2013,
    whereby the Respondent's application for permission to enter the United
    Kingdom in his capacity of the spouse of a  person  who  has  leave  to
    remain until 13th July 2017 ( the sponsor) was refused under the family
    reunion  provisions  of  paragraph  352A  of  the  Immigration   Rules.
    Fundamentally, the refusal was based on a rejection of the Respondent's
    asserted relationship with the sponsor.  One  element  of  the  refusal
    entailed the rejection of the copy marriage  certificate  submitted  by
    the Respondent, based on a Home Office Country  of  Origin  Information
    Report relating to Somalia (November 2007). This refusal  reason  is  a
    familiar one. In a single sentence, the application  was  also  refused
    under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. The Respondent appealed.  By  its  determination  promulgated  on  14th
    October 2013, the First-Tier Tribunal (the "FtT")  allowed  his  appeal
    under both the Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.  The central basis
    of the ensuing grant of permission to appeal to this Tribunal was  that
    the Judge's conclusions were inadequately reasoned.   This  became  the
    sole focus of the case made by the Appellant at the hearing.

 3.  On  behalf  of  the  Appellant,  Mrs  O'Brien,  contending  that   the
    determination of the FtT was inadequately reasoned, characterised  this
    a "fundamental flaw".  She  highlighted  in  particular  the  following
    aspects of the Judge's decision:

    (a)  In one passage, the Judge made a finding that the  Respondent  and
         the sponsor  are  married,  whilst  simultaneously  describing  the
         explanation of the absence of the original marriage certificate  as
         "at best weak".

    (b)   In  the  immediately  ensuing   paragraph,   the   Judge,   while
         acknowledging the Appellant's contention that the Respondent's case
         was undermined by various "inconsistencies", did not  grapple  with
         these or make any  specific  findings,  confining  himself  to  the
         observation that if the  Appellant  had  chosen  to  interview  the
         Respondent  this  might  have  yielded  satisfactory  answers   and
         explanations.

    (c)  Next, the Judge explicitly recognised  that  the  content  of  the
         Facebook and E-mail evidence raised certain  questions,  commenting
         that this "comes close to [overturning the Appellant's  case],  but
         not close enough", without elaboration or rationalisation.

    (d)  In the following paragraph, the Judge, having made a  questionable
         reference to Article 1F of the Refugee Convention (which was not in
         play), stated "I have no reason to doubt that the parties intend to
         live  permanently  with  each  other  and  that  the  marriage   is
         subsisting", without any particulars or reasons.


    (e)  Finally, the Judge acknowledged the expert evidence in the form of
         the report  prepared  by  Dr  Bekalo,  describing  his  opinion  as
         "helpful to a minor degree".


 4. On behalf of the Respondent,  Mr  McTaggart  highlighted  that  at  the
    beginning of the passages under scrutiny, the Judge stated:

         "The burden of proof is on the Appellant and the standard of  proof
         required is a balance of probabilities ....


         I have given full and careful consideration to all of the documents
         attached to this appeal ....."

    The Judge also adverted to the oral evidence given at  the  hearing  by
    the sponsor.  Next, Mr McTaggart drew attention to the various marriage
    and family unit claims made by the sponsor during her asylum  interview
    in June 2012.  He also highlighted the consistent terms  in  which  the
    family reunion settlement  applications  had  been  formulated  by  the
    Respondent and the asserted  children  of  the  family.    Finally,  he
    emphasised the supporting opinion of Dr Bekalo.

 5. I accede to the Appellant's contention that the  determination  of  the
    FtT suffers from insufficient  findings,  a  failure  to  grapple  with
    relevant evidence and insufficient reasons.  Much of the  determination
    is conclusionary in nature. It lacks the necessary  depth  of  analysis
    and ensuing reasoned findings and conclusions.  It does not satisfy the
    standards and principles highlighted in the  recent  decision  of  this
    Tribunal in MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC).

 6. The question which now arises is whether the errors of  law  identified
    above are material.  I have considered this question in the context  of
    the totality of the evidence available  to  the  Judge,  in  particular
    those aspects highlighted in the Respondent's submissions.  I have also
    taken into account that the wording of the determination is, in some of
    the passages  under  scrutiny,  somewhat  infelicitous  and  should  be
    considered  accordingly.   Furthermore,  I  have  had  regard  to   the
    consideration   that,   although   not   explicitly   stated   in   the
    determination, it seems likely that the  Judge  was  impressed  by  the
    evidence   of   the   sponsor   relating   to   the   key   issues   of
    Respondent/sponsor relationship and the family unit.  These core issues
    also had a bearing on the question of Article 8 ECHR proportionality.

 7. Approached in this way, I have come to the conclusion that  the  errors
    of law which I have identified are not material.  I consider that there
    was sufficient evidence before the  Judge  to  make  the  findings  and
    articulate the reasons which a properly composed  decision  would  have
    contained but are missing.  Thus I am satisfied that the outcome  would
    have been no different had the errors been avoided.


DECISION

 8. Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal and affirm the decision of the FtT.







                                    Signed:
                                                 [pic]

                                               THE HON. MR JUSTICE MCCLOSKEY
                                             PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date:   14 April 2014
