
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers:  OA/05570/2013
     VA/03252/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 August 2014                             |On 29 August 2014            |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Southern

                                   Between

                        TANATSWA INNOCENT MATSIKA (1)
                         FAINA FAUSTINA CHINHARA (2)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the First Appellant:        Mr P. Tapfumaneyi, of PT Law & Associates
For the Second Appellant:  None
For the Respondent:        Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1.   In 2005 the mother of the first appellant, who is a child born on 27
      April 2001, left Zimbabwe and came to the United Kingdom where she has
      now been granted discretionary leave to remain. She has not since then
      returned to Zimbabwe and her son, the first appellant, has since  then
      lived with his grandmother, who is the second appellant.


   2.    In late 2012,  although  not  apparently  on  the  same  date,  the
      appellants both made applications for entry clearance to come  to  the
      United Kingdom. The first appellant applied for  settlement,  to  join
      his mother. The second appellant applied  for  entry  clearance  as  a
      family visitor, saying that she wished to stay for 6  months  for  the
      purpose of a family visit to her daughter and others.  They  had  both
      previously made similar applications  and  had  been  unsuccessful  in
      their appeals against refusal.

   3.    It is of significance that, on this occasion, the applications were
      made  quite  separately  and  there  was  no  mention  in  the  second
      appellant's application for a six month visit visa that  her  grandson
      was, at the same time, renewing his application for settlement.

   4.   The two  applications  were  considered  separately  and  both  were
      refused.  Both appealed against refusal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
      The second appellant's appeal came before Judge PJM Hollingworth on 11
      November  2013.  Having  received  oral  evidence  from   the   second
      appellant's  daughter,  who  is  identified   as   sponsor   in   both
      applications, he became aware of  the  pending  appeal  of  the  first
      appellant and so adjourned the  hearing  so  that  both  appeals  came
      before him on 16 April 2014.

   5.    By a determination promulgated on 21 May 2014 the  judge  dismissed
      both appeals. There  were  separate  applications  for  permission  to
      appeal. On 23 June 2014 the first appellant was granted permission  to
      appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge Davies, mainly on the  basis  that
      although the grounds of appeal raised a claim under Article 8  of  the
      ECHR the judge did not deal with that at all. Two days  later,  on  25
      June 2014 the second appellant was granted  permission  to  appeal  by
      Designated Judge McClure, the judge observing  that  the  two  appeals
      needed to be considered together.

   6.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Mr Tapfumaneyi appeared for
      the first appellant only, although  the  second  appellant's  daughter
      attended and was invited to respond to the issues raised in respect of
      her mother's appeal.

   7.   Dealing first with the appeal if the  second  appellant,  the  judge
      made a clear finding of fact that:

         "I find that the reality of the position  is  that  this  appellant
         planned to visit the United Kingdom to  bring  the  child  Tanatswa
         Innocent Matsika with her"


    The judge noted submissions advanced by the respondent that


         "At questions 4.19 and 4.20 of her application form  she  indicated
         that  neither  her  children  nor  any  other  children  would   be
         travelling to the United Kingdom with  her.  At  question  8.2  she
         confirmed that she would not be travelling with anyone. At question
         8.6... she provided details of the other family members  who  would
         be staying at the proposed address during her  visit  but  did  not
         mention Tanatswa Matsika."


     and said:

         "I accept the  respondent's  arguments  in  relation  to  paragraph
         320(7A) and dismiss the appeal of Faina Chinhara on this basis."

   8. Paragraph 320(7A) provides, so far as is relevant, as follows:


         Grounds upon which entry clearance or leave  to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom is to be refused


         (7A) where false representations have been made or false  documents
         or information have been submitted (whether or not material to  the
         application and whether or not to the  applicant's  knowledge),  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed  in  relation  to   the
         application...


   9.   Given the clear finding of fact made by the judge  that  the  second
      appellant intended to travel with the first appellant so as  to  bring
      him to the United Kingdom to join his mother, taken together with  the
      fact that these were renewed applications after an earlier attempt had
      failed, it was  plainly  open  to  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the
      application of the second appellant was one that fell to be refused on
      the basis of paragraph 320(A), now that the true facts had emerged, so
      that on that basis alone the appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  must  be
      dismissed.


  10. In granting permission, Judge Mclure identified two grounds that  were
      being  pursued  by   the   second   appellant   in   challenging   the
      determination. First, her appeal should not have been linked with that
      of her grandson and second, as she had not seen her daughter since she
      left Zimbabwe to travel to the United Kingdom, the  appeal  should  be
      allowed because of rights protected by article 8 of the ECHR.

  11. Neither of those grounds is remotely arguable. There  was  nothing  at
      all to indicate a viable article  8  claim  arising  from  the  second
      appellant's relationship with her adult daughter  who  had  chosen  to
      relocate to the United  Kingdom  years  ago.  The  judge  was  clearly
      entitled to hear the two appeals together. Rule 20 of the  Asylum  and
      Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 provides:

         "Hearing one or more appeals together


         20. Where two or more appeals are pending at  the  same  time,  the
         Tribunal may direct them to be heard together if it appears that-


           a) some common question of law or fact arises in each of them;
           b) they relate to decisions  or  actions  taken  in  respect  of
              persons who are members of the same family; or
           c) for some other reason it is desirable for the appeals  to  be
              heard together."

  12. Addressing next the appeal of the first appellant, Mr Walker accepted,
      quite properly, that the judge had simply failed to  engage  with  two
      grounds that were specifically pleaded before him. The first of  those
      grounds was that there had been no consideration of  rights  protected
      by article 8 of the ECHR, as were engaged between this child  and  his
      mother and second that the application  should  have  succeeded  under
      paragraph 301(i)(c) of HC395 because  one  of  the  first  appellant's
      parents had limited leave to remain in the United  Kingdom  and  there
      were serious and compelling considerations that made exclusion of  the
      child undesirable and suitable arrangements have  been  made  for  the
      child's care.

  13. S.86(2) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  required
      the judge to determine any matter raised as a ground of appeal and his
      failure to do so was an error of law. It was a  material  error  given
      that it cannot be said that the ground was simply unarguable. Plainly,
      careful findings of fact need to be made in respect of those  grounds,
      particularly in the light of the other detailed reasons given  by  the
      Entry  Clearance  Officer,  in   refusing   the   second   appellant's
      application, for finding that there were concerns about the  sponsor's
      financial circumstances.

  14. The grounds challenged also the finding of the judge that the  sponsor
      did not  have  the  sole  responsibility  for  the  first  appellant's
      upbringing demanded by paragraph  301(i)(b)  of  HC395.  Having  heard
      submissions from both parties it is clear that if the first  appellant
      is to meet that requirement it will have to be demonstrated  that  the
      Certificate of Guardianship issued by the  Juvenile  Court  of  Harare
      that certified that the second appellant had  been  appointed  as  the
      first appellant's guardian "with full legal powers "over the child was
      not inconsistent with the assertion that the sponsor, nonetheless, has
      sole responsibility for him.  However,  the  judge  made  no  specific
      finding of fact in that regard and, in the light of the need  for  the
      other ground to be addressed, it was agreed between the  parties  that
      it would not be appropriate to seek  to  preserve  any  part  of  this
      determination insofar as it relates to the first appellant.

  15. For these reasons, the appeal of the  first  appellant  to  the  Upper
      Tribunal will be allowed to the extent that the decision of the  judge
      to dismiss his appeal will  be  set  aside  and  the  appeal  will  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  determination  afresh  by  a
      different judge of that Tribunal. The determination will stand only as
      a record of what was said at the hearing.

   Summary of Decision:

  16. The appeal of the first appellant is allowed to the  extent  that  the
      decision of the judge to dismiss his appeal will be set aside and  the
      appellant will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined
      afresh on all grounds.


  17. The appeal of the second appellant is dismissed  and  in  that  regard
      only the determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand


Signed                                  Date 27 August 2014

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Southern
