


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: OA/05862/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Determination Promulgated |
|On 1 July 2014                         |On 10 July 2014           |
|Prepared on 1 July 2014                |                          |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    S. A.
                            (ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER DHAKA

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Pickering, Counsel instructed by David Gray
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Dewison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who in reliance upon  a
           marriage that she claimed to have entered into with the  sponsor
           in Bangladesh on 10 October 2008, applied  for  entry  clearance
           for settlement as his spouse on 18 November 2012.
        2. On 14 January 2013 the Respondent refused that  application.  He
           was not satisfied  the  Appellant  had  relied  upon  a  genuine
           marriage certificate, or that she had supplied adequate evidence
           of  a  genuine  and  subsisting  marriage  to  the  sponsor.  In
           consequence he was not satisfied the couple were  in  a  genuine
           and subsisting relationship, or that the Appellant  intended  to
           live with the sponsor permanently  in  the  UK  as  his  spouse.
           Finally he was not satisfied the  Appellant  met  the  financial
           requirements set out in Appendix FM.
        3. The Appellant lodged an appeal  with  the  First  Tier  Tribunal
           against that decision, and as a  result  the  decision  was  the
           subject of review by the ECM on 21 July 2013. The ECM upheld the
           decision  and  added  the  additional  point  that   given   the
           difficulties that had subsequently been  revealed  with  City  &
           Guilds English language testing in Bangladesh no  weight  should
           be given to the certificate relied upon by  the  Appellant,  who
           had been offered a free retest.
        4. The appeal was  heard  and  dismissed  by  Judge  Handley  in  a
           Determination  promulgated  on  13  January  2014.  He  was  not
           satisfied on the evidence before him that the Appellant and  the
           sponsor had entered into a genuine marriage, or that they had  a
           genuine and subsisting relationship at the date of the  decision
           under appeal.
        5. The Appellant applied to the First Tier Tribunal for  permission
           to appeal. Permission was granted by Judge PJG White on 14 April
           2014.
        6. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 Notice on 20 May 2014. She argued
           that the grounds  were  misconceived,  and  that  there  was  no
           material error in the approach taken  to  the  evidence  by  the
           Judge.
        7. Neither party  made  a  Rule  15(2A)  application  to  introduce
           further evidence.
        8. Thus the matter comes before me.
        9. I accept as Ouseley J did in CJ (on  the  application  of  R)  v
           Cardiff County Council [2011] EWHC 23,  the  importance  of  the
           approach in Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] Imm AR 318.  Documentary
           evidence along with its provenance needs to be  weighed  in  the
           light of all the evidence in the case. Documentary evidence does
           not carry with it a presumption of authenticity, which  specific
           evidence must  disprove,  failing  which  its  content  must  be
           accepted. What is required is its appraisal in the light of  the
           evidence about its nature,  provenance,  timing  and  background
           evidence and in the light of all the other evidence in the case,
           especially that given by the claimant. The same can properly  be
           said for a witness' oral evidence.


           The grounds
       10. Ms Pickering argued before me only two of the three grounds upon
           which permission to appeal had been sought, and granted. It  was
           conceded that there was no merit in ground  three,  because;  a)
           there had never been any evidence placed before the Judge  about
           the sponsor's mental health, and so the Judge did  not  fail  to
           take any relevant material into account, and, b) the sponsor had
           conceded to the Judge at the  hearing  [30]  that  he  had  been
           discharged from any continuing care by the Community Psychiatric
           Nurse. Whilst the Judge took account of the assertion  that  was
           made to him during submissions by the Appellant's representative
           that the sponsor had continuing mental health issues, their true
           nature was not  properly  identified  to  him  in  the  evidence
           offered by the sponsor or  his  parents.  The  sponsor  and  his
           parents merely referred to "mental  health  problems"  in  their
           witness statements without offering any explanation of what they
           were. In the circumstances Ms Pickering accepted that she  could
           not identify any error of law in the  Judge's  approach  to  the
           health of the sponsor.
       11. In any event, were the sponsor to suffer  from  chronic  serious
           mental ill health, it occurs to  me  that  this  would  raise  a
           concern about his capacity to enter into a valid  marriage  with
           the Appellant; Sheffield City Council v E [2004] EWHC 2808.
       12. Ground two, which was argued, asserted that the Judge had failed
           to give adequate weight to the evidence of the sponsor, and  his
           parents, concerning the regularity, length and  content  of  his
           telephone contact with the Appellant. After  due  reflection  Ms
           Pickering  accepted  that  the  only   fair   reading   of   the
           Determination was that the Judge had rejected this  evidence  as
           untrue. In those circumstances Ms  Pickering  did  not  seek  to
           argue  that  the  Judge  gave  inadequate   reasons   for   that
           conclusion. In my judgement she was right not to do so.
       13. The Judge  did  not  overlook  the  evidence  of  the  sponsor's
           parents; on the contrary he set out  a  summary  of  it  in  the
           Determination [18-19]. The Judge noted the sponsor  had  claimed
           to have been married to the Appellant for over five  years,  but
           accepted that he had not visited her in that time, so that  they
           had last seen each other a few  weeks  after  the  date  of  the
           marriage relied upon. The Judge noted however that  the  sponsor
           claimed to speak to the Appellant every day, for about an  hour,
           which claim was corroborated by both of his parents.
       14. Despite the claim to have such a significant  level  of  regular
           telephone conversation together the Judge noted that the sponsor
           did not know if the Appellant worked, what her interests or  her
           hobbies were, or, even if she had resat an English language test
           following  the  Respondent's  invitation  to  do  so  for   free
           following the problems with the reliability  of  City  &  Guilds
           language testing in Bangladesh. He was entitled to conclude that
           this was inconsistent with the claimed level of  contact.  There
           were no phone records that corroborated his  claims  as  to  the
           length and frequency of the calls he  claimed  to  make  to  the
           Appellant, and thus, although the sponsor's parents had  claimed
           to have been direct witnesses to many of these calls, the  Judge
           gave adequate reasons for his decision.
       15. Finally, ground one asserted the Judge had failed to  take  into
           account evidence that tended to show the document relied upon as
           the 2008 marriage certificate was  genuine.  That  evidence  was
           said to be: a) a further marriage certificate  and  confirmation
           from the Registrar that the marriage did take place, and, b) the
           evidence of the sponsor's parents,  who  claimed  to  have  been
           present at the wedding.
       16. The Respondent's original  decision  had  taken  two  points  in
           relation to the document dated 10 October 2008 which was said to
           be a genuine marriage certificate properly issued to the  couple
           by a Registrar authorised to do so. First, that the ECO had been
           unable in the course of his enquiries  to  verify  the  marriage
           certificate with the individual who was said to be the Registrar
           who had issued it,  because  the  Khadimpara  Marriage  Registry
           Office had been unable to  provide  a  contact  number  for  the
           individual named on the certificate. Second, that  a  member  of
           the  UKBA  document  verification  team  had   concluded   after
           examination of the document  that  it  was  a  forgery,  because
           certain features of the document  were  not  consistent  with  a
           genuine marriage certificate. Of the latter,  perhaps  the  most
           striking example was that the document was printed on the  wrong
           coloured paper. The Respondent had produced evidence in the form
           of a "Document Examination Report", dated 22 November 2012  from
           an officer in the visa  section  trained  in  the  detection  of
           forgery which identified and described these concerns  in  full.
           The Judge was perfectly  entitled  to  place  weight  upon  that
           report.
       17.  In  response  the  Appellant  produced  no  evidence  from  the
           Khadimpara  Marriage  Registry  Office  (or  indeed  any   other
           official body or organisation) to show that the  individual  who
           was recorded on the 2008  document  as  the  Registrar  who  had
           issued that document, held such a post at the date that  it  was
           said to have been issued. Nor did the Appellant produce evidence
           to show that the features of  the  document  identified  by  the
           Respondent were not uncommon in genuine documents of that  type.
           Nor to show that paper of that colour had been  in  use  at  the
           relevant time for the purpose  of  creating  documents  of  that
           type. If the document in question was genuine then I would  have
           expected that evidence of this nature would have been  available
           to the Appellant.
       18. Instead the Appellant relied upon a  document  dated  9  October
           2013 [ApB p25] which purported to be a certificate issued by  Md
           Abdus Salam Rashidi, who was described in a stamp applied at the
           foot of the document as the  Nikah  &  Divorce  Registrar  Kazi,
           Balagon Upozila, Sylhet.  That  certificate  asserted  that  the
           Appellant and the sponsor had married and that  "their  marriage
           certificate" which was otherwise  not  identified  by  date,  or
           index number, was original, and had been issued to them  by  the
           author. The certificate went on to assert that due to a spelling
           mistake (the nature and location of which  was  not  identified)
           the author had issued a new certificate; a document also dated 9
           October 2013 [ApB p26].
       19. There are a number of difficulties with the assertions contained
           in the certificate of 9 October 2013. Perhaps the  most  obvious
           are;
                 a) the failure of  the  author  to  explain  why  the  2008
           document is printed on blue coloured paper as opposed  to  Azure
           Lead paper,
                 b) the failure of the author to explain why neither his own
           signature nor his own stamp (as found on this document)  can  be
           identified upon the 2008 document, if he did indeed issue it  in
           the capacity that he claimed to hold,
                 c) the failure of the author to explain the printing errors
           in the 2008 document,  and  the  lack  of  a  signature  to  the
           authentication stamp on the top left side  of  the  first  page,
           and,
                 d) the failure of the author to identify the 2008  document
           referred to by its date, or its book serial and page numbers.
       20. In the circumstances the Appellant entirely  failed  to  address
           the issue the Respondent had raised  about  the  colour  of  the
           paper that a genuine marriage document would be printed upon, or
           whether spelling errors would be found in the printed section of
           a genuine document,  and  offered  no  explanation  for  why  Mr
           Rashidi's signature did not appear on the 2008 document.
       21. Ms Pickering quite properly accepted before me  that  the  Judge
           was not obliged to accept at face  value  the  evidence  of  the
           sponsor's parents, any more than he was  obliged  to  accept  at
           face value the evidence of the sponsor, or  the  Appellant.  She
           accepted that she could not properly assert that the  Judge  did
           not have their evidence in mind, given that it was summarised by
           him  in  the  Determination  [18-19].  Moreover  the  Judge  was
           entitled to give weight to the issues raised  by  the  sponsor's
           oral evidence, which plainly, and properly, gave him concern  as
           to whether the sponsor and his  parents  were  telling  him  the
           truth.
       22. In the circumstances I am not satisfied that there was any error
           of law in the Judge's approach, which was not  merely  to  focus
           upon the document that was said to be  a  marriage  certificate,
           but to consider the entirety of the evidence which supported the
           Appellant's claim that she had entered into a marriage with  the
           sponsor in 2008. For  the  reasons  that  he  gave,  which  were
           entirely adequate, the Judge was not satisfied that he was being
           told the truth about this, or that the couple had  done  so.  He
           made it abundantly clear why he considered  he  could  place  no
           significant weight upon either the document relied upon  as  the
           2008 marriage certificate, or  the  documents  created  in  2013
           which were relied upon as corroboration of  the  2008  marriage.
           Whereas he could have gone on to spell out in terms a conclusion
           that the 2008 marriage certificate was a forgery, he did not  do
           so, even though it is implicit in my judgement that this was his
           conclusion. In my judgement that conclusion was one that he  was
           perfectly entitled to reach upon the evidence  that  was  before
           him. There was no material error of law in his  failure  to  set
           such a conclusion out in terms that requires me to set aside his
           decision and remake it.


           Conclusions
       23.  In  my  judgement,  and  notwithstanding  the  terms  in  which
           permission to appeal was granted,  there  is  no  merit  in  the
           grounds advanced before me. It was open to the Judge to make the
           adverse findings of fact that he did, for the  reasons  that  he
           gave, and to reach the conclusions that he did.  The  complaints
           made about the Judge's approach reveal no material error of  law
           that requires his decision to be set aside and remade.





   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      13 January 2014 contained no error of law  in  the  dismissal  of  the
      Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be  set  aside  and
      remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 1 July 2014

Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.

   Signed


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 1 July 2014




