
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/05269/2014
                                                               OA/05270/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 October 2015                   |On 21 December 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                              Ms MARIAM JALLOH
                         MASTER ROMEO SOLOMON KOILOR
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTIOn MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Goddard, Southwark CAB
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fujiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellants are cousins, born respectively on 6 May  2001  and  10
       August 1997. They are nationals of Sierra Leone. On 4 February  2014,
       they applied for entry clearance to  join  their  Sponsor,  Ms  Katmu
       Lansana-Woneh, who is the mother of the first Appellant and the  aunt
       of the second Appellant, in the United Kingdom. On 4 March 2014,  the
       applications were refused on  the  basis  that  the  Entry  Clearance
       Officer was not satisfied that paragraph 297(i)(d), (e)  and  (f)  of
       the Immigration Rules were met.

    2. The Appellants appealed and their  appeals  came  before  First  Tier
       Tribunal Judge Traynor for hearing on 26 February 2015. In a decision
       promulgated on 12 May 2015, he dismissed the appeal.

    3. An application for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
       made out of time  on  8  June  2015  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge
       materially erred in law: (i) in  his  treatment  of  the  documentary
       evidence; (ii) in his approach to the evidence  generally;  (iii)  in
       his treatment of the sole responsibility point; (iv) in his treatment
       of the family or other compelling circumstances requirement;  (v)  in
       his approach to Article 8; (vi) in his consideration  of  Articles  3
       and 7 of the UNCRC.

    4. Permission to appeal was granted by First Tier Tribunal  Judge  White
       on 10 August 2015, who also extended time,  on  the  basis  that  the
       First Tier Tribunal Judge arguably erred in law:

        i) with regard to the reliability  of  the  death  certificate  the
           Judge imposed too high a requirement in requiring  corroborative
           evidence;

       ii) in failing to apply the guidance in TD (Yemen);

      iii) in failing to consider the  reliability  of  the  post  decision
           documentation in the round;

       iv) in his flawed approach to the reliability of the documents;

        v) in failing to give sufficient weight to the  best  interests  of
           the Sponsor's British citizen child, with regard to the question
           of the Sponsor relocating to Sierra Leone.

  Hearing

  5.  At the hearing before me, Mr Goddard sought to rely on the grounds of
       appeal. He submitted that it was illogical  for  the  Judge  to  have
       repeatedly dismissed evidence on the basis that it  was  self-serving
       and that this created an  impossible  evidential  burden  beyond  the
       balance of probabilities. The Judge failed to explain why he accepted
       the Respondent's  position  that  the  documents  are  untrustworthy,
       whereas the burden of proving that they are untrustworthy  shifts  to
       the Respondent cf. MA (Switzerland) and Singh v Belgium. He submitted
       that the documents are easily verifiable in this case as the  ECO  is
       in the region.

  6.  In respect of Ground 3  and  the  issue  of  sole  responsibility  he
       submitted that the Judge had got this wrong following  TD  (Paragraph
       297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049. He failed
       to take account of the fact that sole responsibility can be held  for
       a short time and the changes of circumstances in the case. The  Judge
       applied the wrong sole responsibility test at [76] where  he  focuses
       on day to day care rather  than  sole  responsibility  and  crucially
       failed to make a  finding  as  to  who  has  responsibility  for  the
       children cf. TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 00049. In respect  of  Ground  4
       and whether  there  are  family  or  other  compelling  circumstances
       rendering exclusion undesirable, at [80] the Judge acknowledges  that
       the child is not able to attend school but does not consider it to be
       a significant factor but only whether accommodation available to him,
       yet accommodation is only a very small part of it  and  there  is  no
       consideration that the child is an orphan and no one  is  willing  to
       act as his carer: [79] & [80].

  7.  In respect of Ground 5 and Article 8, Mr Goddard submitted that  this
       stands or  falls  with  the  Rules  with  one  exception.  The  Judge
       considered alternatives to the children coming to the UK and at  [83]
       held that the sponsor and her 7 year old British child could relocate
       to Sierra Leone. This is a clear error of law cf. Sanade as the  Home
       Office accept it is not reasonable to expect a British child to leave
       the UK. He submitted that the Judge further  failed  to  engage  with
       section 55 cf. Mundeba but there is  no  clear  finding  on  this  or
       Article 7 of UNCRC viz every child has the right to live  with  their
       parents.

  8.  In response, Ms Fijiwala sought to rely on the rule 24 response.  She
       submitted that, in respect of Ground 1, the Judge has properly  dealt
       with the death certificates at [69-71]. He does not just dismiss them
       out  of  hand.  At  [70]  he  goes  on  to  consider  the  fact  that
       certificates can be  issued  without  corroboration.  Evidence  could
       easily have  been  provided  by  family  members  but  was  not.  She
       submitted that  the  burden  was  not  upon  the  Respondent  as  the
       documents were not considered a forgery  but  simply  documents  that
       cannot be relied upon and it was up to the Appellants to prove  their
       case. She disputed that the Judge has placed an impossible evidential
       burden upon the Appellants but rather has provided reasons as to  why
       the documents are self-serving and  there  was  independent  evidence
       that could have been provided.

  9.  In respect of Ground 3 and the  issue  of  sole  responsibility,  the
       Judge has had proper regard to the decision in TD (Yemen) and it  was
       not accepted that the Sponsor had held it either short or  long  term
       at [76]. There was inconsistent evidence regarding  why  the  Sponsor
       had not visited the Appellants. The Judge applied  the  correct  test
       and finds that care arrangements are in  place  and  the  Sponsor  is
       following her own life. The Judge was  satisfied  there  were  others
       caring for Mariam and made a clear finding the Sponsor  has  not  had
       care and control over Mariam. There was no evidence  she  was  paying
       for education and healthcare or directing this [77]. At [78]-[79] the
       Judge considers the Sponsor's lack of knowledge and finds that she is
       not telling the truth  regarding  family  members  in  Sierra  Leone.
       Family members had attended the funeral of her  mother.  The  Judge's
       plausibility finding was based on custom and the culture of  families
       living together in a compound in Sierra Leone. At  [73]-[81]  it  was
       open  to  the  Judge  to  find  the  Sponsor  does  not   have   sole
       responsibility for Mariam and that she had not discharged the  burden
       of proof.

  10. In respect of Ground 4 and Romeo, the Judge has clearly reasoned  why
       he finds Romeo is not living in the claimed  circumstances  at  [77]-
       [80]. The Sponsor admitted that her sister owned  property  that  may
       pass to Romeo and it was open to the Judge to find  the  Sponsor  was
       not telling the truth and that his  father  or  family  members  were
       involved in his  welfare.  On  the  correct  standard  of  proof  the
       children have continued to live on that compound  and  their  fathers
       are playing a role. In respect of the fact that the schools have been
       closed due to Ebola crisis, this was not a material consideration for
       the Judge as it occurred in April 2004 after  the  date  of  decision
       (March 2014). The Sponsor has not said that the  children  have  been
       exposed otherwise to risk.

  11. In respect of Article 8 the Judge properly dealt with  this.  He  has
       considered section 55 at [82] and he has clearly considered the  best
       interests of the children. The decision will maintain the status  quo
       and  therefore  interference  is  proportionate.  There  is   nothing
       incorrect with that finding and in the alternative the Sponsor  could
       relocate to Sierra Leone with Lucy. That is merely an option for  the
       Sponsor and not a requirement that they go  to  Sierra  Leone.  There
       were no errors in the determination and the findings were open to the
       Judge.

  12. In his reply, Mr  Goddard  stated  that  in  relation  to  the  death
       certificates he was not  suggesting  all  the  burden  was  upon  the
       Respondent but the starting  point  should  be  that  if  someone  is
       disputing without clear reason the burden shifts. There is  a  shared
       burden but that point has not been engaged  with  by  the  Judge.  In
       respect of the evidence as to a family compound he drew my  attention
       to the letter from  the  Government/Social  development  officer.  He
       submitted in respect of Article 8 and maintaining the status quo that
       there is a long line of caselaw that says Article 8  has  a  positive
       obligation. Even in SS (Congo) it says where  there  are  exceptional
       circumstances an entry clearance application can succeed.

  Decision

  13. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons. I find that
       First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor  erred  materially  in  law  in
       dismissing the Appellants' appeal in the following material respects:

  13.1.     In respect of Grounds 1 and 2, the Judge considered  the  issue
       of the death certificates of the Appellants' fathers at [69]-[71]  of
       his decision, concluding at [71]:

           "I am satisfied that the documents which have been produced  can
           be regarded as  nothing  more  than  self  serving  and  do  not
           persuade me upon a balance of     probabilities  that  they  are
           proof of an actual death ... I do not accept that such  evidence
           is proof of the death of the fathers of each of  the  Appellants
           because I find that it has always been open to  the  sponsor  to
           have adduced additional evidence which may  have  supported  her
           claims."

       I have carefully considered the submissions of both parties  on  this
       issue. Whilst I accept Ms Fijiwala's submission that  the  burden  of
       proving that the documents could be relied  upon  was  not  upon  the
       Respondent as she was asserting  that  they  were  unreliable  absent
       corroborating evidence rather than forged, I find  that  the  Judge's
       reasons for not accepting that the death certificates were  proof  of
       the  deaths  of  both  the  Appellant's  fathers  are  unsustainable.
       Firstly, it was erroneous for the Judge to disregard this evidence on
       the basis that it is self-serving, given that all evidence  submitted
       in support of an appeal could  be  termed  in  this  manner,  as  the
       purpose of submitting evidence is to support the case. It is  thus  a
       meaningless  term.  It  is  also  inaccurate  and  there  is  nothing
       inherently self-serving about a death  certificate.  I  further  note
       that this did not form part of the basis relied  upon  by  the  Entry
       Clearance Officer in refusing  the  application.  Secondly,  a  point
       taken by the Entry Clearance Officer against the Appellants  was  the
       delay in registering the deaths until November 2013.  The  delay  was
       explained by the Sponsor in her evidence, recorded at [33] where  she
       stated that the documents were genuine; records were not kept  during
       the war because there were simply too many  deaths  and  society  had
       effectively broken down and the Registry was also  burned  down.  She
       also stated that she had arranged for the deaths to be registered  in
       2013 because she knew she would require this evidence in  support  of
       the applications. Whilst it was  not  incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to
       accept the Sponsor's evidence, it was incumbent upon him  to  make  a
       finding on her credibility in this respect and this he failed to  do,
       despite essentially accepting the content of  her  evidence  on  this
       point. Ultimately, the Judge rejected this evidence  because  it  was
       uncorroborated by further evidence  e.g.  a  witness  statement  from
       Michael Lahai's brother, who the  Sponsor  stated  had  obtained  the
       death certificates on her behalf. It is well-established that  it  is
       an error of law to require corroboration cf. Kasolo  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department (13190). Moreover, whilst I accept that
       additional evidence may have assisted the Judge, equally I find  that
       such evidence could have been disregarded on the basis  that  it  was
       self-serving.

  13.2.     In respect of Grounds 3 & 4 and the contention that  the  Judge
       failed to apply  the  guidance  in  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole
       responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  00049,  in  respect  of  sole
       responsibility and the family or other compelling requirement, I find
       that the Judge fell into error at [76] where  he  held  that:  "I  am
       satisfied that on a balance of probabilities there  have  been  other
       people either within or without the sponsor's family  who  have  been
       caring for Mariam and that it is  these  individuals  who  have  been
       exercising day to day decisions  concerning  that  child's  care  and
       welfare." It was not disputed that the Sponsor had delegated care  of
       her daughter to others, initially her  sister,  Lois  and  after  her
       death in May 2012, her ageing mother, who died on 28 August 2013  and
       after that, with a church member, Michael  Lahai,  who  looked  after
       Mariam along with her cousin and co-Appellant,  Romeo.  In  2014  she
       moved Mariam to live with a friend, Angela Bangura. However, the test
       as set out in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole  responsibility")  Yemen
       [2006] UKAIT 00049 at [52](ix) was: "not whether anyone else has day-
       to-day responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control
       and direction of the child's  upbringing  including  making  all  the
       important decisions in the child's life. If  not,  responsibility  is
       shared and so not "sole." The Sponsor's evidence  was  that  she  had
       continued to make the important decisions in the  Appellants'  lives,
       including where they were to live and with whom and  their  education
       and health: [25]-[31]. The Judge at rejected the  Sponsor's  evidence
       at [75]-[80] essentially on the basis that  the  evidence  was  self-
       serving and it was likely that the children were living on  a  family
       compound, but there is no clear finding as  to  whether  or  not  the
       Sponsor has retained control and direction  of  Mariam's  upbringing.
       The closest he comes to a finding on this issue is at [76]  where  he
       states: "I find that  on  the  balance  of  probabilities  that  care
       arrangements that were in place and which were not necessarily  being
       controlled by the sponsor, were satisfactory..."  Either  those  care
       arrangements were being controlled  by  the  Sponsor  or  not  but  a
       finding needed to have been made on this central issue. In respect of
       Romeo, I consider that the Judge's finding at [80] that he is  living
       in circumstances  which  are  so  serious  and  compelling  that  his
       exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom   would   be   undesirable   is
       unsustainable, given that it is based on the Judge's finding at  [78]
       that they are living on a family compound. Whilst this may have  been
       the case when their grandmother was alive, the only  basis  for  this
       finding is an undated letter  from  the  Social  Development  Officer
       written when she was still alive, which the Judge  at  [74]  rejects,
       yet it clearly forms the basis for  his  finding  at  [78]  that  the
       children are living on a compound as  there  was  no  other  evidence
       before him to this effect. The Judge's finding at [79] that Romeo has
       inherited property from his mother further  contradicts  his  earlier
       finding in that, if this were the case, it fails to  explain  why  he
       was living on a family compound.

  13.3.     in respect of Grounds 5 and 6 and the contention that the Judge
       erred in his approach to Article 8 and in failing to give  sufficient
       weight to the best interests of the Sponsor's British citizen  child,
       with regard to the question  of  the  Sponsor  relocating  to  Sierra
       Leone, I agree with Ms Fijiwala  that  the  Judge  was  not  at  [83]
       imposing a requirement that  the  Sponsor  return  to  Sierra  Leone.
       However, the entirety of the Judge's findings  in  this  respect  are
       predicated upon the basis that the Appellants are residing  with  and
       being cared for by relatives with whom they continue  to  reside  (on
       the family compound) and for the reasons set out at 13.2. above I  do
       not consider this to be a safe or sustainable finding.

  14. For these reasons, I find that  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Traynor
       erred materially in law in dismissing the appeals. I do not  consider
       that any of his findings can be sustained and therefore,  the  matter
       will have to be remitted back to the  First  Tier  Tribunal  to  make
       findings of fact on all the material issues. Whilst I have found that
       the Appellants are not required as a matter  of  law  to  corroborate
       their case, it would assist consideration of the  case  to  have  the
       issues raised by the Entry Clearance  Officer  addressed  by  way  of
       further evidence and with regard to Article 8,  for  statements  from
       the Appellants to be submitted.

    Notice of Decision

  15. The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted for a hearing
       de novo in the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by a judge other than
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Traynor.

No anonymity direction is made.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

2 December 2015
