
[pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05257/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 9th October 2015                  |On 23rd October 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               ms Yingjun Gao
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills
For the Respondent:    Mr S Vokes


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (hereinafter the Secretary of  State).   The  Respondent  in
    this appeal is Ms Yingjun Gao, a national of China,  who  was  born  on
    13th February 1968, (hereinafter the Claimant).  This is the  Secretary
    of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal in respect of a decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Moan and Judge Cheales) promulgated  on  2nd
    April 2015.  That decision was to allow the Appellant's appeal  against
    a decision of an Entry Clearance Officer, of 6th March  2014,  refusing
    to grant her entry  clearance  to  come  to  the  UK  with  a  view  to
    settlement, as a spouse.

 2. The Claimant has a somewhat unedifying immigration history.   She  came
    to the UK on 27th May 2007 in possession of a business visa.  That visa
    expired on 17th November 2007 but she did not leave the United Kingdom,
    instead remaining as an overstayer.  The Home Office wrote  to  her  on
    4th May 2010 advising her that it intended to remove her  from  the  UK
    and she responded by absconding.  At some point in 2010 she met one  Mr
    Alan Allsop, a British national, via an internet dating site.  The  two
    struck up a relationship.  Indeed, on 21st January 2012, while she  was
    still in the UK  unlawfully,  they  married.   On  25th  January  2014,
    though, the Claimant voluntarily left the UK and went  to  China  where
    she has remained ever since.  Mr Allsop went with her  and  spent  some
    considerable time with her in China before returning to the UK.  He has
    sponsored the application for entry clearance which  has  led  to  this
    appeal.

 3. As noted, the Appellant's application for entry clearance was  refused.
    This was on a number of grounds, one of those was a failure to  provide
    the necessary documentation in order to satisfy financial  requirements
    contained within the Immigration  Rules.   Another  was  that,  it  was
    decided, she fell foul of paragraph 320(11) of  the  Immigration  Rules
    because she had  contrived  in  a  significant  way  to  frustrate  the
    intention of the Rules.  Those are the  only  bases  of  refusal  which
    matter for the purposes of this appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

 4. The Claimant's appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was heard on 1st April
    2015.  The First-tier Tribunal was not, of course, able  to  hear  oral
    evidence from the Claimant because she was at that time,  and  remains,
    in China.  It did, though, have a witness statement from her.   It  had
    evidence, including some oral evidence, from a friend and  some  family
    members of the Sponsor and it heard  oral  evidence  from  the  Sponsor
    himself.  It clearly accepted the genuineness of the relationship.

 5. At paragraph 62 of its determination (this is important because of  the
    content of the one of the Grounds of Appeal)  it  noted  that,  at  the
    hearing before it, the representative for the Secretary  of  State  had
    "accepted  that  the  Appellant  met   the   financial   and   language
    requirements".  It went on to explain, in some detail, why it found the
    relationship between the Claimant and the Sponsor to be a genuine  one.
    It then moved on to consider the matter of paragraph 320(11)  which  it
    noted, correctly, contained a discretionary  rather  than  a  mandatory
    refusal ground.  It said this;

         "90. There was no doubt that the answer given by the  Appellant  to
             question 23 on the application form was false.  She was  asked
             a question about how long she had lived at the  China  address
             and she replied four years.

         91.  There was some  margin  for  the  Appellant  to  misunderstand
             question 32 on that form.  She was served with  a  Section  10
             removal direction notice in May 2010.  She  was  not  actually
             removed and no further action was taken by the authorities  to
             ensure her departure.  The fact that she was clear at question
             28 of the form that her visa had expired in 2007 but  did  not
             leave until 2014, was indicative that she was  not  trying  to
             deceive  the  authorities  about  being  an  overstayer.   She
             admitted that very fact at question 28 of the form.

         92.  Therefore whilst there were inaccuracies on  the  form,  there
             was  a  clear  attempt  to  be  honest  about  the   Appellant
             overstaying her visa in 2007.

         93.  Under Appendix FM  the  failure  to  disclose  information  or
             disclosing false information is a reason that  would  normally
             lead to the refusal of entry clearance.  There is no need  for
             the authorities to be satisfied of any intentional deceit.

         94.  The Entry Clearance Officer was  not  bound  to  refuse  entry
             clearance, the Rules merely state that he should  normally  do
             so.

         95.  The Notice of Refusal restates the provisions under  paragraph
             S-EC 2.2(b) but does not go on to consider what  factors  have
             been considered in  the  exercise  of  that  discretion,  what
             weight applied to those factors  and  how  that  decision  was
             determined.

         96.  Paragraph 320(11) provides for a similar  discretionary  power
             to allow entry.  There was no doubt that the  Appellant  falls
             within paragraph 320(11) but in the same way she  also  should
             benefit from a consideration of the facts and circumstances of
             her case in accordance  with  the  guidance  issued  to  Entry
             Clearance Officers.

         97.  We have been referred to the case  of  PS  (paragraph  320(11)
             discretion: care needed) India [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC).  In that
             case the Upper Tribunal commented at paragraph 14:

                  'The Entry Clearance Officer, in making  the  decision  of
                  refusal, refers nowhere to the  guidance  under  paragraph
                  320(11).  It is therefore wholly unclear whether the Entry
                  Clearance Officer has addressed his mind to  the  relevant
                  question, namely whether in the circumstances of this case
                  ....'

         98.  As was  the  Appellant's  case,  in  the  PS  case  the  Entry
             Clearance Officer had failed to recognise that  the  Appellant
             had voluntarily left the UK in order to make an application to
             legitimise his entry into the UK.

         99.  The Upper Tribunal in PS further commented at paragraph 14 -

                  "The Entry Clearance Officer in this case did not  address
                  the correct question and did not  carry  out  an  adequate
                  balancing exercise under the guidelines and then concluded
                  that this decision was therefore not  in  accordance  with
                  the law."

         100. The  decision  notice  refusing  entry  clearance  states  the
             reasons why the Entry Clearance Officer  has  considered  that
             paragraph 320(11) applied.

         101. There was no reflection of what other considerations the Entry
             Clearance Officer  has  considered  in  the  exercise  of  his
             discretion.  There were clear family life considerations  that
             had not been addressed by the Entry Clearance Officer  in  his
             refusal notice.

         102. The Entry Clearance Officer should have  considered  that  the
             Appellant voluntarily left the UK, he should  have  considered
             that  the  Appellant  was  honest  about  her  status  as   an
             overstayer on  the  application  form  when  weighing  up  the
             failure to disclose and  he  should  have  considered  whether
             there were any aggravating factors.

         103. The Officer should then have conducted  a  balancing  exercise
             before reaching his decision about entry clearance.

         104. We consider that the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision  was
             therefore not in accordance with the law."

 6. The First-tier Tribunal then went on to indicate that it  was  allowing
    the appeal outright.

 7. The Secretary of State, in seeking permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, contended that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  failing
    to  address  the   Entry   Clearance   Officer's   concerns   regarding
    shortcomings in the documentary evidence pertaining  to  the  financial
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  in  failing  to  adequately
    consider the issues under paragraph 320(11).  The  Secretary  of  State
    noted in her grounds that the First-tier Tribunal had made  no  finding
    "on whether discretion should have been exercised differently".

 8. On 5th June 2015, permission to appeal was granted by a  judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The salient part of that grant reads as follows;

         "It is arguable  that  the  lack  of  determination  of  the  issue
         regarding  the  production  of  specified  evidence  and  therefore
         compliance with the Immigration Rules amounts to a  material  error
         of law.  All the grounds may be argued although  that  may  be  the
         strongest ground."

 9. In fact, it turned out not to be the strongest ground because Mr  Mills
    chose not to pursue it.  He acknowledged, before Mr  Vokes  could  even
    make the point, and indeed in my judgment, entirely correctly, that  it
    could not be pursued because of the  concession  which  had  been  made
    before and accepted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the  financial
    requirements were met.  This meant that the only live issue of  dispute
    between the parties was that  relating  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    treatment of paragraph 320(11).  Here, Mr Mills contended that  it  had
    materially erred.  This was because it had  not  decided,  for  itself,
    what the  decision  regarding  paragraph  320(11)  should  be.   Having
    decided that the Entry Clearance Officer had not properly exercised the
    discretion afforded to him by the  Rule  (discretion  because  it  says
    entry clearance should normally be refused under certain circumstances)
    it should then have either concluded that the decision was unlawful and
    effectively remitted to  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  for  a  lawful
    decision to be made or gone on to exercise the discretion, for  itself,
    based upon its findings.

10. Mr Vokes, I think it is fair to say, accepted the inevitability  of  my
    conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in the way  Mr
    Mills contended it had.  Having only decided that the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer had not exercised  his  discretion  correctly,  such  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law, and not having gone beyond
    that, it was not open to it to simply allow the appeal outright.

11. I indicated to the parties that I  would,  in  the  circumstances,  set
    aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision only on the basis it had erred
    to that extent.  I indicated that everything else in the determination,
    including the findings of fact,  would  be  preserved.   There  was  no
    disagreement by either party as to that approach.   I  also  indicated,
    again with the agreement of the parties, that I would now  move  on  to
    consider how the decision should be remade.  Mr Vokes accepted that  it
    would not be necessary for him to call any oral evidence  with  respect
    to that discrete issue so that the matters could be dealt with  by  way
    of submissions.

12. Mr Mills addressed me, on the point, first  of  all.   He  acknowledged
    that there was no dispute about the fact that the Claimant and  Sponsor
    have a subsisting relationship.  He acknowledged that she  had  made  a
    voluntary departure and that these were factors in her favour.  Against
    that, however, was her immigration history.  She had been an overstayer
    and an absconder.  Those were aggravating factors.

13. Mr Vokes said he accepted  that  the  overstaying  was  an  aggravating
    factor but, essentially, it was the only one.  It had not been worsened
    by her seeking to use false identifies or the  like.   She  had  simply
    gone to ground.  I should bear in mind what was said in the case of PS,
    cited above, to the effect that substantial credit must be given  to  a
    person who overstays but  then  makes  a  voluntarily  departure.   The
    relationship between the Claimant and the Sponsor was  a  genuine  one.
    The Sponsor had even gone to China when she returned there and, had not
    health difficulties and the need for treatment in  the  UK  arisen,  he
    would have remained there, at least,  for  a  longer  period.   If  the
    Claimant were to be successful in her appeal she would only  receive  a
    grant of leave limited to some two and a half years, as  opposed  to  a
    grant of indefinite leave, so if there was any further  breach  of  the
    Rules the Home Office would be able to act against her.

14. I have carefully considered those  helpful  competing  submissions.   I
    have reminded myself of the full content of paragraph  320(11)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Essentially, the Rule states that  entry  clearance
    should normally be refused;

         "(11)     where  the  applicant  has  previously  contrived  in   a
             significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by;

             (i)  overstaying; or

             (ii) breaching a condition attached to his leave; or

             (iii)    being an illegal entrant; or

             (iv) using deception in an application  for  entry  clearance,
                  leave to enter or remain or in order to  obtain  documents
                  from the Secretary of State or a third party  required  in
                  support of the application (whether  successful  or  not);
                  and there are other  aggravating  circumstances,  such  as
                  absconding,  not  meeting  temporary   admission/reporting
                  restrictions or bail conditions, using an assumed identity
                  or  multiple  identities,  switching  nationality,  making
                  frivolous applications  or  not  complying  with  the  re-
                  documentation process."

15. Here, there is no dispute that the Claimant's conduct, in  overstaying,
    brings her within  the  scope  of  Rule  320(11).   There  was  also  a
    suggestion that she had used deception when seeking entry clearance  in
    that she had answered  a  question  on  the  relevant  entry  clearance
    application form in a way which seemed to indicate she had been  living
    at her current address in China for a period of four years, as  at  the
    date of application, when, in fact, she had spent a good deal  of  that
    time unlawfully in the UK.  However, the First-tier Tribunal found that
    there was no deliberate attempt to deceive, because  she  had  made  it
    clear elsewhere that she had overstayed and had not left the  UK  until
    2014, such that there was no intention to mislead.  As  indicated,  the
    findings of the First-tier Tribunal have been preserved.

16. Of course, the fact  that  the  Rule  indicates  leave  to  enter  will
    "normally" be refused means that my  starting  point,  given  that  the
    Claimant's conduct falls within the scope of the  Rule,  is  that  such
    should be refused.  I look, therefore, to the Claimant to  persuade  me
    otherwise.  I take into account, against her, the above points made  by
    Mr Mills and bear in mind that her period of overstaying was a  lengthy
    one.  The mere fact of overstaying was aggravated, in my view,  by  her
    failing to respond to the Home Office when they apparently located  her
    in 2010.  Although Mr Vokes contends that she only "went to ground"  as
    distinct from  committing  some  of  the  other  actions  specified  in
    paragraph 320(11)(iv) that, of itself, is serious.  There are , though,
    the various points in her favour to which Mr Vokes referred.  I accept,
    following PS, that weight is to be attached to her making  a  voluntary
    departure from the UK in order to seek entry clearance.   There  is  no
    dispute about the fact that that is what she did.   I  also  take  into
    account the findings of the First-tier Tribunal, unchallenged,  to  the
    effect that she and her husband are in a genuine relationship.  He  is,
    of course, a British national who, understandably, wishes to enjoy  his
    family life, with her in the UK.  She had, it was  found  in  preserved
    findings,  acted  honestly  when  making  her  application  for   entry
    clearance rather than seeking to hide her previous adverse  immigration
    history.  Whilst there  are  certainly  arguments  both  ways,  I  have
    concluded that, on the facts, this is a case  where  the  Claimant  has
    been able to demonstrate that, in all  the  circumstances,  the  normal
    situation should not apply and that entry clearance should be  granted.



    Conclusions

    The First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law  but  in  remaking  the
    decision, I allow the Claimant's appeal.

    I make no anonymity direction.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

