
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/05883/2014
     OA/05888/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |               Decision and Reasons   |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 10th June 2015                   |               On 26th June 2015      |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CONNOR
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     AS
                         (Anonymity direction made)

                                                             First Appellant
                                     SS
                         (Anonymity direction made)

                                                            Second Appellant

                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr. P. Turpin of Turpin & Miller solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Given the age of the Appellants we make an anonymity order in  relation
    to each of them, pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal)  Rules  2008.  Disclosure  or  publication  of  documents  or
    information likely to lead  members  of  the  public  to  identify  the
    Appellants is prohibited.  The Appellants are referred to herein as  AS
    and SS.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellants against a decision  promulgated  on
    13th January 2015 by First-tier Tribunal Judge Flower, which  dismissed
    the Appellants' appeals against the  refusals  of  entry  clearance  as
    dependent relatives of their Sponsor, HS, under paragraph 319X  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  on  the  basis
    that it is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take account
    of, or make findings of fact upon, evidence pertaining to circumstances
    at the date of the decision.

Setting aside of the First-tier Tribunal's determination

 4. Paragraph 33 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision states:


         "I accept that on the face of it the social work report describes a
         situation which has probably been going on since at least May 2013,
         which is when the appellants are said to have gone to live with Mr.
         M.  The information in this report goes far  beyond  what  was  put
         forward by the appellants in their original  application,  however.
         In some  ways  it  raises  more  questions  than  it  answers.   It
         describes  a  complicated  factual  scenario  and  there  are  many
         apparent and unresolved inconsistencies, only  some  of  which  are
         outlined above.  This report and the situation it describes  should
         be considered by the  respondent.   I  am  unable  to  resolve  the
         evidential conflicts that it raises today."


 5. It was not disputed before us, and neither could it sensibly have been,
    that the First-tier Tribunal's failure (and refusal) to resolve  issues
    of fact emanating from the social work report of Natalie Achten amounts
    to an error of law capable of affecting the outcome  of  the  appeal  -
    thus requiring the First-tier Tribunal's determination to be set aside.



 6. We announced this at the hearing and directed that the  decision  under
    appeal would be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.


Re-making of decision under appeal


 7.  The  Sponsor  attended  the  hearing  but  did  not   give   evidence.
    Accordingly the evidence we have taken into account is  that  contained
    in the Appellants' and  Respondent's  bundles  and  the  oral  evidence
    provided to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  insofar  as  its  determination
    records such evidence.


 8. The ECO refused the Appellants' applications under paragraphs  319X(ii)
    and (v) of the Immigration Rules.  In order to meet the requirements of
    paragraph 319X(ii), the Appellants must show that  there  are  "serious
    and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations"  which  make  their
    exclusion undesirable, and that suitable arrangements  have  been  made
    for their care.  Paragraph 319X(v)  provides  that  they  must  not  be
    leading an independent life, or have formed an independent family unit.


 9.  In  the  case  of  Mundeba  (s.55  and  para  297(i)(f)) [2013]  UKUT
    00088(IAC), the Tribunal considered the meaning of phrase "serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations" albeit  in  the  context  of
    paragraph 297.  It was held that "in deciding what is meant by the rule
    the words need to be given their natural and ordinary meaning." [29] At
    paragraph [34] the Tribunal states:


         "In our view, 'serious' means that there needs to be more than  the
         parties simply desiring a state of affairs to obtain.  'Compelling'
         in the context of paragraph 297(i)(f) indicates that considerations
         that are persuasive and powerful. 'Serious' read with  'compelling'
         together indicate that the family or  other  considerations  render
         the exclusion of the child from the United Kingdom undesirable. The
         analysis is one of degree and kind. Such an interpretation  sets  a
         high threshold that excludes  cases  where,  without  more,  it  is
         simply the wish of parties to  be  together  however  natural  that
         ambition that may be."


10. We have carefully considered Natalie Achten's report.  Her CV was  also
    provided  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   We  find  that  she  is   an
    independent social worker who works for a refugee trust and specialises
    in children.  Ms Fijiwala  accepted  (i)  that  this  report  had  been
    produced by an independent  social  worker,  (ii)  that  it  accurately
    described the conditions in which she had found the  Appellants  to  be
    living, and (iii)  that, should we find the report to be reliable,  the
    circumstances  set  out  therein  would  satisfy  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 319X(ii) of the Rules.


11. However, she submitted that the Appellants and Mr. M had fabricated the
    circumstances in which they were purportedly living, the consequence of
    which is that  Ms  Achten's  report  does  not  properly  reflect  such
    circumstances and is not reliable.  We have no hesitation in  rejecting
    this submission.


12. It was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal that, although  Ms  Achten's
    report  post-dated  the  application  and  decision,  it  referred   to
    conditions which had been in place since May 2013, prior to  the  dates
    of application and decision.


13. The report describes two visits made to Mr. M's home, the  first  being
    an arranged  visit,  and  the  second  being  unannounced.   Ms  Achten
    described the conditions in which the Appellants were living on page  3
    of her report.  She stated that the family lived in a  two  room  flat,
    but the bedroom used by Mr. M and his wife was in better condition than
    the bedroom in which the  Appellants  slept  together  with  the  other
    children.  Ms Achten further stated that there were six other children,
    the oldest of whom was 18 years old, and the youngest of whom was  only
    8 months old, living in the accommodation.


         "The other two rooms  look  completely  different.   The  paint  is
         getting off the wall and it is very dark.  In the bedroom was  only
         one big mattress that the children  share  all  together.   In  the
         other room is an old couch and seats.   The  place  was  dirty  and
         looked like a temporary home."


14. Ms Achten expressly identified that on  the  second  visit,  which  was
    unannounced, she still found Mr. M's wife, some of his children and the
    Appellants at the same  place.   She  then  goes  on  to  describe  the
    sanitary facilities, which are located outside the house.  "There is  a
    latrine and a bathroom that are  shared  with  surrounding  neighbours.
    There is no running water but they buy water from a nearby tap."


15. On the second unannounced visit Ms Achten went  for  a  walk  with  the
    Appellants outside of the home.  She states  "during  the  second  home
    visit I noticed that SS and AS were not free to talk and took them  out
    for a walk."  She reported that SS had started crying  and  "opened  up
    immediately that sometimes they are not treated well at Mr. M's  place.
    She stated his wife and the other older children often abuse them".  On
    the final page of her report she states "The money HS  sends  does  not
    seem to be used for AS and SS .....I have my doubts that AS and SS  are
    well taken care of at Mr. M's home."


16. On the balance of probabilities we find that the report  of  Ms  Achten
    can be relied upon and conclude that it gives a clear and unbiased view
    of the conditions in which the Appellants are living, and  were  living
    as of  the  date  of  the  ECO's  decision.   Any  inconsistencies  are
    contained in the information given to Ms Achten, and we find  that  she
    has reported what was told to her, as well as what she saw.  We do  not
    find that there is any inconsistency in the fact  that  Ms  Achten  was
    told different things by the Appellants on her second visit to what she
    was told on her first visit.  Her first visit was prearranged  and  the
    second was unannounced.  During the second visit, Ms  Achten  took  the
    Appellants away from the home environment in  order  to  talk  to  them
    alone.  It is understandable that the Appellants would open  up  to  an
    independent person away from the  home  environment,  especially  given
    that this was the second time that they had met her.  Any discrepancies
    in what Ms Achten was told do not undermine  her  evidence  as  to  the
    circumstances in which she found the Appellants.

17. It was submitted by Ms Fijiwala that  there  were  other  relatives  in
    Uganda with whom the Appellants  could  live,  namely  ZS,  SS's  older
    sister.  She had gone missing from the Mr. M's  home.   She  was  still
    missing at the time of Ms Achten's  visits,  and  her  whereabouts  are
    still unknown.  It was suggested that she might have gone to live  with
    a boyfriend, but even if  she  has,  neither  the  Appellants  nor  the
    Sponsor know of her whereabouts.  At the date of the decision, she  was
    not an adult, being only 17 years old.  We do not find that it would be
    possible for  the  Appellants  to  live  with  a  17  year  old,  whose
    whereabouts are unknown.


18.  It  was  further  submitted  by  Ms  Fijiwala  that  there  was   some
    significance in the fact that the death certificates for SS's aunt  and
    mother indicate that their deaths were not medically certified, whereas
    there was in fact evidence in the form of medical certificates of cause
    of death which pre-dated the death  certificates.   These  certificates
    had been  provided  after  the  application.   It  was  submitted  that
    therefore the death certificates were not  accurate  when  they  stated
    that the deaths had not been medically certified.  It was suggested  by
    Ms Fijiwala that there was a possibility that the aunt was still alive.


19. Mr. Turpin submitted that the deaths were both reported by ZS, who  was
    only 16 years old at the time.  Both deaths were reported on  the  same
    date, 2nd September 2013.  Her aunt had died some three months prior to
    this, and her mother some two weeks earlier.  There was no evidence  of
    what ZS had  taken  with  her  to  report  the  deaths.   The  original
    certificates were provided, and there has not been any suggestion these
    are  false.   Despite  the  fact  that  medical  certificates  were  in
    existence when the death certificates were produced, we find  that  the
    certificates can be relied on to show that SS's aunt  and  mother  have
    died.  We find on the balance of probabilities that there are no  other
    family members in Uganda who can care for the Appellants.


20. We find that Ms Achten's report can be relied on to show that there are
    serious and compelling family or other considerations  which  make  the
    Appellants' exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom  undesirable.  Having
    considered all of the evidence before us we find  that  the  Appellants
    meet the requirements of paragraph 319X(ii) of the Rules.


21.  At  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the   issue   of
    accommodation was raised for first time.  Ms  Fijiwala  submitted  that
    this issue had still not been  addressed  and  that  we  could  not  be
    satisfied now that accommodation would become available.


22. Judge Flower was satisfied that adequate arrangements could be made  to
    accommodate the Appellants in the UK.  She states, inter alia, that  "I
    have no doubt that assistance will be given to  him  [the  Sponsor]  to
    find larger accommodation should the need arise"  [30].   Judge  Flower
    relied on the evidence of Mr. Stansfield, Director  of  Emmaus  Oxford,
    who has assisted the Sponsor in the United Kingdom.  There is a  letter
    from Mr. Stansfield dated 6th March 2014 at page 60 of the Respondent's
    bundle.  There is also evidence in the Respondent's bundle to show that
    the Sponsor had researched available accommodation, and that he had the
    funds in order to be able to afford appropriate accommodation.


23. We find, as Judge Flower did, that suitable arrangements have been made
    for the Appellants' care in the UK, and that they  will  be  adequately
    accommodated here.


24. Turning to paragraph 319X(v) of the Rules; Ms Fijiwala  indicated  that
    she had no submissions to  make  in  relation  to  this  paragraph  but
    nevertheless maintained that  the  Appellants  could  not  satisfy  the
    requirements therein.  We  find  that  as  of  the  date  of  the  ECOs
    decisions, 1st April 2014, SS was 15 years old and AS was 11 years old.
     We find that they were not  living  independent  lives  nor  had  they
    formed independent family units. We find that both Appellants meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 319X(v).


25. For the reasons given above we allow the each Appellant's appeal on the
    basis that they each meet the requirements of  paragraph  319X  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside.

We re-make the decisions under appeal, allowing them under  the  Immigration
Rules.


    Signed:

     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain


