

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
OA/05946/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Centre City Tower, Birmingham     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 11 February 2016                        |On 29 February 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                         Mr james Ndiritu Kariamburi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                  ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI\449128
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs H Masih, Counsel instructed by Morris Andrews
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, who has indefinite leave to remain, appeals against  the
    decision of an Entry Clearance Officer to refuse him entry clearance as
    a returning resident under paragraph 18 of the Rules on the ground that
    his application for entry clearance fell for refusal  under  paragraphs
    320(2)(b), 320(18B)(b) and 320(19) of the Rules.  The appellant appeals
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Davidson sitting
    at Taylor House on 7 May 2015) dismissing his appeal against the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's decision under the Rules and under Article 8  ECHR.
    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction, and  I  do
    not consider that the appellant requires to be accorded  anonymity  for
    these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Kenya, whose date of birth is 1  January
    1942.  From 1965 until March 2013 the appellant resided in the UK.   It
    is accepted by the respondent that the appellant was  at  all  material
    times lawfully resident in the United Kingdom,  having  at  some  point
    been granted ILR.  Mrs Masih informed me that his entitlement to reside
    in the United Kingdom arose from the fact that he was a citizen of  the
    Commonwealth.

 3. As stated by Judge Davidson in the  decision  which  is  under  appeal,
    between  1974  and  2004  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  seventeen
    different offences.  He has spent convictions for  offences  of  theft,
    burglary, wounding, actual bodily harm and arson in respect of offences
    committed between 1974 and 1998.  He has unspent convictions  for  more
    recent offending.  In the year 2000 he was convicted of three counts of
    indecent assault on a female over  16  for  which  he  received  thirty
    months' imprisonment and was obliged to  sign  on  the  sex  offender's
    register indefinitely.  In 2004 he was convicted of attempted arson for
    which he was sentenced to five years' imprisonment  with  a  four  year
    extension, and for burglary and theft  of  a  dwelling,  for  which  he
    received a concurrent term of imprisonment of eighteen  months.   These
    were subject to the supervision of the courts until 2013, when his five
    year conviction and four year extension expired.

 4. The appellant's five year term of imprisonment for attempted arson  was
    imposed by a judge sitting at Birmingham Crown  Court  on  22  December
    2004.  In the light of that conviction and sentence, the then Secretary
    of State gave consideration as  to  whether  the  appellant  should  be
    deported.  In or  about  2006  the  appellant  received  the  following
    written confirmation:

         I confirm that Criminal Casework Directorate will not be taking any
         action in this case due to subject's length of residence in the UK.

 5. As set out in a letter from the appellant's solicitors  dated  7  March
    2014 which was addressed to the British High Commission in Nairobi, the
    appellant travelled to Kenya for a short vacation in  March  2013,  and
    booked his flight to return  to  the  United  Kingdom  in  April  2013.
    However the appellant travelled on a new passport which did not have  a
    visa or ILR stamp allowing him entry back into the United Kingdom.   As
    he had lived in the United Kingdom for 48 years, he was  not  aware  of
    the necessity of getting a visa transferred into his new passport prior
    to travelling out of the country.  When the appellant tried  to  embark
    on a flight to return to the UK, he was refused embarkation by  airport
    officials.  He attended  the  Visa  Application  Centre  the  following
    morning, and solicited the assistance of an agent to  complete  a  visa
    application as a returning resident.

 6. The application for entry clearance was refused  because,  among  other
    things, the appellant had failed to disclose his  criminal  convictions
    in response to a question as to whether he had any criminal convictions
    in any country (including traffic offences).   In  their  letter  of  7
    March  2014,  the  appellant's  solicitors  said  that  their  client's
    instructions were that he had not deliberately sought  to  deceive  the
    British High Commission, and that the responsibility for the errors  in
    the  application  lay  with  the  agent.   Also,  the   appellant   had
    misunderstood the question about his criminal convictions.  He believed
    that the question referred to convictions in any  other  country  apart
    from the UK.

 7. The appellant submitted a second application for entry clearance  under
    cover of the letter from his solicitors  to  which  I  have  previously
    referred.  On 31 March 2014 an Entry Clearance Officer in Nairobi  gave
    his reasons for refusing the application.  Whilst he acknowledged  that
    the appellant was issued with indefinite leave to remain in the UK,  he
    had taken account of his previous history.  He had been convicted of an
    offence for which he had been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
    at least four years and so he refused his application  under  paragraph
    320(2)(b).  He was considered to be a persistent offender who showed  a
    particular disregard for the law.  He had also been sentenced  to  over
    ten years' imprisonment for his various offences in the UK.  So he also
    refused his application under  paragraph  320(18B)(b).   He  considered
    this exclusion from the United Kingdom to be conducive  to  the  public
    good, and so he was  also  refusing  his  application  under  paragraph
    320(19).

 8. He had also considered  his  application  under  Article  8  ECHR.   He
    considered his bad character outweighed any obligations  to  him  which
    the UK held under this Article.  He  also  noted  he  had  provided  no
    evidence about his relationship with one of his sons in the UK.  He had
    stated he had six children in all, but had lost touch with five of them
    on account of his criminal behaviour towards their mother, for which he
    had received  criminal  convictions.   There  appeared  to  be  nothing
    preventing his son, who he stated was his only family member in the UK,
    visiting  him  in  Kenya,  should  he  wish  to  continue  the   family
    relationship with him there.

 9. In the grounds of appeal for the First-tier Tribunal,  the  appellant's
    solicitors relied on the fact that the appellant's current  predicament
    came about through misfortune.  Although he had ILR, the appellant  did
    not have a stamp or visa in his passport which evidenced the same.  Due
    to his previous passport containing his ILR stamp being lost "over  the
    years", the appellant was left with no alternative but to submit a  new
    application to the British High Commission in Nairobi in order  to  re-
    enter the  United  Kingdom  as  a  returning  resident.   His  criminal
    convictions were predominantly due to domestic violence including arson
    where their client had set fire to his wife's property while  both  her
    and the children were asleep.  The case had been considered by the then
    Secretary of State who decided that due to his length of residence,  no
    action would be taken to instigate deportation proceedings against him.
     So it was unfair that, on the same facts,  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer should see otherwise.  His exclusion from  the  United  Kingdom
    would mean a loss of his home and life as he knew it.  He had been  out
    of Kenya for almost  fifty  years.   It  would  be  difficult,  if  not
    impossible, for him to fit into the culture of a country  to  which  he
    had become a stranger.  So the appeal should be allowed  on  Article  8
    grounds.



The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

10. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Davidson to be  determined  on
    the papers.  In his subsequent decision, he set  out  his  findings  of
    fact in paragraphs [14] onwards.  He accepted that  the  appellant  had
    been granted ILR, and that he had returned to Kenya for  a  holiday  in
    2013.  He accepted that in October  2007  the  appellant  had  received
    written confirmation that the Criminal Casework Directorate  would  not
    be taking action against him due to his length of residence in the  UK.
    He also acknowledged that in an earlier letter  from  the  Home  Office
    dated 8 September 2006 the Home Office had informed the appellant  they
    would be taking "no further deportation action" against  him  "on  this
    occasion".

11. The judge went on to  rehearse  the  appellant's  history  of  criminal
    offending.  In the light of that history, he endorsed the  decision  of
    the Entry Clearance Officer to refuse  the  appellant  entry  clearance
    under the three Rules which the Entry Clearance Officer had cited.   In
    particular, he noted that Rule 320(2)(b) was a mandatory provision.  It
    listed a number of situations where the refusal of entry clearance  was
    mandatory,  and  these  included  being  sentenced  to  a   period   of
    imprisonment of at least four years.

12. At paragraph [22], the judge said he attached little weight to the fact
    that the respondent had informed the appellant when he was still in the
    UK in 2007 that she did not intend to deport him at that stage:

         The appellant seems to have deported  himself  to  some  extent  in
         2013, and the respondent has now said that, since he  is  currently
         out of the country, he can stay there.  If the appellant was stupid
         enough to put himself in that position, then he only has himself to
         blame, the respondent is not barred from taking the action she  has
         done.

13. The judge concluded at paragraph [23] that the respondent was justified
    in refusing entry clearance to the appellant under  the  Rules,  so  he
    dismissed the appeal under the Rules accordingly.

14. The judge addressed the appellant's human rights appeal  at  paragraphs
    [24] to [32].  In his  discussion  of  proportionality,  he  considered
    Huang [2007] UKHL 11 and JO (Uganda) and Another v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2010] EWCA Civ 10.   He  accepted  that  while
    this was not a deportation case as such, in his view it  bore  all  the
    hallmarks of one, and he therefore placed reliance on the  decision  in
    JO (Uganda). As he had portrayed it above, it was in the  nature  of  a
    self  deportation.   He  held  that  the  appellant's   exclusion   was
    proportionate, both from a private life and  family  life  perspective.
    With regard to private life, the judge  held  at  paragraph  [30]  that
    there did not appear to be anything significant about his private  life
    in the UK except that a  quarter  of  it  was  spent  in  custody.   He
    appeared to have been violent towards his wife and family.   There  was
    nothing in his view to indicate that refusing him entry to the UK would
    interfere in any way with the residue of any private life he had in the
    UK.  He was a Kenyan national who had now returned to  his  country  of
    origin.



The Application for Permission to Appeal

15. Emma Rutherford of Counsel  settled  the  appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Ground  1  was  that  the
    judge had materially erred in law in finding that the  general  grounds
    of refusal relied on by the Entry Clearance Officer were made out.   It
    was the appellant's case that the general grounds of  refusal  did  not
    apply to him.  Under Section 76 of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002, ILR could be revoked  in  certain  circumstances,  but
    none of the circumstances appeared to apply in  the  appellant's  case.
    She acknowledged that Section 76(1) provided that a person's ILR  could
    be revoked if they were  liable  for  deportation,  but  could  not  be
    deported for legal reasons.  But as the appellant  was  a  Commonwealth
    citizen, who was ordinarily a resident of the UK on 1 January 1973, and
    he had remained ordinarily a resident in the UK up until 2013  when  he
    left  on  holiday,  he  met  the  requirements  of  Section  7  of  the
    Immigration Act 1971 and was thus not liable for deportation.

16. The appellant's ILR had not lapsed due to his  departure  from  the  UK
    because he had not been outside of the UK for more than  two  years  at
    the date of  application  or  decision.   Paragraph  18  of  the  Rules
    appeared in Part 1 of the Rules.  The Entry Clearance Officer had  been
    wrong to invoke paragraph 320 of  the  Rules,  as  paragraph  320  only
    applied to Parts 2 to 8 of the Rules.  The  introduction  at  paragraph
    320 states as follows:

         In addition to the grounds of refusal of entry clearance  or  leave
         to enter set out in parts  2-8  of  these  Rules,  and  subject  to
         paragraph 321 below, the following grounds for the refusal of entry
         clearance or leave to enter apply...

17. While paragraph 321 allowed an Immigration Officer to refuse entry to a
    person who had been issued with entry clearance on the basis that  they
    fell to be refused under the paragraphs invoked by the Entry  Clearance
    Officer, it did not appear that paragraph 321 applied to the issuing of
    entry clearance by the Entry Clearance  Officer.   Paragraph  321  only
    applied at port, not in respect of the initial grant of entry clearance
    by the Entry Clearance Officer.

18. Ground 2 was that the judge had misdirected himself in law in  invoking
    JO (Uganda) in his discussion of proportionality.  The judge  had  been
    wrong to invoke JO (Uganda),  as  the  appellant  was  not  liable  for
    deportation due to the operation of Section 7 of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.

19. Ground 3 was that the judge had erred in law in  finding  at  paragraph
    [30] that the appellant's continued  exclusion  from  the  UK  did  not
    interfere with his private life.  This was contrary to the decision  of
    the Court of Appeal in VW (Uganda) and  AB  (Somalia)  v  Secretary  of
    State [2009] EWCA Civ 5 in which it was held that anything more than  a
    technical interference in a  person's  private  and  family  life  will
    engage Article 8(1).

20. Ground 4 was that the judge failed to have regard to  relevant  matters
    when  considering  proportionality.   By  refusing   to   endorse   the
    appellant's passport appropriately, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
    effectively going behind the decision of the Secretary of State in 2007
    which was not to take deportation action due to the appellant's  length
    of residence, and presumably her acceptance that he did not  appear  to
    be liable for deportation due to the operation of Section 7 of the 1971
    Act.



The Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

21. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the First-tier  Tribunal,
    but on a renewed application to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kebede granted permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         There is arguable merit in the assertion made in the  grounds  that
         the respondent, not having sought to, or been able to,  revoke  the
         appellant's indefinite leave to remain, was not entitled to  refuse
         admission to the United Kingdom and that the judge  arguably  erred
         in failing to conclude that that was the case.

The Rule 24 Response

22. On 15 January 2016 David Clarke of the  Presenting  Officer's  Unit  in
    Feltham, settled an extensive Rule 24  response  opposing  the  appeal.
    The application was not refused for any of the reasons asserted by  the
    appellant.   Rule  320(2)(b)  required  mandatory  refusal   where   an
    individual had a criminal history such  as  that  of  the  appellant's.
    There was no discretion.  In addition, it was a question of  fact  that
    the appellant was required to  make  an  entry  clearance  application.
    This was not an appeal against revocation, or against the  decision  to
    make a deportation, or a refusal of leave  to  enter  under  Rule  321.
    This Rule (Rule 321) was  specific  to  someone  "who  holds  an  entry
    clearance which was duly issued to him and is still current".  The fact
    the appellant was required to  make  the  entry  clearance  application
    demonstrated that he did not meet this definition.  In any event,  Rule
    321 permitted a refusal of leave to enter on the same  grounds  as  has
    been invoked by the Entry Clearance Officer to  justify  a  refusal  of
    entry clearance.  So the appellant's complaint was  wholly  immaterial.
    The grant of permission implied that an individual  cannot  be  refused
    entry clearance if he has ILR.  This is inconsistent with Rule 320.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

23. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mrs Masih developed the arguments raised in the grounds of appeal.
     In reply, Ms Pettersen adopted the Rule  24  response  settled  by  Mr
    Clarke.

Discussion

24. The first ground of appeal is the  only  ground  which  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Kebede singled out as having arguable merit.  It was not part  of
    the appellant's case before the First-tier Tribunal that  the  decision
    of the Entry Clearance Officer was unlawful, still  less  that  it  was
    unlawful for the reasons advanced in the grounds of appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal.  So prima facie the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not err  in
    law in not engaging with a case that had not been put to him.

25. However, the law always speaks, and so it is right to consider  whether
    ground 1 has underlying merit.  I answer this question in the negative,
    essentially for the reasons canvassed in the Rule 24 response.

26. The Secretary of State did not need to revoke the appellant's ILR as  a
    pre-condition of the Entry Clearance  Officer  refusing  the  appellant
    entry clearance on the grounds of his criminal history.   Although  the
    appellant has been issued with ILR in the past,  he  was  not  able  to
    produce a passport containing an ILR stamp so as to be able  to  embark
    on a flight to the UK.  The appellant put himself in a  position  where
    he had to apply for entry clearance to return to the United Kingdom  as
    a returning resident.

27. The construction which the appellant's Counsel has sought to  place  on
    the introduction to paragraph 320 is wrong.  On a  proper  construction
    of the introductory wording to paragraph 320, the  general  grounds  of
    refusal are not confined to persons seeking entry clearance under Parts
    2 to 8.  Paragraph 320 also applies to a person seeking entry clearance
    under Part 1, and specifically under paragraph 18.

28. It is clear from the introductory wording to  paragraph  320  that  the
    mandatory grounds of refusal set out thereunder are in addition to  the
    grounds of refusal of entry clearance or leave to enter which  are  set
    out in Parts 2 to 8 of the Rules.  Thus, as a matter  of  construction,
    the mandatory grounds of refusal set out in paragraph 320  apply  right
    across the board, including to returning residents who  have  to  apply
    for entry clearance under Part 1.

29. The remaining grounds of appeal pursued by the appellant relate to  the
    First-tier Tribunal's disposal  of  his  Article  8  claim.   Paragraph
    320(2) provides that entry clearance  or  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom is to be refused where the person seeking entry to  the  United
    Kingdom:

         (b)  Has been convicted of an offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment for a least four  years;
             ... where this paragraph  applies,  unless  refusal  would  be
             contrary to the Human Rights Convention or the Convention  and
             Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees, it will  only  be
             in exceptional  circumstances  that  the  public  interest  in
             maintaining  a  refusal  will  be  outweighed  by   compelling
             factors.

30. Given the wording of  paragraph  320(2),  there  is  no  merit  in  the
    argument   that   the   judge   misdirected   himself   in    assessing
    proportionality in accordance with the guidance given by the  Court  of
    Appeal in JO (Uganda).  The judge was not  thereby  applying  a  higher
    proportionality threshold than was appropriate.  It is irrelevant  that
    the appellant was not liable to deportation for legal reasons.   As  he
    met the criteria for exclusion from the United Kingdom  on  account  of
    his criminal history, the public interest in his exclusion was no  less
    than the public interest in his  expulsion.   The  scales  were  tipped
    against the appellant because of the circumstances in  which  he  found
    himself, which was that he had voluntarily left the United  Kingdom  in
    circumstances where he had to seek entry clearance in order  to  return
    to the United Kingdom.  It was thus open to the judge to find, for  the
    reasons which he  gave,  that  neither  the  appellant's  private  life
    interests, nor his right to enjoy a family life with the one son of his
    with whom he maintained a relationship, was sufficiently compelling  to
    outweigh the public interest in maintaining the refusal.   Accordingly,
    grounds 2 to 4 are not made out.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson







