
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05430/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st September 2016                    |On 4th October 2016               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                              Ishehaatsari [C]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - pretoria
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M West, Counsel, instructed by Thomas Andrew &
                    Daodu Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national  of  Zimbabwe,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  to  refuse
    her application for entry clearance to join her mother (the Sponsor) in
    the UK.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    Appellant  appeals  against  that  decision  with  permission  to  this
    Tribunal.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Sponsor left Zimbabwe in 2002
    to come to the UK leaving the Appellant in Zimbabwe to be cared for  by
    her grandmother.   The  Appellant's  grandmother  died  in  2004.   The
    Sponsor went to Zimbabwe sometime after the funeral but says  that  she
    was told by her relatives that she was not welcome because she had left
    to go to the UK.  She says that the distant  relatives  who  threatened
    her also worked for the Zimbabwean security forces and  she  says  that
    she took their warnings seriously.  She says that the Appellant went to
    live with the Sponsor's friend Mrs  Masimba  after  the  death  of  her
    grandmother.  The Sponsor says that she sent money  for  the  Appellant
    via third parties because Mrs Masimba's husband was a gambler and would
    take the money for himself. The Sponsor met a British citizen whom  she
    married in December 2008. She was granted indefinite leave to remain in
    2011.  The Sponsor says that  her  husband  was  not  amenable  to  her
    bringing the Appellant to stay with them in the UK and it was not until
    she divorced on 7th October 2013 that she was able to go  about  making
    an application for the Appellant to join her in the UK.

 3. The Appellant's case is that in 2014 Mrs  Masimba  said  that  she  was
    unable to look after the Appellant any longer because  her  husband  no
    longer supported the arrangement because he believed that it led to the
    neglect of his own family. She says that a church  pastor  allowed  the
    Appellant to live with the family.  It is claimed  that  the  Appellant
    attended a boarding school and the Sponsor paid the school fees.

 4. In his decision the First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that  a  number  of
    facts were not in dispute including that the  Respondent  accepts  that
    the Sponsor left Zimbabwe in 2002 and only returned once, in 2005.  The
    identities and maternal relationship of the Appellant and Sponsor  were
    accepted and it was also noted that it was accepted  that  the  Sponsor
    has been sending money to Zimbabwe via third parties.

 5. The judge noted the documentary evidence before  him  including  emails
    and electronic messages going back about two  years,  a  few  pages  of
    telephone payment cards, a small number of greeting cards bearing  very
    short messages, some school reports and examination grades and  letters
    purporting to be from community elders stating that the  Appellant  was
    now staying with them as well as an unsigned letter from the Appellant.

 6. The judge considered the documentary evidence and stated  at  paragraph
    21 that he did not find that any of the documentary evidence led him to
    "a definitive conclusion" by  itself.   The  judge  accepted  that  the
    Appellant has been  remitting  money  and  that  there  has  been  some
    communication between the Appellant and the Sponsor since 2013 but  did
    not accept that it had been daily as claimed and was unable to draw any
    positive findings from the telephone payment cards because  they  could
    not be verified as to how and when they have been  used  and  who  they
    have been used to call.  The judge gave little weight  to  the  letters
    from the elders as he said that they add little and could  have  easily
    been manufactured.

 7. The judge considered, however, that it was 'the general picture and the
    gaps in evidence' which  he  found  to  be  more  persuasive  than  the
    documentary evidence [21] and went on to deal  with  those.  The  judge
    considered the circumstances of the Sponsor leaving  Zimbabwe  in  2002
    and only returning once in 2005 noting that the Sponsor made no mention
    of whether she saw the Appellant when she returned in 2005.  The  judge
    did not accept the Appellant's claims that she would be of any interest
    to the authorities in Zimbabwe because these were first raised  in  the
    witness statement and he was presented with no other evidence of  these
    events or in regard to any country information  that  would  raise  the
    likelihood of this account being plausible [23].  The  judge  therefore
    did not accept that it would have prevented the Appellant  and  Sponsor
    having some other form of visits, either meeting in a different part of
    Zimbabwe or by applying for a visitor's visa for the Appellant to visit
    her mother in the UK.

 8. The judge did not accept that there had been a falling out between  the
    Sponsor and  Mrs  Masimba.  The  judge  remained  dissatisfied  by  the
    Sponsor's evidence and explanation in respect of the  arrangements  for
    her money transfers and  concluded  that  this  'erodes  the  Sponsor's
    contention that there are no other sources of support' [25].

 9.  The  judge  also  considered  that  the  timing  of  the   Appellant's
    application, one month before her 18th birthday, was of interest in the
    context of the fact that the Sponsor had been divorced  in  2013,  well
    over a year before  this  application,  and  that  there  had  been  no
    explanation for that further effluxion of time [27].

10. The Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  contend  that  the  judge
    failed to have in mind the correct test as set  out  in  TD  (Paragraph
    297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049 and imported
    into his decision findings that were not relevant to the issue of  sole
    responsibility such as to render his determination fatally  flawed.  It
    is contended that the judge lost sight of the test he should  apply  in
    ascertaining whether  the  Sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant and has given weight to matters that are irrelevant  to  that
    test while appearing to import some form of proportionality  test  into
    the relevant Rule.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro  on
    16th August 2016, who considered that it was arguable  that  the  judge
    misdirected himself in failing to apply the correct test regarding sole
    responsibility.

    Error of Law

12. At the hearing before me Mr West submitted that  the  judge  failed  to
    keep in mind the correct test as set out in TD (Yemen) and that he took
    into account facts not strictly relevant to  the  test.   He  submitted
    that the judge applied too high a test at paragraph 21  where  he  said
    that the documentary  evidence  did  not  lead  him  to  "a  definitive
    conclusion" in themselves. Mr West submitted that  the  judge  gave  no
    reasons for finding at paragraph 23 that it was  implausible  that  the
    Sponsor had been warned off claiming her inheritance  at  her  mother's
    farm.

13. The judge looked at the evidence around the transfer of money  but  did
    not accept the explanation that money had not been transferred  to  Mrs
    Masimba because of her husband's gambling.  Mr West submitted that  the
    judge's  questions  about  who  the  Sponsor  sent  money  to  did  not
    necessarily  mean  that  those  people  have  responsibility  for   the
    Appellant nor did that issue preclude  the  Sponsor  from  having  sole
    responsibility for the Appellant.  He again submitted  that  the  judge
    had misconstrued the test in this context.

14. Mr West referred to the Appellant's interview in  which  she  corrected
    herself when referring to the money being sent via her uncle to say the
    Sponsor's uncle and another distant cousin.   He  submitted  that  this
    shows that there was uncertainty on the part of the Appellant as to who
    this person was.

15.  Mr  West  submitted  that  there  was  compelling  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's school to which the judge had failed to attach  appropriate
    weight.  Mr West submitted that there was no suggestion in the decision
    that this document is not authentic.  He submitted that  this  document
    goes directly to the test as it shows that the Sponsor  is  making  the
    big decisions in the Appellant's life. Mr West relied on a document  at
    page 175 of the Appellant's bundle, a school  fees  invoice  dated  4th
    December 2014, which he says  names  the  Sponsor  as  the  Appellant's
    guardian.  He submitted that this could only refer to  the  Appellant's
    mother and he submitted that the  judge  failed  to  properly  consider
    these documents.  He submitted that significant weight should have been
    attached to these  documents  in  considering  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant's upbringing.

16. On the other hand Mr  Kotas  submitted  that  looking  at  the  judge's
    overall reasons it is clear that he had found that the Sponsor does not
    have sole responsibility.  He submitted that the judge's  findings  are
    all part of the assessment on all aspects of the evidence which went to
    undermine the Sponsor's credibility.  He submitted that the  judge  did
    note the documentary evidence including the school report and it is not
    appropriate for  the  judge  to  list  every  piece  of  evidence.   He
    submitted that at paragraph 26 the judge set out the case  put  by  the
    Sponsor at the hearing which is that she had spoken  to  the  Appellant
    every day but it was open to the judge to  find  that  the  documentary
    evidence submitted did not corroborate that.  It was open to the  judge
    to make that finding.   He  submitted  that  the  judge's  findings  on
    general credibility are all part of  the  holistic  assessment  of  the
    case.

17. Mr Kotas submitted that  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to  reject  the
    explanation given as to why there had been no visits to  the  Appellant
    in over ten years at paragraphs 23 to 24.  Mr Kotas submitted  that  it
    was open to the judge to reject the evidence in relation to  the  money
    transfers.  It  was  clear,  he  submitted,  that  the  judge  was  not
    accepting the domestic circumstances as claimed.  He submitted that  it
    was a matter for the judge what weight to give to the  evidence  before
    him.

18. It is helpful to set out the guidance set out by the Upper Tribunal  in
    the case of TD (Yemen) where the Tribunal said:

         "52. Questions of "sole responsibility" under the immigration rules
         should be approached as follows:

             i.   Who has "responsibility" for  a  child's  upbringing  and
             whether that responsibility is "sole" is a factual  matter  to
             be decided upon all the evidence.

             ii.  The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules should
             not to be understood as a theoretical or legal obligation  but
             rather as a practical one which, in each case, looks to who in
             fact  is  exercising  responsibility  for  the   child.   That
             responsibility may have been for a short duration in that  the
             present arrangements may have begun quite recently.

             iii.  "Responsibility"  for  a  child's  upbringing   may   be
             undertaken by individuals other than a child's parents and may
             be   shared   between   different   individuals:   which   may
             particularly arise where the child remains in its own  country
             whilst the only parent involved in its  life  travels  to  and
             lives in the UK.

             iv.  Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in
             the upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional  that  one
             of them will have sole responsibility.

             v.   If it is said that both are not involved in  the  child's
             upbringing, one of the indicators for that will  be  that  the
             other has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility.  In  such
             cases, it may well be justified to find that  that  parent  no
             longer has responsibility for the child.

             vi.  However, the issue of sole responsibility is not  just  a
             matter between the parents. So  even  if  there  is  only  one
             parent involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may not
             have sole responsibility.

             vii.  In  the  circumstances  likely  to   arise,   day-to-day
             responsibility (or decision-making) for  the  child's  welfare
             may necessarily be shared with others (such  as  relatives  or
             friends) because of the geographical  separation  between  the
             parent and child.

             viii.    That, however, does not  prevent  the  parent  having
             sole responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.

             ix.  The test is,  not  whether  anyone  else  has  day-to-day
             responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control
             and direction of the child's upbringing including  making  all
             the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.   If   not,
             responsibility is shared and so not "sole"."

19. In my view the difficulty with the First-tier Tribunal judge's decision
    in this case is that ultimately he did not make any clear finding as to
    who  does  have  responsibility  for  the  Appellant  or  whether   the
    responsibility is shared between the  Sponsor  and  another  person  or
    other people.

20. Mr Kotas submitted that it was not necessary for the judge to find  who
    had responsibility for the Appellant. This may be right in some  cases.
    However, it is difficult to see how the guidance in YD (Yemen)  can  be
    properly applied here without deciding who has responsibility  for  the
    child. At paragraphs (vii) and (viii) the  guidance  looks  at  whether
    responsibility is  shared  with  others  because  of  the  geographical
    separation between the parent and child pointing out however that  this
    does not prevent the  parent  having  sole  responsibility  within  the
    meaning of the Rules. Further the guidance  states  at  paragraph  (ix)
    that the test is not whether anyone else has day-to-day responsibility,
    but whether the parent 'has continuing control  and  direction  of  the
    child's upbringing including making all the important decisions in  the
    child's life'.

21. It is clear that the judge did not  find  aspects  of  the  Appellant's
    account  credible.  However,  in  my  view,  the  credibility  findings
    distracted the judge from the  documentary  evidence  and  from  making
    findings on the core aspects of the test. For  example  the  judge  had
    doubts as to the nature of the claimed fall out between the Sponsor and
    Mrs Masimba who had been looking after the Appellant  but  appeared  to
    accept that it was Mrs Masimba's husband who was no  longer  supportive
    of the Appellant continuing to stay with the family  [19],  [24].  Yet,
    the judge failed to make a clear finding as to  whether  the  Appellant
    still lived with Mrs Masimba (regardless as to the reasons why  if  she
    did not) and, crucially, whether Mrs Masimba  was  making  any  of  the
    important decisions in the Appellant's life.

22. Also, in my view the judge was distracted  by  the  issues  as  to  the
    arrangements for money transfers. At paragraph 25 the  judge  sets  out
    his concerns about the Sponsor's account as to why she  says  she  sent
    money to relatives rather than to Mrs Masimba concluding;

         "In addition, the presence of third parties who could be trusted to
         hold and transfer important sums of money on behalf of the Sponsor,
         one of whom with an identical surname, also  erodes  the  Sponsor's
         contention that there are no other sources of support".

23. The issue is not whether there are  any  sources  of  support  for  the
    Appellant in Zimbabwe but whether the Sponsor or anyone else has  'sole
    responsibility' for her.

24. Another example of the judge's focus on other issues is at paragraph 20
    where he said that the Sponsor had given no evidence  "as  to  why  the
    Appellant could not continue her studies  in  Zimbabwe  with  continued
    financial  support  from  the  Sponsor".  Again,  the  question  to  be
    determined is not whether the current arrangements could  continue  but
    whether the Sponsor has had sole responsibility for the Appellant.

25. The judge referred to 'school reports' at paragraphs 16 and 26 where he
    set out the other documentary evidence. However the documents  referred
    to by Mr West are not simply school reports. The letter from the school
    from November 2014 goes to the heart of the issue to be  determined  in
    this appeal. The judge has not said why he has rejected this letter  or
    the school fee receipt.

26. Looking at the decision overall, whilst I acknowledge  that  the  judge
    had a number of significant  concerns  about  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant and Sponsor,  he  failed  to  properly  answer  the  ultimate
    question as set out in the guidance.

27. In these circumstances I find that the judge made a material  error  of
    law in misdirecting himself by failing to apply  the  established  test
    for sole responsibility  and  I  set  the  judge's  decision  aside.  I
    preserve the judge's findings of fact which were not challenged.

    Remaking the decision

28. I have considered all of the evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    judge and the unchallenged findings of fact.

29. I note that it is not in dispute that the Sponsor left Zimbabwe in 2002
    and  only  returned  once,  in  2005.   The  identities  and   maternal
    relationship  of  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  were  accepted  by  the
    Respondent and it was accepted that the Sponsor has been sending  money
    to Zimbabwe via third parties. The Respondent and the judge noted  that
    one of those to whom money has been transferred shares the  Appellant's
    family name. It may be that this person is the Appellant's uncle or the
    uncle of the Sponsor.

30. I also note the judge's summary of his findings at paragraph  29  where
    he said;

         "... the facts are that the Sponsor left in 2002 when her  daughter
         was 5 and seems to have made no serious attempts to see her  since.
         Since 2005 the Appellant has been able to be  looked  after,  there
         have been people in Zimbabwe who the Sponsor has trusted  with  the
         money she sent,  she  has  attended  school  and  appears  to  have
         achieved very good grades in her exams. The Sponsor married  a  man
         whom she chose (there is no implication that  it  was  an  arranged
         marriage and the Sponsor says that she fell in love)  but  who  was
         not prepared to entertain family life with his wife's child".

31. The judge therefore accepted that the Sponsor did not seek to have  the
    Appellant join her earlier because her ex-husband was  not  supportive.
    The Appellant and Sponsor have been consistent in their  evidence  that
    they last saw each other in person in 2005.

32. I accept that there is limited  evidence  of  electronic  communication
    however the emails and electronic messages submitted cover  the  period
    from February 2013  to  February  2015.  I  also  note  that  there  is
    reference in the emails to the Sponsor  paying  school  fees  and  exam
    fees. I accept that telephone call cards are not verifiable and  should
    be considered in the round along with all of the  other  evidence.  The
    Sponsor and the Appellant claim to be in touch via skype daily  however
    it is unclear whether evidence of skype calls can be obtained.

33. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not reach any conclusion  as  to  why
    the Appellant left the care of Mrs Masimba. However I note that in  the
    application, the grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
    Appellant's interview and since then the Appellant has been  consistent
    in her claim that the relationship between her mother and  Mrs  Masimba
    had broken down and that she was no longer  living  with  her.  In  her
    interview the Appellant said that the fall out  occurred  in  September
    2014.  As  the  evidence  on  the  timing  of  this  breakdown  of  the
    relationship has been consistent and is not contrary  to  the  findings
    made by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lloyd I accept that the Appellant has
    not lived with Mrs Masimba since September 2014.

34. At the time of her interview in February 2015 the Appellant had been  a
    boarder at Riverton school for four years (Q39). In these circumstances
    evidence from the school is particularly important as  the  school  has
    day-to-day  responsibility  for  the  Appellant.  There  has  been   no
    challenge to the authenticity of the letter from the school

35. The Appellant's bundle contains a letter dated 4th November  2014  from
    Riverton Academy which states that the Appellant's next of kin  is  the
    Sponsor, who had been the point of contact regarding all aspects of the
    Appellant's education.  It confirmed that the Sponsor paid school  fees
    and provided guidance on subjects and extracurricular activities to the
    Appellant.  It states that the Sponsor's  input  and  contribution  has
    been consistent over the years.  There is also a  school  fees  invoice
    dated 4th December 2014 at page 175 of  the  Appellant's  bundle  which
    names  the  Sponsor  as  the  Appellant's  guardian.   I  attach   very
    significant weight to these documents. They go  to  the  heart  of  the
    Appellant's case. The letter indicates that the Sponsor has  continuing
    control and direction of the Appellant's  upbringing  including  making
    all the important decisions in her life.

36. Looking at all of the  evidence  I  am  satisfied  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the Sponsor has  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant  at  the  time  of  the  decision.  I  therefore  allow   the
    appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
and is set aside.

The Appellant's appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 3 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no  fee  award
because the letter from Riverton School, which went  to  the  issue  at  the
heart of this appeal, was not before the ECO.


Signed                              Date: 3 October 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
