
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05156/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 July 2015                      |On 7 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                           Sophia Tumeyi Chikwani
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     entry clearance officer - pretoria
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mutebuka, Mutebuka & Co Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Sophia Tumeyi Chikwani, was born on  25  September  1999
    and is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  She claims to be the daughter of  Tumeyi
    Obvious Chikwani (hereafter referred to as the sponsor) who is  settled
    in the  United  Kingdom.   Her  application  for  entry  clearance  for
    settlement with the sponsor was refused by a decision of the respondent
    dated 31 March 2014.  The appellant  appealed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which gave permission in the following terms:

         "The respondent refused the application as it was  not  found  that
         the sponsor exercised sole responsibility.  No issue was raised  as
         to the sponsor being her father.  No issue  was  raised  about  the
         appellant's birth  certificate  which  named  the  sponsor  as  her
         father.  The FTTJ refused the appeal as he found that  the  sponsor
         was not the father of the appellant.  One reason for this was  that
         she did not find weight could be placed on the  birth  certificate.
         The appellant and the sponsor had no notice prior to the hearing of
         this new and fundamental point being taken against them and  it  is
         not clear from the determination that  they  were  given  a  proper
         opportunity to address it at the hearing.  An  arguable  procedural
         error arises."

 2. On 25 June 2015, the respondent wrote to the Tribunal to indicate  that
    the respondent did not oppose  the  setting  aside  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.  That position was confirmed by Mrs  Pettersen,  for
    the respondent, at the Upper Tribunal hearing on 24 July 2015.  In  the
    circumstances, I set  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.   The
    appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  Shimmin)
    for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 17 December  2014  is
set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not  Judge
Shimmin) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.  None of the findings  of
fact of the First-tier Tribunal decision shall stand.


Signed   Date 2 September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

