
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/05407/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17 August 2015                    |On 20 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (LAGOS)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         OLUWADAMILARE JOSEPH PETER
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E. Yerokun of A & A Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.    For the sake of continuity I will refer to the parties  as  they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal although technically the Entry Clearance
    Officer (represented by the Secretary of State)  is  the  appellant  in
    this appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

2.    The matter can be dealt  with  briefly.   The  appellant  applied  for
    entry clearance as the dependent child of a person who is  present  and
    settled in the UK.  His application was refused in a notice of decision
    dated 11 January 2013.

3.    The Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the  appellant  was
    related as claimed to the sponsor in  the  UK  or  that  she  had  sole
    responsibility for his welfare and upbringing.  The second  reason  for
    refusal was that the Entry Clearance Officer  was  not  satisfied  that
    adequate accommodation would be available on his  arrival  to  the  UK.
    The third reason for  refusing  the  application  was  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not satisfied that there was sufficient  evidence
    to show that the appellant would be adequately  maintained  in  the  UK
    without recourse to public  funds.   Accordingly  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer found that the appellant  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

4.    The appellant appealed against the decision and the appeal  was  heard
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Majid on 25 March 2015.  The decision  was
    promulgated on 29 March 2015.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  allowed
    the appeal but respondent  argues  that  he  failed  to  give  adequate
    reasons for doing so.

5.    At the start of the hearing Mr Yerokun conceded that the decision  did
    not give adequate reasons and that it involved the making of  an  error
    of law.  I consider  that  this  concession  was  properly  made.   The
    decision was expressed in very general terms. The judge  did  not  make
    any specific findings in  relation  to  the  reasons  for  refusal  and
    allowed the appeal in a rather vague and confused manner.  At paragraph
    12 of the decision he said:

         "I am persuaded by the available evidence that the appeal should be
         allowed and the appellant should be given the benefit of Article 8,
         believing that the DNA test has confirmed the relationship  between
         the appellant and the sponsoring mother."

6.    Reading the decision as a whole, it seems quite clear that  the  judge
    simply failed to engage with the reasons for refusal and that his final
    conclusions were rather vague and  confused  in  terms  of  the  proper
    application of  the  law.   No  reference  was  made  to  the  relevant
    immigration rule and it was not clear whether  he  allowed  the  appeal
    under the rules or under Article 8 outside the rules. It  is  incumbent
    on a First-tier Tribunal Judge to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  his
    decision but in this case the judge manifestly failed to do so. As such
    I find that the decision involved the making of an error on a point  of
    law and I set aside the decision.

7.    At the hearing it was agreed that the best course of action  would  be
    for the case to be heard afresh.  I have taken into  account  paragraph
    7.2 of the Upper Tribunal Practice  Direction  and  consider  that  the
    appropriate course of action is to remit the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh hearing. The appeal will be relisted in due course
    and a hearing notice will be sent out to the parties.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

I set aside the decision and remit the case for a fresh hearing  before  the
First-tier Tribunal

Signed      [pic]      Date 18 August 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
