
[pic]
IAC-FH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05794/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 July 2015                      |On 23 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                sarra boutina
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Anifowoshe, Counsel instructed by Elkettas &
Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Algeria.  Her date of birth is 01  August
    1996.  She appealed against the respondent's decision  dated  02  April
    2014 to refuse her entry clearance as the dependent child of  a  person
    who is present and settled in the United Kingdom.  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Wellesley-Cole dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on
    19 January 2015.  On 17 June 2015 the Upper  Tribunal  found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law and
    set aside the decision.  The appeal now comes before the Upper Tribunal
    to re-make the decision.

2.   I have had the opportunity of hearing  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    mother and sponsor Ms Kheira Meftah. I have also heard submissions from
    both parties.  The  relevant  details  will  be  incorporated  into  my
    findings.

Decision and reasons

3.   The remaining issue for determination in this  appeal  is  whether  the
    sponsor has sole responsibility for the appellant within the meaning of
    the immigration rules. Since Ms Meftah came  to  the  UK  in  2011  the
    appellant has been living with her grandparents.

4.   After having heard evidence from  Ms  Meftah  I  find  that  she  is  a
    credible witness.  She gave her evidence in an  open  and  unhesitating
    way and her  evidence  was  broadly  consistent  with  the  documentary
    evidence before the Tribunal.  Ms Meftah's said that she has always had
    responsibility for her daughter's upbringing. She  separated  from  the
    appellant's father in 1997 and was given custody of their two children.
    She has produced a copy of the original divorce certificate which shows
    that the divorce became final in 2000. She said that when she began  to
    prepare for the entry clearance application she applied to the court in
    Algeria for confirmation that she had custody of the child. Pursuant to
    that application a court in Oran issued a  further  judgment  dated  03
    October 2013. The judgment confirms that the marriage was dissolved  on
    20 April 1997 and that the sponsor  was  given  custody  of  their  two
    children, Sarra and Mohammed. This is a  legal  document  issued  by  a
    court in Algeria.  There is nothing on the face of  the  document  that
    gives me any cause to doubt the reliability of  the  evidence  and  the
    respondent put forward no arguments to undermine the validity  of  this
    document. As such I am satisfied that the court judgment can  be  given
    weight as evidence to show that the sponsor  has  had  custody  of  the
    appellant since she divorced from the appellant's father in  1997.  The
    fact that she was granted custody was confirmed by the Algerian  courts
    in October 2013.

5.   The respondent relies on other evidence  produced  by  the  sponsor  in
    support  of  the  application.  This  included  a  document  which  was
    translated into English. The document  states  that  it  is  a  "Solemn
    Declaration"  signed  by  the   sponsor's   mother   (the   appellant's
    grandmother).  Elsewhere  in  the  document  it  is  described  as   an
    "affidavit".  The  declaration  is  dated  26  January  2014.  In   the
    declaration Mrs Fatima Hachemaoui confirmed that the appellant was  her
    granddaughter and that she had been under her "guardianship  since  her
    birth until the present day".  The declaration goes on  to  state  that
    she now assigned the guardianship of  her  granddaughter  back  to  her
    mother due  to  her  old  age  and  sickness.   When  the  sponsor  was
    questioned about this document she explained that there may  have  been
    some slight  differences  when  the  declaration  was  translated  into
    English. In all likelihood her mother was just trying to say  that  she
    was now passing the care of her granddaughter back to her mother.

6.   After having considered this document in detail  I  am  satisfied  that
    the wording is not intended to mean that  the  appellant's  grandmother
    had guardianship in the legal sense of the word and that it  was  being
    used in the general sense of the word.  The solemn declaration  amounts
    to little more than a witness statement and although it states that  it
    could be used for "legal purposes" the document  is  not  of  the  same
    legal nature as a court order formally assigning  guardianship  to  the
    grandmother. For these reasons I am satisfied that the  order  made  by
    the Algerian court confirming custody to the appellant's  mother  is  a
    document  that  should  be  given  greater  weight  than   the   solemn
    declaration made by the appellant's grandmother.

7.   In TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
    00049 the Tribunal summarised its findings as follows:

         "Sole responsibility" is a factual matter to be  decided  upon  all
         the evidence. Where one parent  is  not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  had  abandoned   or   abdicated
         responsibility, the issue may arise between  the  remaining  parent
         and others who have day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The  test
         is whether the parent has continuing control and direction over the
         child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in
         the child's life. However, where both parents  are  involved  in  a
         child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that one  of  them  will
         have "sole responsibility"."

8.   I heard evidence from the sponsor who said that she is the one who  has
    always taken the major  decisions  relating  to  her  daughter's  life.
    Unfortunately the appellant's father has not been present since she was
    a baby. Although the appellant has lived in a  joint  family  household
    with her grandparents throughout her life I am satisfied that it is her
    mother who has always taken the major decisions. She keeps  in  contact
    with her daughter on a regular basis by telephone and provides her with
    emotional and  financial  support.   The  sponsor  also  provides  some
    financial support to her own parents.  She  is  the  person  who  takes
    responsibility for paying for the appellant's school fees and takes all
    the major decisions. Although the respondent  asserts  that  there  are
    some gaps in the documentary evidence I am satisfied that  the  sponsor
    is a credible witness. I am satisfied that I can accept her evidence in
    terms of the support that she provides to the appellant.

9.   For  the  reasons  given  above  I  am  satisfied  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities  that  the  sponsor  has  sole  responsibility  for   the
    appellant within the  meaning  given  in  paragraph  297(i)(e)  of  the
    immigration rules albeit that as a matter of practicality the appellant
    remained in the joint family household with her grandparents  when  her
    mother came to the UK in 2011.

10.  Because I am satisfied that the appellant  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297(i)(e) I do not consider it necessary to go on to make any
    separate findings relating to paragraph 297(i)(f)  or  in  relation  to
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

11.  I conclude that the appellant met the requirements of paragraph 297  of
    the immigration rules at the date of  the  decision  and  as  such  the
    appeal should be allowed.

DECISION

I re-make the decision and ALLOW the appeal



Signed   [pic]    Date 23 July 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan
