

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: oa/05942/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                   |Decision signed:   20.04.2015        |
|On:    20.04.2015                    |Sent out on:  22.04.2015             |

                                   Before:

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN


                                  Between:

                                 saima saeed
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:  no appearance
For the respondent: Mr Sebastian Kandola


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal, by the , against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Wm. Khan), sitting at Taylor House on 23 October  2014,
    to declare invalid  an  out-of-country  appeal  against  administrative
    removal by a citizen of Pakistan, born 23 September 1972.

 2. The appellant did have an out-of-country right of appeal against such a
    decision, which she exercised, and the judge needed to make a  decision
    on her appeal: as he did not, I shall. The  appellant's  complaint  was
    that she had had leave to remain till  14  April  2014,  and  had  been
    trying since mid-February to  get  her  passport  back  from  the  Home
    Office, so that she could make a voluntary departure  on  it.  However,
    instead of dealing with that request, the Home Office had done  nothing
    about it till 16 April, when they had served on her a notice  that  she
    was liable to removal as an overstayer. Nevertheless, they had  granted
    her temporary admission till 19 April, on which day she had left.

 3. The appellant's grounds suggest that this piece  of  maladministration,
    as it certainly was, made the decision to remove her  challengeable  on
    appeal, as 'not in accordance with the law'. I cannot accept that;  for
    whatever reason, by 16 April  the  appellant  was  an  overstayer,  and
    liable to removal. In effect the Home Office had removed in advance the
    black mark that might leave on her record, by  granting  her  temporary
    admission till the 19th, when she did leave. So  long  as  it  is  made
    clear on their records that this appellant has never been here  without
    leave, and left voluntarily and at her own expense, it does not seem to
    me that she has any continuing cause for complaint.

Appeal against first-tier decision

Decision re-made: appeal against removal dismissed


                                                                       [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)
