
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/05276/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 25th June 2014                               |On 26th June 2014          |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge MARTIN

                                   Between

                               mr fawad azizi
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - islamabad
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Smeaton (instructed by Healys LLP)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission  by  the
    Respondent with regard to a determination of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Mathews) promulgated on 17th March 2014. For the sake of clarity
    and continuity  however,  I  shall  continue  to  refer  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer as the Respondent and Mr Azizi as the Appellant.

 2. In his determination Judge  Matthews  allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal to  grant  him  leave  to
    enter under paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration  Rules  as  a  dependent
    relative of his brother.

 3. The grounds assert that the Judge  considered the case of Mundeba (s.55
    and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 00088(IAC) at paragraph 22  but  failed
    to engage with the considerations identified  by  Blake  J  therein  as
    being the factors to consider when looking at whether there are serious
    family or other considerations which make  exclusion  undesirable.  The
    grounds recite paragraph 37 Mundeba as follows:-

         "Family considerations require an evaluation of the child's welfare
         including emotional needs.  'Other considerations' come  into  play
         where there are other aspects of a child's life  that  are  serious
         and compelling - for example where an applicant  is  living  in  an
         unacceptable social and economic environment.  The focus  needs  to
         be on the circumstances of the child in the light  of  his  or  her
         age, social background and developmental history and  will  involve
         inquiry as to whether:-

          a) there is evidence of neglect or abuse;

          b) there are unmet needs that should be catered for;

          c) there are stable arrangements for the child's physical care.

         The assessment involves consideration as to whether the combination
         of circumstances sufficiently serious  and  compelling  to  require
         admission".

 4. The grounds assert that the Judge failed to  grapple  with  the  issues
    mentioned in paragraph 37 in his assessment of  the  circumstances  and
    limited his consideration of Mundeba to an analysis of  Section  55  of
    the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009    which,  it  is
    asserted,  is clear from paragraph 22 of the determination.

 5. The grounds assert that although at paragraph 35 the Judge said:-

         "The Appellant's best interests are not determinative  of  course,
         but when the point is simple family reunion, and  that  reunion  is
         also with the brother that  provides  financial  support,  it  must
         represent  compelling  family  reasons   making   the   Appellant's
         exclusion undesirable."

 6. It is asserted that this finding indicates that the best  interests  of
    the child in this case were in fact determinative, contrary to what the
    judge had stated. It is asserted that it also ignores the  comments  of
    the Upper Tribunal in Mundeba that:-

         "It is not the case that any 15-year-old orphan who has a sister in
         the United Kingdom must be admitted,  irrespective  of  his  actual
         circumstances or the  prior history of the  relations  between  the
         Appellant and the proposed carer."

 7. The grounds go on to assert that the Judge carried out no  analysis  of
    the comparison with others in  the  community  in  Afghanistan,  a  key
    component of the ratio of  Mundeba   at  paragraph  45  which  is  also
    quoted as follows:-

         "Even if we had been persuaded that the judge had not accepted  the
         sponsor's evidence on  this  issue  and  had  erred  on  the  basis
         alleged, we do not consider that this was an error that would  need
         the decision to be set  aside.  Taking  the  circumstances  of  the
         appellant at its highest, he is being  looked  after  by  the  Girl
         Guides Association who  are  meeting  his  basic  needs  including,
         significantly, medical care which we suspect may not  be  available
         to many orphans displaced by the civil war in  the  DRC.   Although
         the appellant is not receiving an education, we  do  not  consider,
         having regard to his age at the date of  application  and  his  age
         now, that this of itself is sufficient  to  create  a  serious  and
         compelling consideration.  The lack  of  opportunities  that  might
         exist for a teenager in the United Kingdom are unlikely  to  be  of
         any relevance unless  the  cumulative  effect  is  to  undermine  a
         child's welfare needs. In addition he has a mobile  phone  supplied
         by his sister, and receives regular remittances from her. Doubtless
         there are emotional  exchanges  between  them  given  their  family
         history and their re-discovery  of  each  other  but  that  is  not
         sufficient to amount to serious and compelling  circumstances  that
         make his exclusion undesirable. In so far as a comparison  is  made
         with other children in his  country  of  origin,  it  is  a  factor
         (albeit not a conclusive one) that his circumstances  would  appear
         to be reasonably catered for despite the loss of his parents".

 8. Looking at the determination of the First-tier Judge in  this  case  he
    set  out  at  paragraph  10  the  circumstances  giving  rise  to   the
    application and appeal. The Appellant, under 18  at  the  date  of  the
    application, had sought to join his brother in the UK. His  brother  is
    now a British citizen. He initially came to UK from Afghanistan in 2002
    and unsuccessfully claimed asylum. He was however allowed to remain  in
    the UK with discretionary leave due to his minority. However,  in  2007
    he was removed to Afghanistan and returned to live with his mother  and
    brother, the Appellant.

 9. While the Sponsor had been in the UK he had formed a relationship  with
    a British citizen and gained entry to the UK in April 2009 as a spouse.
    He has remained since and is now a British citizen.

10. Whilst in the UK the Sponsor remained in contact with  his  mother  and
    brother travelling back annually to visit them. During one of his trips
    to Afghanistan, in November 2011, his mother died suddenly. The Sponsor
    arranged for his brother  to  live  with  someone  else  sending  money
    monthly to support him. However, due to interest  by  the  Taliban  the
    Appellant moved to Kabul and the Sponsor went to Afghanistan to try and
    assist. He sought police assistance. As a result the Sponsor  took  his
    brother to stay with a friend in Jalalabad and has  continued  to  send
    money to him for his support. That accommodation is  not  available  to
    the Appellant long term.

11. The Appellant is receiving medical attention for depression.

12. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard evidence from the Sponsor. He found
    that the Appellant and Sponsor's mother had died as  claimed  based  on
    photographic evidence of the grave,  medical  evidence  and  the  death
    certificate. He accepted that the Sponsor was visiting  Afghanistan  at
    the time of his mother's death and arranged  her  burial  and  he  also
    accepted that the Sponsor had found accommodation for his  brother  and
    had been sending money to cover his expenses.

13. The Judge accepted that as a result of threats made to  the  Appellant,
    the Sponsor contacted the police to  seek  their  assistance  and  then
    arranged alternative accommodation for his brother. The Judge  accepted
    that as a result the Appellant moved to live  with  another  friend  in
    Jalalabad and he also accepted on  the  basis  of  the  oral  evidence,
    medical report and prescriptions, that the Appellant is suffering  from
    depression.

14. The Judge also accepted that there were  no  other  family  members  in
    Afghanistan.

15. The Judge referred himself to the case of Mundeba at paragraph  22.  He
    did not specifically however refer himself to the paragraphs  mentioned
    in the grounds and recited above. However, those paragraphs stress  the
    need for serious and compelling circumstances and a proper  examination
    of all the facts and suggest that serious and compelling  circumstances
    may include neglect or abuse, unmet  needs  and  arrangements  for  the
    child's physical care.  Mundeba  makes  clear  that  there  must  be  a
    detailed examination of the Appellant's circumstances in such cases and
    being an orphan in and of itself is insufficient. However, although the
    Judge did not specifically spell out those factors he has clearly taken
    all matters into account and done as Mundeba requires. This is  a  case
    where the two brothers have been in constant contact. They lived in the
    same home from the Appellant's birth until he was 7 and then from  when
    he was 12 until 14. After his mother died when he was 16  he  has  been
    supported by his brother who has been responsible  for  his  care.  The
    Judge made reasoned and sustainable findings that the mother  is  dead,
    that the Appellant had to relocate due to threats, that he suffers from
    depression and that the accommodation that  he  has  currently  is  not
    available indefinitely and further that  he  has  no  other  family  in
    Afghanistan. I therefore find that even if the Judge had quoted all the
    cited paragraphs of Mundeba it would have made  no  difference  to  the
    outcome. This is clearly a case where the Judge was  entitled  to  find
    that there are serious and compelling family  or  other  considerations
    which make exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable arrangements
    have been made for the child's care.  As a result the  Appellant  meets
    the requirements of paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.

16. It is not the case that the Judge has looked only at the best interests
    of the child although arguably that is precisely  what  paragraph  2971
    (f) requires. The Judge has taken all factors into account and thus has
    followed the guidance of Mundeba.

17. I would point out that there is an obvious typing error at paragraph 36
    of the First-tier Tribunal's determination where the Judge says that on
    the basis of the evidence produced  he  is  "not"  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant meets the requirements of the Immigration Rule applicable  to
    him. That is clearly a typographical error  because  the  preceding  35
    paragraphs and following 2 paragraphs make clear  that  the  Judge  was
    satisfied that the Appellant met the requirements of paragraph  297  of
    the Immigration Rules.

18. Miss Holmes, while relying on the grounds, accepted that the conclusion
    of the Judge was properly open to him.

19. For the above reasons I find that there is no error of law in the First-
    tier Tribunal's determination, material or otherwise and I  uphold  its
    decision.

20.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.





Signed                              Date 25th June 2014





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
