
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/05115/2014
     oa/05114/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 September 2015                           |On 4 September 2015           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                         elizabeth gamuchirai bvoro
                             mustsa byron bvoro
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    No representation
For the Respondent:    Ms E Savage, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cheales  promulgated  on  3  February  2015  which  refused  the  entry
    clearance applications of the two minor appellants.

 2. The hearing before Judge Cheales was on 15 January 2015 in  Birmingham.
    The sponsor, Mr Brian Bvoro, was not in attendance at the  hearing  and
    there was no explanation for this before Judge Cheales.  Judge  Cheales
    went on to refuse the appeals finding that it had not been  shown  that
    the UK sponsor had sole responsibility  for  the  children  where  EECO
    visits to the appellants'  home  and  interviews  with  family  members
    suggested that they were still being care for by their mother.

 3. Following promulgation of the First-tier Tribunal decision the  sponsor
    applied for permission to appeal.   He  was  granted  permission  in  a
    decision dated 14 April 2014 of Judge Ransley.  The appeal was  put  on
    the basis that Mr Bvoro had missed a flight to  the  UK  from  Zimbabwe
    which had prevented him from attending the hearing on 15 January  2015.
    This was material where he wanted to address the evidence in the  ECO's
    visits but had not had the opportunity to do so.

 4. Mr Bvoro attended the hearing before me. His oral evidence was that  he
    had booked a flight for  Tuesday  13  January  2015  which  would  have
    allowed him to arrive in the UK on Wednesday 14 January 2015  but  that
    he missed that flight. He showed me evidence of that flight having been
    booked on his mobile telephone. There was no documentary evidence  that
    he had missed that flight and had to book another,  however.  Mr  Bvoro
    stated that he had paid for the second return flight by credit card but
    did not provide any statements showing  that  to  be  so.  He  did  not
    provide  a  boarding  card  or  other  documentation  showing  that  he
    travelled on a later flight. It did not appear to me that  there  could
    be any difficulty in providing those  documents  with  the  grounds  of
    appeal or to me. There was nothing however.

 5. I also noted that Mr Bvoro confirmed that he did not attempt to contact
    the First-tier Tribunal on either 13 or 14 January 2015  having  missed
    his return flight. He also stated that hr did not contact the  Tribunal
    after returning on 16 January 2015 but waited for the decision of Judge
    Cheales.

 6. It is clear to me that  there  was  nothing  before  Judge  Cheales  to
    explain the non-appearance of the sponsor  before  him.   It  does  not
    appear to me, therefore, that the judge could be said to have  been  in
    error in proceeding in the absence of the sponsor.  Further, it was not
    my view that the evidence before me showed that  Mr  Bvoro  missed  his
    flight and that he should therefore have a second chance to address the
    discrepancies in the evidence which led to the  appeal  being  refused.
    Judge Cheales was manifestly entitled to find that the sponsor did  not
    have sole responsibility given the evidence before him.

 7. For these reasons I did not find an error in the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal.



Signed   [pic]                               Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt

