

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number OA/05154/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Sheldon court
                        Determination Promulgated
On 18th June 2014
Prepared 18th June 2014
              On 27th June 2014
                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                          USMAN BASHIIRAHMAED VAID
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr N Ahmed (Counsel, instructed by Bhavsar Patel,
Solicitors)
For the Respondent: Mr D Mills (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant applied to enter the UK as the spouse of an EEA national
   exercising treaty rights. The application was made on the 9th of January
   2013. The ECO refused the application in a Refusal Notice of the 22nd of
   January 2013 which gave the reasons for the decision. The Appellant
   appealed the decision by Notice and Grounds of Appeal of the 7th of
   February 2013.


2. The appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge T R P Hollingworth at
   Nottingham Magistrates' Court on the 27th of November 2013. The appeal
   was dismissed in a determination promulgated on the 14th of December
   2013. In the determination the Judge rejected much of the credibility of
   the evidence and found that it had not been shown that the Sponsor was
   exercising treaty rights.


3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal in
   grounds of the 7th of January 2014. The grounds assert that the Judge
   erred in making credibility findings in respect of the genuineness of the
   relationship when this was not an issue and that this infected the
   findings made by the Judge in respect of the issue of whether the Sponsor
   was exercising treaty rights in the UK. It was stated that the Judge was
   wrong to have applied Tanveer Ahmed to the documentation that was relied
   on.


4. The grounds were considered by First-tier Tribunal Judge Page who
   granted permission to appeal on the 31st of March 2014. Judge Page found
   that it was arguable that the Judge's approach to the Sponsor's
   credibility regarding replies about the relationship were an error, this
   was not an issue the Appellant could have anticipated before the hearing.
   It was not clear why those answers undermined her credibility about her
   employment. Also in relation to the Sponsor's employment there was
   documentation and it was not clear what findings were made in paragraph
   51 and that it was not clear why the HMRC evidence fell to be
   disregarded.


5. The determination of Judge Hollingsworth set out the background and the
   Sponsor's evidence. The Judge's findings begin at paragraph 15. In
   relation to what the Appellant complains are extraneous issues relating
   to his immigration history and the nature of the relationship, these
   findings are set out in paragraphs 18 to 28. The Judge referred to the
   Appellant's history of applications and his appeal in June 2007.


6. The findings in respect of the Sponsor's evidence are set out from
   paragraph 25, those relating to the relationship end at paragraph 28.
   They are followed by a discreet analysis of the evidence relating to her
   employment and the supporting documentation.


7. The Appellant would have more grounds for complaint if the issue of the
   relationship had been taken by the Judge in the determination without
   warning or without giving the Appellant's representative or witness to
   address the issue in answer to questions or submissions. At the hearing a
   Presenting Officer may take issues that appear to arise on the
   information available. This is supported by Kwok on Tong [1981] Imm AR
   214.


8. While the nature of the relationship was not questioned in the Refusal
   Notice that did not preclude the Presenting Officer from raising it
   before the Tribunal. In being asked questions the Sponsor had the
   opportunity to provide information that was relevant and, as is often the
   case, answers provided led to other questions. It was the answers that
   the Sponsor gave that gave rise to the problem.


9. The suggestion that the Sponsor should have been warned carries no
   weight, the Sponsor was being asked when she met the Appellant, not a
   subject that would ordinarily be controversial or that would need
   preparation. In any event the Judge did not make a finding on the
   genuineness of the marriage but took the view that the evidence had an
   effect on the Sponsor's credibility.


10. I am not persuaded that there was an error in this regard or, if there
   was, that it could be regarded as material. Credibility is to be assessed
   overall and if a witness is not reliable on one issue that is bound to
   affect the assessment of their evidence in other areas. Obviously if
   there is material that supports the main thrust of a witnesses evidence
   then that may assuage any doubts or concerns that a Judge may have but
   equally if there are other concerns that may exacerbate the situation.

11. Reading the determination as it relates to the credibility of the
   evidence it falls into 2 distinct parts. The first from paragraph 18 to
   28 deals with the Appellant's history and the marriage. That is followed
   by paragraphs 29 to 53 which concern the Sponsor's employment and contain
   an analysis of the documentation provided in support.


12. As I have indicated I am satisfied that the consideration of the issues
   in paragraphs 18 to 28 were properly considered by the Judge and are not
   an error. In any event if that is wrong the following paragraphs are
   distinct and contain an analysis of the documentation that can be
   considered separately.


13. The analysis of the documentation in paragraphs 29 to 53 can be read
   separately from the previous paragraphs and can be maintained without
   reference to the other findings. The Judge looked at the documents in
   turn and gave reasons for finding that they were not reliable or that the
   evidence was not accepted.


14. The Appellant was inconsistent about whether she had a contract and
   there was none available. Salary slips from May to July 2012 were
   missing, others were not accepted when taken with the absence of a
   contract of employment and issues relating to letters allegedly from the
   company.


15. At paragraph 33 the Judge summarised the position and found that the
   documents supplied were not reliable. For the reasons given in paragraphs
   45 to 49 the Judge found that the information on the HMRC documents in
   paragraph 51 were not reliable. He observed that it might have supported
   the Appellant's case but the unreliability of the supporting
   documentation meant that he placed no weight on the information it
   contained, not that the document was not genuine.


16. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal Mr Ahmed argued that the
   Respondent had already been granted a residence card. After some
   exchanges it became apparent that there was nothing about this on the
   ECO's file and it was not raised in evidence at any stage before Judge
   Hollingsworth.


17. Clearly it is not an error where potentially relevant information is
   not placed before the Judge for him to consider. In any event the case
   had to be considered on the facts as they stood at the date of the
   decision, the fact that the Appellant may have been exercising treaty
   rights at a time before the decision may have been capable of being
   relevant but would not be determinative of the appeal. However, it was
   not brought to the Judge's attention and so, legally, is not relevant in
   these proceedings.


18. It was also argued that the Sponsor has the right to reside in the UK
   under regulation 13 of the EEA Regulations and that the Appellant should
   have been entitled to join the Sponsor on that basis. Apart from the fact
   that it does not appear to be the case that such an application was made
   I have had regard to Regulation 19(2) which only requires that a family
   member be admitted to the UK if the EEA national has a right to reside in
   the UK.


19. Paragraph 13 only refers to the initial right of residence which the
   Sponsor had exercised some time ago and not on her return. A return to
   where a person has been residing cannot be the initial residence. This
   was an application to join an EEA national exercising treaty rights and
   for the reasons given the ECO and Judge were entitled to conclude that it
   had not been shown that the Sponsor was exercising treaty rights. It is
   not clear that this was argued before the First-tier Tribunal and if not
   it cannot be said to be an obvious point. In any event there is no error
   in the determination.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 26th June 2014


