
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/05428/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, Newport        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22 July 2015                      |On 18 August 2015                     |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                LAYLA KHANAM
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Kalam, Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-Tier  Tribunal.  We  find  that  no
particular issues arise on the facts of this case  that  give  rise  to  the
need for a direction. For this reason no anonymity direction is made.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Respondent in this appeal was the Appellant before the First tier
       Tribunal and for ease of reference we refer to her as  the  Appellant
       in this determination. She is a citizen of Bangladesh and was born on
       7 May 1940. She appealed against the Respondent's decision  dated  18
       March 2014 refusing her entry clearance as a dependent relative.  Her
       appeal was allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge I Ross in a  decision
       promulgated on 27 February 2015 ("the Decision").  The  matter  comes
       before the Upper Tribunal to determine whether the Decision  involved
       the making of an error of law.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Judge Garrett  on  the
       ground that  it  was  arguable  that  it  was  not  accepted  by  the
       Respondent  that  the  Appellant  required  long  term  care  as  the
       Respondent indicated both in the decision and the ECM's  review  that
       it was in issue.

    3. Mr Kalam said that he appeared in the hearing before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal and there was  a  concession  by  the  Respondent  that  the
       requirements of paragraph E-ECDR.2.4 were met and that the  Appellant
       required long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks. Mr Clarke
       said that he had no note  of  the  concession  but  cross-examination
       focussed on paragraph E-ECDR.2.5 although this was not determinative.

    4. Mr Clarke submitted that First-tier Judge Ross was  not  entitled  to
       make a finding  that  the  Appellant  required  long-term  care.  The
       doctor's letter post-dated the decision and was dated 13 January 2015
       and consequently should not have been taken  into  account.  He  also
       relied on the requirements of paragraph 33 of  Appendix  FM-SE  which
       required medical evidence from a doctor  or  health  professional  to
       show  that  an  adult  dependent   relative   met   the   substantive
       requirements of the Rules.  The  medical  evidence  did  not  address
       'personal  care'.  With  regard  to  paragraph  E-ECDR.2.5,   medical
       evidence had not been provided to show that the Appellant was unable,
       even with the practical and financial help of the sponsor in the  UK,
       to obtain the required level of care in Bangladesh. Such evidence was
       required by paragraph 35 of FM-SE.

    5. Mr Kalam submitted that permission to appeal  was  limited  to  Judge
       Ross's findings in respect of paragraph E-ECDR 2.4. Mr Clark  replied
       that the grounds were not limited and there was  silence  on  whether
       the other grounds were arguable. In any event  it  was  a  'Robinson'
       obvious point.

    6. Mr Kalam submitted that the medical letters  did  not  post-date  the
       decision.  There  had  been  medical  letters  submitted   with   the
       application and they were before the Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO").
        They were dated 7 December 2013 and 26 June 2013. They satisfied the
       requirements as to specified evidence as they were from a doctor.  In
       any event, the sponsor had been found credible  in  relation  to  his
       evidence as to the Appellant's inability  to  care  for  herself  and
       Judge Ross had accepted that it was difficult to secure care. It  was
       open to the Judge to make his findings in respect of paragraph E-ECDR
       2.5 and there was no error of law.

    7. Mr Clarke submitted that it was a matter for us to determine  whether
       the medical evidence was sufficient to meet the criteria of paragraph
       E-ECDR 2.4. It was said in the medical letter that  she  required  an
       attendant but it was questionable that this was enough to  show  that
       she could not perform everyday tasks. First-tier Judge Ross  did  not
       consider whether there was anyone in Bangladesh who could  reasonably
       provide care and did not take the requirements of paragraph 35 of FM-
       SE into account.

    8. The parties agreed that if we found that there was an error of law we
       could go on to re-make the decision on  the  basis  of  the  evidence
       before the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of Law

    9. We deal first with the whether  the  Respondent  is  limited  in  the
       grounds she can pursue. Permission was not  refused  on  any  of  the
       grounds and we find that consequently the Respondent is  not  limited
       to the ground identified in paragraph 2 of the grant  of  permission.
       In Ferrer (limited appeal grounds; Alvi) [2012] UKUT  00304(IAC)  the
       Tribunal held that in  deciding  an  application  for  permission  to
       appeal the UT a  judge  should  consider  carefully  the  utility  of
       granting permission only on limited  grounds.  In  practice,  such  a
       limited grant is unlikely to be as helpful as a general grant,  which
       identifies the ground or grounds that are considered by the judge  to
       have the strongest prospect of success. Where the  judge  intends  to
       grant permission only  in  respect  of  certain  of  the  applicant's
       grounds, the judge should make this abundantly plain, both in his  or
       her decision and by ensuring that the Tribunal's administrative staff
       send out the proper notice, informing the applicant of the  right  to
       apply to the Upper Tribunal for permission to appeal  on  grounds  on
       which the applicant has been unsuccessful in the application  to  the
       First-tier Tribunal.

   10. We consider that it is clear from the decision granting permission to
       appeal that First-tier Judge Garrett intended a general grant in this
       case and identified  the  ground  considered  to  have  to  strongest
       prospect of success. However, all grounds may be argued.

   11. It is the Respondent's case, as set out in her grounds,  that  First-
       tier Judge Ross failed to take into account or resolve a conflict  of
       fact on a  material  matter  in  respect  of  whether  the  Appellant
       required long-term personal care. At paragraph 6 of the Decision  the
       Judge stated  'Nor  is  it  disputed  that  the  appellant's  medical
       conditions result in the requirement for long  term  personal  care'.
       The Respondent argues in the grounds that this was a matter in  issue
       between the parties as the ECO and Entry  Clearance  Manager  ("ECM")
       both refused  the  application  on  the  basis  that  they  were  not
       satisfied that the Appellant  required  long-term  personal  care  to
       perform everyday tasks. It is clear from a perusal of the refusal  of
       entry clearance and the ECM Appeal Review that this was a  matter  in
       issue.

   12. It is the Appellant's case, as became apparent at the  hearing,  that
       the Respondent had conceded that the medical evidence  relied  on  by
       the Appellant was considered by the  Respondent's  representative  to
       satisfy the requirements of E-ECDR paragraph  2.4.  First-tier  Judge
       Ross does not record a concession in his  Decision  but  proceeds  at
       paragraph 6 on the basis that it is not disputed that the Appellant's
       medical conditions result in the requirement for  long-term  personal
       care. We consider that the likelihood is that the Respondent did make
       such a concession. Mr Kalam appeared at the hearing before the First-
       tier Tribunal and recalled that the concession was made. Further,  we
       consider that the fact that cross-examination proceeded on the  basis
       of paragraph 2.5 only is a strong indication that paragraph  2.4  was
       not in issue at the hearing.

   13. In any event, First-tier Judge Ross then went on to make a finding at
       paragraph 7 of the Decision that 'given the age of the appellant  and
       her medical conditions as set out  in  the  reports,  that  she  does
       require long-term  personal  care  to  perform  everyday  tasks'.  We
       accept, having seen the medical evidence that was  before  First-tier
       Judge Ross, that it pre-dated the Respondent's decision and hence  he
       did not err in taking it into account. There were two letters  before
       him from North East Medical College Hospital and  Bangabandhu  Sheikh
       Mujib Medical University dated 7  December  2013  and  26  June  2013
       respectively. The  first  letter  states  that  'all  the  physicians
       including myself are in the same opinion that at present her physical
       condition do not permit to live alone. She always needs one attendant
       in her day to day life'. The second letter gives  the  same  opinion.
       The author of the first letter is a  professor  of  surgery  and  the
       second a professor of hepatology.

   14. We do not consider that First-tier Judge Ross erred in law if failing
       to identify the reports in his determination.  The  medical  evidence
       was before him from a doctor as required by paragraph 33 of  Appendix
       FM-SE and he was entitled to take it into account.

   15. In considering the requirements of the Rule, 'personal  care'  should
       to be distinguished from 'medical' or 'nursing' care and therefore is
       to be provided by another person. The  care  needs  to  be  long-term
       rather than transitory and it has to be in order to perform 'everyday
       tasks'.

   16. Whilst the medical evidence does not overtly address  the  nature  of
       the  care  required,  we  consider  that  the  word  'attendant'   is
       sufficient to demonstrate that the nature of  the  care  required  is
       personal rather than medical. There is no suggestion  that  the  care
       required has to be provided  by  a  medically  qualified  individual.
       Further, we find that it is proper to infer from the  words  used  by
       the medical evidence that she requires the attendant 'in her  day  to
       day life' that the care is required to perform everyday  tasks.    In
       view of the fact that she was  73  years  old  at  the  date  of  the
       Respondent's decision and that she suffered inter  alia  from  senile
       osteoarthritis, uncontrolled diabetes mellitus,  diabetic  neuropathy
       and hypertension we find that it was not an error of law to find that
       the care required as likely to be long-term.

   17. We therefore consider that in  the  light  of  the  opinions  of  the
       medical professionals it was open to First-tier Judge  Ross  to  find
       that the Appellant  required  long  term  personal  care  to  perform
       everyday tasks.  We do not find therefore that there was an error  of
       law in relation to the Judge's findings under paragraph E-ECDR 2.4.

   18. However, we do find that  there  was  a  material  error  of  law  in
       relation the First-tier Judge Ross's findings regarding paragraph  E-
       ECDR.2.5 of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The  Rules  require  that  the
       applicant must be unable, even with the practical and financial  help
       of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in  the  country
       where they are living, because (a) it is not available and  there  is
       no person in that country who can reasonable provide it; or (b) it is
       not affordable. By virtue of paragraph  35  of  Appendix  FM-SE  such
       evidence must be from a central or local health  authority;  a  local
       authority or a doctor or other heath professional.

   19. First-tier Judge Ross's findings in relation to this  aspect  of  the
       Rule were recorded at paragraph 8 of the determination. He stated  'I
       accept the sponsor's evidence that it has been  difficult  to  secure
       reliable carers to  look  after  the  appellant,  and  I  accept  the
       appellant's daughter's sworn evidence that she is not in  a  position
       to provide the level of care needed.' He further finds at paragraph 9
       'I find that the level of care required by the appellant can only  be
       reasonably provided by her children in the UK, rather than a new maid
       who may or may not be able to look after the appellant'.

   20. The evidence required by paragraph  35  of  Appendix  FM-SE  was  not
       before him in relation to the applicant's ability to obtain the level
       of care required in Bangladesh.  There was no evidence from a  health
       authority, local authority or doctor  or  health  professional.    We
       find that in concluding that it had been difficult for the sponsor to
       find reliable carers  the  Judge  applied  the  wrong  test.  He  was
       required to making a finding whether the applicant was unable, due to
       its unavailability, to obtain the required level of care by reference
       to prescribed evidence. He did not do so. We conclude that he made  a
       material error of law.  We set aside the decision pursuant to section
       12 (2) (a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  ("the
       2007 Act").

       Conclusions

   21. There was no further evidence produced by either party in  accordance
       with the directions of the Tribunal and we proceeded  to  remake  the
       decision on the basis of the evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
       pursuant to section 12 (2) (b) (ii) of the 2007 Act.

   22. It is apparent that the evidence required by paragraph 35 of Appendix
       FM-SE was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  relation  to  the
       requirements of paragraph E-ECDR 2.5 and it is not before us.

   23. The evidence in relation to the availability of care before the First-
       tier Tribunal consisted of a witness statement from the sponsor,  Abu
       Bashir Mohammed Farhad,  a  letter  from  three  of  the  Appellant's
       children  in  the  UK  and  an  affidavit  from  Shakira  Ahmed,  the
       Appellant's daughter who remains living in Bangladesh.  According  to
       the sponsor, the maid who currently looks after his mother is ill and
       elderly herself. The sponsor states that his  sister,  Shakira  Ahmed
       who lives in Bangladesh is unable to  provide  any  care  as  she  is
       married with two children and has a husband who suffers from  medical
       problems. The sponsor further states that it is  extremely  difficult
       to find reliable maids in Bangladesh to look  after  his  mother  and
       unfortunately, dedicated specialist health carers are  not  available
       in Bangladesh. He adds that even if they managed to find  someone  to
       care for their mother her safety  and  well-being  would  be  put  in
       jeopardy as there is no vetting process in place in  Bangladesh  with
       people in general being unreliable.  He  states  that  hospitals  are
       unwilling to provide nurses at home.

   24. The letter from the appellant's children asserts that it is difficult
       to find reliable carers and that specialist ones are  not  available.
       The affidavit from the appellant's daughter in Bangladesh states that
       her husband has heart disease and she has two children.  She  asserts
       that it is impossible for her to look after both her husband and  her
       mother.

   25. The Appellant's unsupported evidence  does  not  establish  that  the
       level of care required is not available in Bangladesh. It establishes
       that it may be difficult  to  find  reliable  carers.   There  is  no
       evidence to support the assertions made by the sponsor that  if  they
       were to find someone, the appellant's health would be  put  at  risk.
       It may not be  reasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant's  daughter  to
       provide care, but the Appellant has not established that the level of
       care from third parties (a carer, private nurse or  a  nursing  home)
       would not be available.  Further, the Appellant has had a maid in the
       past who has now herself become  old  and  we  consider  that  it  is
       reasonable to conclude that another maid could be similarly employed.
        In terms of affordability, the Appellant is supported by  her  son's
       in the UK and the evidence  does  not  establish  that  care  is  not
       affordable.

   26. The requirement of reasonableness in our view concerns whether it  is
       reasonable to expect a particular person to care  for  the  Appellant
       for example because that person lives far away and has  a  family  of
       his or her own to look after. Reasonableness does not  refer  to  the
       general availability of care for example from a nurse  or  carer  and
       whether is it reasonable to expect the Appellant to be cared for by a
       particular person (rather than her carer of choice).  It  is  obvious
       that the Appellant would prefer to be cared for  by  members  of  her
       family, but  this  is  not  a  consideration  under  the  rules.  The
       Appellant has not demonstrated that the requirements of paragraph  E-
       ECDR.2.5 are met and her appeal must be dismissed.

   27. The Appellant asserted in her grounds of appeal before the First-tier
       Tribunal that the refusal of entry clearance is a breach of Article 8
       ECHR. According to the grounds, all her children are British Citizens
       and settled in the UK. It is said in the grounds of appeal  that  she
       is living alone in her country and her daughter  is  unable  to  look
       after  her.  It  is  asserted  that  the  Respondent's  decision   is
       disproportionate.

   28. It does not appear to have been in  dispute  that  the  Appellant  is
       dependent on the sponsor. However, the sponsor and Appellant did  not
       live together and at the date of the Respondent's decision and  there
       is no evidence to show that they did so in the  recent  past.  Whilst
       the Appellant may, as the sponsor asserts in his  witness  statement,
       have visited the sponsor  and  her  other  children  in  the  UK,  we
       consider that the Appellant  has  not  established  on  the  evidence
       before us that more than the normal emotional  ties  between  herself
       and her UK based children exist.  We find that family  life  did  not
       exist within the meaning of  Article  8  ECHR  at  the  date  of  the
       Respondent's decision.

Decision

   29. The Respondent's appeal is allowed. The decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal allowing the appeal involved the making of a material  error
       of law. We set aside the decision  and  remake  it.  We  dismiss  the
       appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules and Article 8.




  Signed


  L Murray
  Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal    Dated 14 August 2015
