
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/05902/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination promulgated    |
|on 2 October 2013                             |On 8 November 2013           |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                      LS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, AMMAN
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:       Mr A Gibson, Advocate, instructed by Ethnic
Minorities
        Law Centre, Glasgow

For the Respondent:      Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1) The appellant is a citizen of Syria, now aged 12.  On 9  April  2012  she
   sought entry clearance to the UK as a Tier 1 (General)  child  dependant.
   A letter of the same date from the sponsor, the appellant's father,  said
   that the application was based on his sole responsibility for her.

2) The Entry Clearance Officer refused the application by  notice  dated  11
   April 2012.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  not  satisfied  of  the
   relationship  between  the  appellant   and   sponsor   nor   that   sole
   responsibility had been demonstrated, the appellant having  been  in  the
   care of her mother in Syria.

3) The  appellant  filed  notice  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
   providing some further evidence.  On  9  July  2012  an  Entry  Clearance
   Manager accepted that the appellant is the  child  of  the  sponsor,  but
   maintained the decision on the basis that  sole  responsibility  was  not
   shown.

4) The following facts are undisputed.   The  appellant's  parents  divorced
   when she was aged 3 years and 3  months.   Custody  was  awarded  to  her
   mother, in whose care she remained until consent was given to a  transfer
   of custody on 18 March 2012.  The sponsor has lived in the UK since 2005.
    At the time the entry clearance application was made, the appellant  and
   sponsor were both  in  Amman.   After  refusal  of  the  entry  clearance
   application, the sponsor returned to the UK and the appellant returned to
   Syria.  She and other family members relocated around Aleppo due  to  the
   civil war.  On 2 August 2012, she relocated with her mother to the United
   Arab Emirates, where they remain.

5) First-tier Tribunal Judge Montgomery heard the appellant's appeal  on  12
   October 2012 and dismissed it by determination promulgated on 26 November
   2012.  The appellant was represented by Mr B Murphy of Ethnic  Minorities
   Law Centre and the respondent by a Presenting Officer.  The evidence  and
   submissions focussed on "sole responsibility" within the meaning  of  the
   Immigration Rules.  The judge noted that even if sole responsibility  was
   not met, a child might qualify under the  "exclusion  undesirable"  rule,
   but that had not been argued, the appellant having had  "the  benefit  of
   very  competent  professional  representation".    She  said   that   she
   therefore had only to resolve the questions of sole responsibility and of
   Article 8 of the ECHR.   She  concluded  that  the  appellant  failed  to
   establish that the sponsor had sole responsibility for her, the weight of
   the evidence being that responsibility has been shared  by  both  parents
   (paragraph 21).  What was sought was not a reuniting of family life,  but
   the creation of a different family life (paragraph  25).   That  was  not
   necessarily in the best interests of the appellant.  To the  extent  that
   the sponsor could be considered a "victim" of the decision that would not
   be  disproportionate  to  the  legitimate  aims  of  immigration  control
   (paragraph 28).

6) The appellant applied  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  permission  to
   appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,  on  these  grounds:-  refusal  of  entry
   clearance was (i) incompatible with  the  rights  of  the  appellant  and
   sponsor to family reunion and (ii) an unlawful  denial  of  the  father's
   legal right to custody;  (iii) it was in the best interests of the  child
   to give force to the  arrangement  reached  between  the  parents  as  to
   custody, and in finding that the judge was not in imminent danger because
   she was in the UEA, the judge failed to have regard to evidence that  she
   would be required to leave there imminently; (iv)  the  judge  failed  to
   consider the issue of "relevant, serious and compelling family  or  other
   considerations ... as  at  the  date  of  decision",  even  although  the
   applicant's representative did not argue the point, and  it  "would  also
   have been within judicial knowledge that the situation in Aleppo  ...  in
   April 2012 was extremely dangerous."

7) On 8 January 2013 Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge  Campbell  refused
   permission to appeal, on the view that the judge  was  entitled  to  find
   this was not properly a case of family reunion; that the award of custody
   was considered, within a careful assessment of the circumstances  of  all
   family members; the judge took into account that the  appellant  and  her
   mother were temporarily present in the UAE; and that the ground based  on
   failure to consider "relevant, serious and  compelling  family  or  other
   considerations" was disingenuous, the  judge  having  recorded  that  the
   appellant's case was not advanced on that basis, and having in any  event
   found that such considerations were not shown.

8) The appellant sought permission to appeal from  the  Upper  Tribunal,  on
   identical grounds.  On 12 February 2013 Upper Tribunal Judge Warr granted
   permission, on the view that there might be error at paragraph 26 of  the
   determination, although not as identified in the grounds.  The First-tier
   Tribunal judge thought that in relation to the Immigration Rules she  was
   required to consider the situation as at date  of  decision,  but  as  to
   Article 8 could have regard to circumstances at the date of the  hearing.
   However, the date of decision is the material date under  the  Rules  and
   also under Article 8, in overseas cases.

9) Mr Gibson submitted that the error about the relevant date led the  judge
   into the wrong decision.  He said that she analysed the risk to the child
   as at 12 October 2012 rather than at 11 April 2012, and that if  she  had
   approached the case correctly, she would have  appreciated  the  imminent
   danger to the appellant in Aleppo due  to  the  very  dangerous  security
   situation.  Mr Gibson accepted that as matters turned out, the  appellant
   was taken to the United Arab  Emirates  with  other  family  members  for
   safety.  We observed that the move might be seen  as  evidence  of  later
   circumstances with significant bearing on the situation as at the date of
   decision, ie there was the capacity to remove the  appellant  to  safety.
   Mr Gibson argued nevertheless that there should have been a  finding  the
   appellant was in danger as at 11 April 2012.  He said this was  shown  by
   the fact that her parents, although divorced, were jointly concerned  for
   the safety of the child and to remove her from Aleppo.

10) We enquired what the evidence was before the First-tier Tribunal on  the
   situation in Aleppo.  The only evidence filed for  the  appellant  was  a
   short report by Human Rights  Watch,  dated  17  September  2012,  headed
   "Syria: End Opposition use of Torture, Executions",  and  the  judge  did
   refer to it (paragraph 4 of the determination).  This document  sets  out
   concerns about armed  opposition  groups  subjecting  detainees  to  ill-
   treatment, torture and summary execution in locations  including  Aleppo.
   Mr Gibson accepted that has little application to this appellant, but  he
   pointed out that the judge herself  referred  at  paragraph  21  to  twin
   bombings  in  Aleppo  on  10  February  2012,  signalling  the  start  of
   escalating conflict in the area.

11) We found on file the judge's record of  the  oral  submissions  and  the
   skeleton argument for the appellant.  The arguments both oral and written
   were on the basis of sole responsibility, with very little  reference  to
   the security situation.  The submissions were made on the basis that  the
   appellant was in the UAE and were thoroughly confused as to whether  they
   were based on circumstances at  the  date  of  application  or  on  later
   developments.

12) Mr Gibson accepted that the judge  was  placed  in  difficulty  by  both
   representatives having focused incorrectly on the situation as at date of
   the hearing, not the date of decision.  However, he  submitted  that  the
   appellant's move to the UAE had not been contemplated  until  refusal  of
   the application to bring her to the UK.  The application was  refused  on
   18 April 2012 and she appeared to have moved  from  Aleppo  on  2  August
   2012.  That was not a long period for a family to  prepare  for  a  major
   move.  Mr Gibson said that if the judge had  directed  herself  properly,
   she would have looked at the situation in Aleppo and might  have  allowed
   the appeal, but he was unable to suggest that evidence by way of  country
   background, human rights reports, UNHCR reports or otherwise  leading  to
   that conclusion had been adequately placed before  her.   He  said  again
   that the judge might have drawn an inference from  the  arrangements  the
   family was attempting to make to get the appellant to the UK.

13) We observed at this stage that the father's statement dated  5  December
   2012, on which the  appellant  relied  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  is
   designed almost entirely to show that he  had  sole  responsibility,  and
   that no statement by her mother was  provided.   There  was  very  little
   evidence by which the judge might have found that  the  security  of  the
   child was the primary motive for the application, even if that  had  been
   argued to her.  We also observed that even if the  judge  had  considered
   whether the appellant's security was at risk in Aleppo, the evidence  was
   that the family was able to make other arrangements.   In  his  statement
   the sponsor speaks of transferring money for the appellant's  benefit  to
   his brother in Aleppo, prior to the date of application, and the  sponsor
   is in a good financial position.

14) Those were all the arguments for the appellant.   We  did  not  need  to
   hear  from  the  Presenting   Officer.     We   formally   reserved   our
   determination.

15) The judge erred in law at paragraph 26, where she  thought  that  as  to
   Article 8 she was not restricted to looking at the situation  as  at  the
   date of decision.  Representatives did nothing to  help  the  judge  from
   falling into that error.  Indeed, the representative  for  the  appellant
   greatly  encouraged  it.   It  is  not  an  error  founded  upon  in  the
   appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal; it  did  not  affect
   the outcome; and so it does not lead us to set the decision aside.

16) The reasons given  by  the  Designated  Judge  for  refusing  the  first
   application for permission to appeal succinctly explain why  the  grounds
   are of no merit.  The case was not argued in the First-tier Tribunal that
   "serious and compelling family or other considerations" might permit  the
   appeal to succeed.  Even if it  had  been,  no  background  evidence  was
   presented which might have led to success.  The one  item  of  background
   evidence was of very little application  to  the  appellant's  situation.
   The judge's general knowledge of the situation in Syria did  not  require
   her to go any further of her own initiative,  which  a  judge  is  rarely
   required to do.

17) The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is  dismissed.   The  determination  of
   the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18) An anonymity order made by the First-tier  Tribunal  remains  in  place.







                               [pic]
                                9 October 2013
                                Judge of the Upper Tribunal
