
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/05425/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 2 February 2016                   |on 10 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                             SAMUEL MATAMBANADZO
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ZIMBABWE
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     No legal representation; sponsor present
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe, born on 9  December  1988.   He
    has not asked for an anonymity direction.  He sought entry clearance to
    the UK as an adult dependant  relative  of  his  mother,  the  sponsor,
    Emelda Jackfama.  The respondent refused his  application  by  decision
    dated 15 January 2013.

 2. Following an order by the Upper Tribunal setting  aside  and  directing
    the remaking of an earlier decision by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    case came before Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald  at
    Glasgow on  5  August  2015.   He  dismissed  the  appeal  by  decision
    promulgated on 11 August 2015.

 3. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  (prepared  by
    solicitors previously acting on his behalf)  essentially  contend  that
    the judge erred (a) by not finding in terms of paragraph 319VB(i)(f) of
    the Immigration Rules that the appellant was "living alone outside  the
    UK in the most exceptional compassionate  circumstances",  and  (b)  by
    finding in relation to Article 8 of the ECHR that there would  be  only
    slender interference with private and family life.

 4. On 12 November 2015  Designated  Judge  Shaerf  granted  permission  to
    appeal, observing that the judge was correct to note that the case fell
    to be decided as at the date of the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision
    and not at any  later  date,  but  considering  that  the  judge  might
    arguably not have taken account of "jurisprudence which finds  that  in
    some circumstances it is possible to be living in a household  and  yet
    be living alone."

 5. In a Rule 24 response dated 22 December  2015  the  respondent  submits
    that even if the appellant had been found to have been living  "alone",
    it was clear that the judge had concluded that there were not "the most
    exceptional compassionate circumstances", as required by the Rules, the
    wording of which is "not mere surplusage."

 6. By letter dated 28 January 2016 the appellant's solicitors advised  the
    Tribunal that they had withdrawn from acting.   The  sponsor  confirmed
    that she was aware of their  withdrawal,  and  advised  that  no  other
    representatives had been instructed.  She was also aware of  the  terms
    of the grant of permission and  of  the  Rule  24  response.   She  had
    nothing to add to the grounds of appeal.

 7. The Presenting Officer relied on the Rule 24 response  and  added  that
    even if it were an error to find that  the  appellant  was  not  living
    alone (which was not conceded) there was no  error  in  the  conclusion
    that the very  high  hurdle  of  "the  most  exceptional  compassionate
    circumstances" had not been met.

 8. I reserved my determination.

 9. The appellant's circumstances attract natural sympathy.  It is  readily
    understandable why his mother seeks to secure his entry to the UK.   It
    is unfortunate that due to a seriously flawed  first  decision  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal his case has spent so long in the  appeal  process.
    However, the test imposed by Immigration Rules is indeed  a  very  high
    one.  The circumstances must not be merely compassionate, but far above
    that level.  There is no legal error in the  judge's  conclusion  under
    the Immigration Rules.  Nor is there any legal  error  in  the  outcome
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.   The  grounds  on  that  point  are  only
    disagreement.

10. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           5 February 2016
