

                                              [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/05996/2013


                                      THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Determination Promulgated|
|On August 27, 2014              |On August 29, 2014       |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                            DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MRS ADAMA SERAY BAH
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Duffy (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Sowerby, Counsel, instructed by Portway
      Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. Whereas the  respondent  is  the  appealing  party,  I  shall,  in  the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.


 2. The appellant, born July 10, 1987, is a citizen  of  Sierra  Leone.  On
    November 14, 2012 she applied for entry clearance as the  spouse  of  a
    person settled in the United Kingdom.

 3. The appellant and sponsor, Abdul Rahman Bah, married on June  20,  2005
    and they have a son, born May 21, 2009.  The child is a British subject
    and at the date of application was living with the appellant in  Sierra
    Leone.

 4. The respondent refused her application on February 7, 2013 as  she  was
    not satisfied:

     a. The  appellant  and  sponsor  were  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        relationship.
     b. The appellant and sponsor satisfied the financial  requirements  of
        the Immigration Rules.

 5. On February 25, 2013 the appellant appealed under Section 82(1) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The  respondent  reviewed
    the original decision on October  31,  2013  and  upheld  the  original
    decision. The entry clearance manager considered the application  under
    article 8 ECHR but was satisfied refusal was not disproportionate.

 6. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Shamash
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on March  31,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on May 15, 2014 she refused the appeal  under
    the Immigration Rules but allowed the appeal under article 8 ECHR.

 7. The respondent appealed that decision on May 22,  2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Nicholson  on
    June 25, 2014. He found the FtTJ may have erred for the reasons set out
    in the grounds namely allowing the appeal on  factors  that  post-dated
    the date of decision.

 8. Mr Sowerby agreed that if there was an error  in  law  that  firstly  I
    should retain the matter in the Upper Tribunal and secondly the  matter
    could proceed to conclusion without any  further  representations  from
    either party.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 9. Mr Duffy submitted there was a clear error of law because the FtTJ  had
    materially erred in allowing the appeal under article 8 ECHR for events
    that occurred after the date of decision. Section 85(5) of the 2002 Act
    makes it clear that such applications must be considered at the date of
    decision. The House of  Lords  in  AS  (Somalia)  (FC)  and  another  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 32 made clear in
    paragraph [19]

        "Mr  Gill's  argument,  therefore,  was  that  section   85(5)   is
        incompatible with the right to respect for the family under article
        8 because the restriction that it imposes is not  proportionate.  I
        am willing to recognise that there may be some  cases  where  entry
        clearance is sought in which it will be necessary to  grapple  with
        this issue, but in my opinion this is not one of them.  It  is  the
        generality of his proposition that leads  him  into  a  difficulty,
        which I regard as insurmountable. He  submits  that  section  85(5)
        should be read down to enable the adjudicator to look  at  all  the
        circumstances because it is likely that the restriction will affect
        a substantial number  of  other  applicants  or,  if  this  is  not
        possible, that there should be a declaration of incompatibility.  I
        agree with  Sedley  LJ  that  the  language  of  section  85(5)  is
        incapable of being read down in the  way  Mr  Gill  suggested.  The
        directions that it contains could not be put more plainly.


        Subsection (4) "shall not apply".  The  adjudicator  "may  consider
        only" the circumstances appertaining at the time of the decision to
        refuse. These  words  are,  as  Sedley  LJ  said,  unequivocal  and
        unyielding: [2008] EWCA Civ 149, para 16. Reading them  down  would
        be to cross the boundary between interpretation  and  amendment  of
        the statute: Ghaidan v Godin-Mendoza [2004] UKHL 30;  [2004]  2  AC
        557, para 121, per Lord Rodger of Earlsferry.  Even  if,  as  I  am
        willing to assume, there may be cases where a decision to refuse to
        consider the up-to-date position could lead to an interference with
        the article 8 right in  a  way  that  was  not  proportionate,  the
        adjudicator must abide by the terms of the statute. It will not  be
        unlawful for him to do so, because the result of its provisions  is
        that it is not open to him to act differently:  1998  Act,  section
        6(2)(a)."

    Mr Duffy argued the fact the child came to live in the  United  Kingdom
    (nine months later) was not something the FtTJ should have  considered.
    If the FtTJ had allowed the appeal based on her findings  in  paragraph
    [36] then his argument would  have  no  basis  but  it  is  clear  from
    paragraph [37] of  the  determination  that  this  appeal  was  allowed
    because of what had happened after the date of decision.

10. Mr Duffy submitted that the FtTJ also erred because he applied a  "near
    miss" assessment when the courts have made clear that there is no  such
    thing as a near miss in Immigration appeals.

11. Mr  Sowerby submitted:

     a. The respondent had neither challenged any of the FtTJ's findings of
        fact nor the way she dealt with Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and
        Nagre [2013] EWHC 720 Admin.


     b. The FtTJ clearly had in mind the circumstances that existed  before
        the child came to the United Kingdom because she set out the  facts
        in  some  detail  in  paragraph  [36]  of  her  determination.  She
        considered the facts and the respondent's decision  and  found  the
        latter to be inadequate. As there was a  child  involved  she  then
        quite properly considered the position that now faced the family.

     c. Whilst Section 85(5) of the 2002  Act  can  restrict  the  facts  a
        Tribunal can take into account there  are  cases  where  subsequent
        events are taken into account. For example, in  Goudey  (subsisting
        marriage  -  evidence)  Sudan  [2012]  UKUT  00041(IAC)   and   Naz
        (subsisting marriage - standard  of  proof)  Pakistan  [2012]  UKUT
        00040(IAC) the Tribunal took  into  account  evidence  of  devotion
        after the date of decision. The House of Lords in AS  (Somalia)  at
        paragraph [21] stated

             "I cannot leave this case however without  expressing  concern
             at the effect that the delay and expense  that  the  rule  may
             give rise to, when compared with the  ease  of  bringing  into
             account up-to-date information, may have on individual  cases.
             In R (SB) v Governors of Denbigh High School [2006]  UKHL  15;
             [2007] 1 AC 100, para 68, Lord Hoffmann said that  article  9,
             which was in issue in that case, was concerned with substance,
             not procedure. What mattered was the  result:  was  the  right
             restricted in a way, which was  not  justified  under  article
             9(2)? I would apply that reasoning here too. The facts of this
             case are academic, as the appellants have been given leave  to
             enter and are now in the United  Kingdom.  But  there  may  be
             other cases, where very young children  or  vulnerable  adults
             are involved for example, in which  respect  for  family  life
             cries out for urgent attention. The delay resulting  from  the
             need to start the procedure again, and to find the money to do
             so, may be so plainly out of keeping with  the  needs  of  the
             case that the application of the rule in  their  case  may  be
             found to be disproportionate. Situations of that kind can only
             be dealt with on a  case-by-case  basis.  The  effect  of  the
             legislation is that domestic law is incapable, even  in  those
             cases, of providing a  remedy.  But  the  Secretary  of  State
             should bear in mind that they may be vulnerable to an  adverse
             decision  in  Strasbourg,  and  I  would  not  rule  out   the
             possibility  of  a  declaration  of  incompatibility   in   an
             individual case if the circumstances were so clearly  focussed
             as to enable the precise nature of  the  incompatibility  with
             the applicant's article 8 right to be identified."


12. The House of Lords, he submitted, gave a  clear  indication  that  each
    case should be considered on its own merits and that is what  the  FtTJ
    did in this appeal. The FtTJ gave ample reasons for taking the decision
    she did and the decision was  sustainable.  In  paragraph  [30]  of  AS
    (Somalia) the House of Lords stated-


             "These children should not have had to  wait  so  long  before
             being reunited with the only real family they  have.  But  the
             reason that they have had  to  do  so  lies  as  much  in  the
             previous approach to article  8  claims  as  it  does  in  the
             provisions of section 85(4) and (5). There is  some  logic  in
             requiring out of country appeals against the refusal of  entry
             clearance to be decided on the evidence as it was presented to
             the entry clearance officer on the ground at the time. But the
             restrictions on the powers of appeal  tribunals  do  not  mean
             that other public authorities are exempt from  their  duty  to
             act compatibly with the convention rights. We have been  shown
             nothing which suggests that  they  are  disabled  from  taking
             changes of  circumstance  into  account  without  requiring  a
             prohibitive fee for a fresh application every time. It is  the
             fee, as much as anything else, which may stand in the  way  of
             the system operating compatibly with the convention rights. It
             remains the duty of all  concerned  to  respect  those  rights
             insofar as statute law allows them to do so."

13. Mr Sowerby submitted that even  if  there  was  an  error  it  was  not
    material because the FtTJ had given plenty of  reasons  to  allow  this
    appeal under article 8 ECHR.


    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


14. This is an appeal by the respondent. The key issue in  this  appeal  is
    whether the FtTJ was wrong to have  regard  to  matters  that  occurred
    after the date of decision.


15. The starting point in considering this point of law is  the  2002  Act.
    Section 85(4) and (5) of that Act state-

         "(4) On an appeal under section 82(1)  against  a  decision  the  ?
         ?Tribunal may consider evidence about any matter  which  it  thinks
         relevant to the ?substance  of  the  decision,  including  evidence
         which concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision.


         (5) But in relation  to  an  appeal  under  section  82(1)  against
         refusal  of  entry  clearance  or  refusal  of  a  certificate   of
         entitlement under section 10-


           (a) Subsection (4) shall not apply, and


           (b)  The  Tribunal   may   consider   only   the   circumstances
           appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse."


16.  In SA (Pakistan) 2006 UKAIT 00018 the Tribunal confirmed that  section
    85(5) of the 2002 Act applies to  human  rights  issues  raised  in  an
    appeal against refusal of entry clearance.


17. The issue of post decision evidence under section 85(4) and (5) of  the
    2002 Act was considered by  the  Tribunal  in  DR  (ECO:  post-decision
    evidence) Morocco * [2005] UKIAT 00038. The Tribunal noted that section
    85(4) as it then was - now exception 1 in  section  85A  -  enabled  an
    Adjudicator to consider evidence, which concerns a matter arising after
    the date of decision.  This provision was excluded in refusal of  entry
    clearance cases by section 85(5).  Evidence  of  matters  arising  post
    decision could thus not be considered  in  such  cases.   However,  the
    Tribunal noted that this did not mean that any evidence  post  decision
    could not be considered. The Tribunal drew a distinction  between  post
    decision evidence that "shed light" on the  circumstances  appertaining
    at the date of decision, which remains admissible under the  2002  Act,
    and post decision evidence relating to post decision events,  which  is
    not admissible under that Act. The latter usually arises when the issue
    is whether a particular matter or circumstances is likely at  the  date
    of decision. In contrast post decision letters, which shed light on the
    parties' intentions at the date of decision would still be  admissible.
     That was broadly the view of the Tribunal in CA (Nigeria)  2004  UKIAT
    00243 in which the Tribunal said that, in  assessing  circumstances  at
    any date in the past, it was right to look at  evidence  subsequent  to
    that date, provided that that evidence was relevant to  the  assessment
    of the circumstances at that date. This was also the Tribunal's view in
    RM (Pakistan) 2004 UKIAT 00244 in which the  Tribunal  said  that  post
    decision evidence was relevant if it cast light on what was  reasonably
    foreseeable at the date of decision.  The Adjudicator was  entitled  to
    take into account post decision activities and to  find  that  it  shed
    light on a couple's intentions at the date  of  decision.  In  Naz  the
    Tribunal held that post decision visits by a sponsor to his spouse  are
    admissible in  evidence  in  appeals  to  show  that  the  marriage  is
    subsisting.


18. Both parties have made reference to AS (Somalia). I have had regard  to
    this decision as well as the other authorities I have set out above. It
    should be stated that the facts of AS (Somalia) are  different  to  the
    facts of this case. That case involved two children who had remained in
    Somalia and were applying to come to live with their cousin who  was  a
    refugee. This case involved an application by the  sponsor's  wife  for
    entry clearance as a spouse. The sponsor and appellant had a child  who
    lived with the appellant at the time the  application  was  made.  Lord
    Phillips in giving the leading judgement made  it  clear  in  paragraph
    [10] of the decision that "the provisions of Section 85(4) and (5)  are
    neither irrational nor calculated to result in unjustified delay in the
    consideration, where that is in issue, of the implications of the right
    to respect for family life." He also noted in paragraph [8] that  there
    was nothing in that case to have  prevented  the  appellants  making  a
    fresh application as soon as their circumstances changed for the  worse
    and he concluded that this would have been the  appropriate  course  to
    take having regard to the provisions of Section 85(5). Both  Lord  Hope
    of Craighead and Baroness Hale of Richmond went further and as set  out
    in paragraphs [10(c) and [11] above suggested there may be  some  cases
    when post-decision evidence may be admissible but they both agreed that
    case was not one of them.


19. This application was an entry clearance application that did  not  meet
    the Immigration Rules.  At  the  time  the  application  was  made  the
    appellant and her son lived in Sierra Leone. The sponsor went there and
    brought his son back to the united Kingdom thereby changing  the  whole
    matrix that had been considered by the entry clearance officer.

20. This was neither a change as envisaged in Naz nor  a  change  that  was
    relevant  to  the  assessment  at  the  date  of  decision.  It  was  a
    fundamental change made and was taken by the sponsor.

21. Having considered the  two  arguments  advanced  I  accept  Mr  Duffy's
    assessment of the law in so far as it applies to this  case.  In  other
    words there is a material error of law if the article  8  decision  was
    based on the circumstances at the date of hearing.

22. I turn therefore to the determination. The FtTJ set out from  paragraph
    [21] onwards "factors relevant to the article 8 application at the date
    of hearing". In paragraph [23] she has wrongly considered Section  EX.1
    of Appendix FM because that section does not apply to  entry  clearance
    applications. The case of Sabir (Appendix FM-EX.1  not  free  standing)
    [2014] UKUT 00063 does not assist the appellant or the FtTJ.

23. In paragraph [35] the FtTJ considered whether to remit  this  case  for
    consideration under Section EX.1 but for the reason set out above to do
    so would have been an error. In paragraph [36]  she  acknowledged  that
    the application did not meet the Immigration Rules and then  went  onto
    consider the case outside of the Rules. Mr  Duffy  does  not  challenge
    this approach and accepts this was a  case  that  could  be  considered
    outside of the Rules.

24. However, paragraph [36] includes a further arguable error  in  approach
    in that the  FtTJ  found  that  the  sponsor  met  the  spirit  of  the
    legislation. It goes without saying that the decisions in  Miah  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 261 and Nasim and others (Raju: reasons not to follow?) [2013]
    UKUT 00610(IAC) make clear that there is no such things as a near  miss
    when dealing with the Immigration Rules.

25. Instead of allowing the appeal on the facts that existed at the date of
    decision the FtTJ proceeded in paragraph [37] to go on to set  out  all
    the reasons and facts of why the situation was  now  more  extreme  and
    damaging. Great weight is placed on the fact the child is here and  the
    mother is in Sierra Leone. The FtTJ concentrated on  the  circumstances
    at the hearing.

26. The FtTJ erred by considering the  best  interests  of  the  child  and
    carrying out a proportionality assessment  in  paragraph  [37]  of  her
    determination She also erred because in paragraph [37] she again places
    reliance on Section EX.1.

27. Accordingly, I find there has been an error in law and I set aside  the
    decision under article 8 ECHR.

    CONSIDERATION OF SUBSTANTIVE APPEAL

28. I agreed with the representatives that if there was an error in  law  I
    would remake this decision based on the  evidence  already  before  the
    Tribunal albeit I will confine myself to the circumstances in existence
    as at the date of decision and not today or any  other  date.  As  Lord
    Phillips made clear in AS (Somalia) if there are  new  matters  then  a
    fresh application should be submitted.


29. The application for entry clearance did not meet the  Rules.  The  FtTJ
    set out in paragraph [18] what had to be submitted and she  noted  that
    what was submitted did not meet the Rules. No cross appeal was made  in
    respect of this finding.

30. The Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) & Ors, R (on the application of)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department & Anor [2014] EWCA  Civ  985
    examined numerous authorities and stated:


         "128. ... In Nagre the new  rules  were  themselves  attempting  to
         cover, generally,  circumstances  where  an  individual  should  be
         allowed to remain in the UK on Article 8 grounds... Nagre does  not
         add anything to the debate,  save  for  the  statement  that  if  a
         particular person is outside the rule then he has  to  demonstrate,
         as a preliminary to a consideration outside the rule, that  he  has
         an arguable case that there may be good grounds for granting  leave
         to remain outside  the  rules.    I  cannot  see  much  utility  in
         imposing this  further,  intermediary,  test.    If  the  applicant
         cannot satisfy the rule, then there either is or  there  is  not  a
         further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be  determined  by  the
         relevant decision-maker.


         134. Where the relevant group  of  Immigration  Rules,  upon  their
         proper construction, provide a "complete code" for dealing  with  a
         person's Convention rights in the context of  a  particular  IR  or
         statutory provision, such as in the case  of  "foreign  criminals",
         then the balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to
         be taken into account  in  an  individual  case  must  be  done  in
         accordance with that  code,  although  references  to  "exceptional
         circumstances"   in   the   code   will   nonetheless   entail    a
         proportionality  exercise.    But  if   the   relevant   group   of
         Immigration  Rules  is  not  such  a  "complete  code"   then   the
         proportionality test will be more at large, albeit  guided  by  the
         Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.


         159. ... It seems clear from the statement of Lord Dyson MR  in  MF
         (Nigeria) and Sales J in Nagre that a court would have to  consider
         first whether the  new  MIR  and  the  "Exceptional  circumstances"
         created a "complete code" and,  if  they  did,  precisely  how  the
         "proportionality test"  would  be  applied  by  reference  to  that
         "code".


         162. ... Firstly, paragraph GEN.1.1 of Appendix FM states that  the
         provision of the family route  "takes  into  account  the  need  to
         safeguard and promote the welfare of children  in  the  UK",  which
         indicates that the  Secretary  of  State  has  had  regard  to  the
         statutory duty.   Secondly, there is no legal requirement that  the
         Immigration Rules should provide that the  best  interests  of  the
         child should be determinative.   Section 55 is not a  "trump  card"
         to be played whenever the interests of a child arise..."


31. I have to consider whether a  refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably
    harsh  consequences  for  the  individual  such  that  refusal  of  the
    application would not be proportionate.


32. The appellant was unable to meet the Immigration Rules. If she had  met
    the Rules then her application would have been granted. However, it  is
    arguable the Rules do not recognise that in this  appeal  there  was  a
    British child living in Sierra Leone and they both intended to come and
    live in the United Kingdom with the sponsor.

33. I accept that this is a case that can  be  considered  outside  of  the
    Rules and following the five stage test set out in Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
    00027 I find there is family life between the  appellant  and  sponsor,
    the refusal is an interference but the interference is for a legitimate
    purpose and for the purpose of  maintaining  immigration  control.  The
    issue is therefore one of proportionality.

34. At the date of decision the appellant was living with her son and  they
    were seeking to come together to the United Kingdom. The  circumstances
    alluded to in the evidence and the FtTJ are perhaps no different to the
    many other entry clearance applications. There  was,  at  the  date  of
    decision nothing out of the ordinarily about this application.  It  was
    effectively a straightforward application with no compelling factors.

35. In any assessment on proportionality I have to have regard to the  best
    interests of the child but this is not a trump card but merely  one  of
    the factors to take into account. The importance of the public interest
    and immigration control also carry significant weight especially  where
    the Immigration Rules are not met. As stated above "nearly" meeting the
    Rules is not something these courts recognise.

36. Having considered all of the available evidence and  dealing  with  the
    appeal on the facts that existed at the  date  of  decision  I  am  not
    satisfied that refusal of entry was disproportionate.

37. I therefore uphold the refusal under the  Immigration  Rules  (Appendix
    FM) and dismiss the appeal under article 8 ECHR.


    DECISION


38. There is a material error of law and I set aside the original  decision
    in respect of article 8 ECHR.


39. I have remade the article 8 decision and I  dismiss  the  appeal  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

40. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.


Signed:                           Dated:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award, as the appeal did not succeed.

Signed:                           Dated:





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
