
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
Appeal Number:OA/05860/2013
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 August 2014                              |On 7 August 2014             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                           SATYAM BHARATBAI PANDHI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, MUMBAI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Iqbal, of counsel, instructed by Bhogal
Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of India. He applied on  25  October,  2012
      for an entry clearance to settle in the United Kingdom as  the  spouse
      of an Indian  national  Avni  Raichura,  whom  he  had  first  met  in
      September 2000 when they were at school together. They were married on
      17 January, 2012 in India. They had lived together in  the  UK  before
      their marriage and after their marriage while in India.

   2. The appellant had been studying accounting and  had  a  visa  from  18
      August, 2005 until 31 January, 2008. It was the appellant's case  that
      he had done an MBA in accounting which was to finish in September 2008
      and he had applied for further leave to remain to complete the  course
      and he said that he had been granted a six-month  extension  until  30
      November, 2008.

   3. The appellant then approached a Mr Patel to make a further application
      and on the basis of that he obtained a residence permit on  5  August,
      2008 valid until 4 August 2013.

   4. On 12 March, 2012 the appellant was stopped at Mumbai airport  on  his
      way back to the United Kingdom and was told that his residence  permit
      was not valid. There are charges in relation to this residence  permit
      pending in India.

   5. The appellant's application for an entry clearance was refused  on  19
      December, 2012 on the basis of the false UK resident permit visa.  The
      Entry Clearance Officer found the appellant's explanation  -  that  he
      had been defrauded - was not credible because the appellant had chosen
      not to apply to  the  Home  Office  but  instead  had  used  an  agent
      thousands of miles away. It was not credible that a person in  the  UK
      would use an agent in another country to assist them  with  a  genuine
      application for leave to remain.

   6. The appellant had been issued with a student visa from  18  May,  2005
      until 31 January, 2008 but had not made an  application  to  the  Home
      Office for further leave to remain in the UK and therefore  overstayed
      his visa as he had not left the UK until at least 2009. He had been in
      the UK illegally and had not attempted to regularise his stay  through
      the Home Office. The application was refused under paragraph 320  (11)
      as the appellant's immigration history showed that he had contrived in
      a significant way to  frustrate  the  intentions  of  the  immigration
      rules. Further in the light of the use of  non-genuine  documents  the
      Entry Clearance Officer doubted the appellant's intentions and he  was
      not satisfied that the appellant  was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship or that the appellant intended to live together with  his
      wife permanently in the UK.

   7. The appellant appealed against the decision and his appeal came before
      a First-tier Judge on 28 March, 2014. The  judge  recorded  the  claim
      that the appellant had applied  for  further  leave  to  remain  as  a
      student on a May 2008 expiring on the 30 November, 2008. He  explained
      that there was no indication at any time that his residence permit was
      not genuine although it was accepted by Miss  Iqbal  (who  represented
      the appellant before the  judge  as  she  does  before  me)  that  the
      resident  permit  was  false.  However  it  was  submitted  there  was
      insufficient evidence that the appellant had  knowingly  obtained  the
      false permit and he had been the victim of fraud and there was need to
      exercise care when considering the matter: PS (India) [2010] UKUT  440
      (IAC).

   8. The First-tier Judge accepted the submission that the Entry  Clearance
      Officer had made a mistake in saying that the appellant had relied  on
      an agent who was not in the UK, there was no evidence to that effect.

   9. However the judge noted that in the appellant's passport there  was  a
      residence permit said to have been issued in May 2008 and expiring  on
      30 November, 2008 which the appellant says  was  his  extension  as  a
      student and the judge commented: "if that is  genuine,  I  would  have
      expected there to be a record at the Home Office." In paragraph 23 the
      judge commented that in the absence  of  confirmation  from  the  Home
      Office that the appellant had obtained an extension as a student  "the
      appellants immigration record must be  more  doubtful  [than]  he  has
      represented." The judge returns to this theme in paragraph 24  stating
      that the Entry Clearance Officer had recorded that the  appellant  had
      not made an application to the Home Office for further leave to remain
      as a student "something he now claims to have done but for which there
      continues to be no record." The Entry Clearance  Officer's  conclusion
      that the appellant had unlawfully overstayed his original student visa
      was a conclusion which was supported by the evidence. The judge  found
      that the Entry Clearance Officer's decision under paragraph  320  (11)
      was in accordance with the law. The decision was not disproportionate.

  10. The appellant appealed and in ground two of the grounds of  appeal  it
      was stated that the appellant had obtained his subject  access  report
      which clearly demonstrated the extension application that  he  claimed
      to have been made,  expiring on 30 November, 2008.

  11. Before me Mr Bramble accepted that Home Office records did indeed show
      that that the appellant had been granted  leave  to  remain  until  30
      November, 2008. It was also to be noted that the Presenting Officer at
      the  hearing  before  the  First-tier  Judge  did  not  challenge  the
      genuineness and subsistence of the relationship between the  appellant
      and the  sponsor.  The  sole  issue  remaining  was  the  issue  under
      paragraph 320 (11).

  12. Mr Bramble acknowledged that the key to the case was  the  appellant's
      application and the Home Office record of  it.  The  judge  had  given
      great emphasis to the appellant's claim to have made this application,
      a claim which the judge had rejected. She had found in particular that
      the  appellant's  immigration  history  was  doubtful  and   that   no
      application for further leave to remain had been made.

  13. Mr Bramble further accepted that there  was  a  need  for  aggravating
      circumstances in cases of this type. It was now clear that  the  point
      taken by the Entry Clearance Officer and focused on by the  judge  was
      not a good  point  and  the  appellant  had  indeed  been  granted  an
      extension of leave to remain until 30 November, 2008.

  14. The other point taken by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  been  in
      relation to the appellant using an agent thousands of miles  away  but
      the judge had found that that was not a good point. Mr  Bramble  asked
      rhetorically what was left. In the circumstances he did not resist the
      arguments advanced and agreed that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Judge was materially flawed in law and that it should be reversed  and
      that the appellant's appeal should be allowed.

  15. It does appear that the decision of the Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
      flawed in two material respects. The judge, while accepting the  error
      in relation to one matter (the use of  an  agent  thousands  of  miles
      away) placed heavy emphasis on the fact that there was no evidence the
      appellant had made a further application for leave to remain  expiring
      in November 2008. As there was an entry in the appellants passport  to
      that effect this would be a  significant  countervailing  circumstance
      (see paragraph 21 of the determination). It is now accepted that  this
      point was without foundation.

  16. In the light of the fact that Mr Bramble  accepted  that  the  judge's
      decision should be reversed it is not necessary for me  to  produce  a
      lengthy  determination.  I  only  mention  the  fact  that  the  Entry
      Clearance  Officer  proceeded  on  the  basis  that  the   appellant's
      relationship with the sponsor  was  neither  genuine  nor  subsisting,
      points which were conceded by the Presenting Officer  at  the  hearing
      before the First-tier Judge.

  17. It is accepted that the First-tier Judge is  decision  was  materially
      flawed in law. By agreement this appeal is allowed.

Appeal allowed



Signed
                               Upper Tribunal Judge Warr


                               6 August 2014



