
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06082/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |  Decision & Reasons          |
|                                             |Promulgated                   |
|On 22nd April 2015                           |  On 3rd June 2015            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD BANNATYNE
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MARIA ALMIRA VICTORIA PRANGAN
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance or representation

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   Although this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department, we  shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

2.   The Appellant is a national of the Philippines and  was  born  on  28th
    August 1993.  Her application to extend her leave to remain in  the  UK
    was refused by the Respondent on  12th  March  2014.   Her  appeal  was
    allowed under Article 6 of the European Convention of Human  Rights  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Kempton on 18th November 2014.

3.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department applied  for  permission
    to appeal on the basis that the judge did not appreciate that this  was
    an out of country appeal and he failed to give reasons why  the  appeal
    should be allowed.  Further, the decision  of  the  European  Court  of
    Human Rights in Maaouia v France 39652/98 [2000] ECHR  455  established
    that Article 6 of the  European  Convention  of  Human  Rights  had  no
    bearing on matters of immigration status and so the judge's unexplained
    reliance on it "in the interests  of  justice"  did  not  constitute  a
    proper disposal of the appeal.

3.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Levin  on
    8th January 2015 on the basis that there was no evidence to support the
    judge's finding at paragraph 9 of her decision that the  Appellant  had
    made her application for leave to remain prior to the expiry of  extant
    leave and the copy of the refusal notice provided by the Respondent  in
    support of the application asserted that neither the Appellant nor  her
    mother, as a dependant of whom the Appellant had obtained her  previous
    leave, had any extant leave when the Appellant  made  her  application.
    The judge clearly made an error of law in  allowing  the  appeal  under
    Article 6 of the ECHR which on the face of it  had  no  application  to
    this appeal.

4.   The notice of appeal was served on the  Appellant  and  her  mother  on
    26th February 2015 together with directions stating that the Tribunal's
    original file was incomplete and  therefore  any  material  upon  which
    either party relied must be filed with the Tribunal and served  on  the
    other party no less than five working days before the hearing.

5.   There was no appearance on behalf of the Appellant at  the  hearing  on
    22nd April 2015.  We were satisfied  that  the  notice  of  appeal  was
    properly served and proceeded in the absence  of  a  representative  on
    behalf of the Appellant.  Ms Everett submitted the Respondent's  bundle
    and apologised for failing to comply  with  directions.   No  documents
    were submitted by the Appellant.

6.   The Respondent's bundle contained the notices of decision,  the  notice
    and grounds of appeal, documents relating to the Appellant's  voluntary
    departure to the  Philippines  on  16th  April  2014,  the  Appellant's
    application form dated 10th February 2014, a letter  dated  7th  August
    2013 from Emmanuel Logli, an  Italian  national,  and  a  copy  of  his
    passport, a copy of the Appellant's  mother's  passport  and  residence
    permit valid until 8th August 2013.  Pages 1 to 21 of the  Respondent's
    bundle were already on the court file.  The new documents contained  in
    the  bundle  amounted  to  the   Appellant's   application   form   and
    accompanying documents.

7.   At the hearing Ms Everett relied on the notice of decision  dated  12th
    March 2014 and submitted that the Appellant had no in-country right  of
    appeal as she had no leave to remain when she made her application.   A
    decision to remove the Appellant was made on 8th  April  2014  and  the
    Appellant left the UK voluntarily on 16th April 2014.

8.   The Appellant exercised her right of appeal from  outside  the  UK.  Ms
    Everett submitted that the judge failed to understand  the  immigration
    history and had wrongly come to the conclusion that the  Appellant  had
    an in-country right of appeal and that she had  been  deprived  of  it.
    The judge had not dealt with the grounds of  appeal  substantially  and
    allowed the appeal under Article 6 which was not open to her.   It  was
    accepted that the Home Office had failed to serve papers on the  First-
    tier Tribunal but this did not  form  the  basis  on  which  the  judge
    allowed the appeal.  The decision to allow the appeal under  Article  6
    was not an outcome open to the judge.

9.   We pointed out that there was a letter before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge dated 9th August 2013 in which the Home Office  acknowledged  the
    Appellant's application to extend her leave.  Her leave expired on  8th
    August 2013 so, on the face of it, it would appear that  the  Appellant
    had made an in-time application.  This letter may well have led to  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's finding  that  the  Appellant  had  an  in-
    country right of appeal.

10.  We adjourned for a short time for  the  Respondent  to  obtain  further
    information about the nature of the Appellant's application and whether
    her mother had leave to remain in the UK. When Ms Everett returned  she
    informed us that when the Appellant made her application her mother did
    not have leave to remain.  Her mother's leave  expired  on  8th  August
    2013 and her mother applied on 5th March  2014  for  further  leave  to
    remain as a domestic worker which was granted until  16th  March  2015.
    She had obtained information from the Home Office database  which  also
    showed that applications  were  made  by  the  Appellant's  mother  but
    rejected as invalid.  Ms Everett did not know why.  She submitted  that
    the Appellant could not succeed in the Immigration Rules as a dependent
    of her mother because she was over 18 years  of  age.   She  could  not
    succeed on the basis of her private life because she had only  been  in
    the UK for two years and four months.

Discussion and Conclusion

11.  We find that the Immigration Judge made an error  of  law  in  allowing
    the appeal under Article 6 which on the face of it had  no  application
    to this appeal.  Whilst there  was  evidence  to  support  the  judge's
    finding that the Appellant had made her application for leave to remain
    prior to the expiry of any extant leave, namely the  letter  dated  9th
    August 2013, the fact remained that the  Appellant  had  exercised  her
    right of appeal from outside the UK and it was incumbent on  the  judge
    to substantively deal with the Appellant's appeal under the Immigration
    Rules and any human rights grounds raised.  Accordingly  we  set  aside
    the judge's decision to allow the appeal under Article 6 and re-make it
    as follows.

12.  We have taken into account the notice  of  decision  dated  12th  March
    2014 which states that the Appellant submitted an application  on  27th
    January 2014 which was clearly  out  of  time.   The  application  form
    submitted in the Respondent's bundle was dated 10th February 2014.  The
    Appellant was notified of the need  to  provide  documentation  to  the
    Tribunal but she has failed to do so.  It would therefore appear on the
    evidence before us that the Appellant had no in-country right of appeal
    and she has properly exercised her appeal from outside the UK.

13.  In considering the substantive matters the Respondent's position is  as
    follows. The Appellant's mother did not have any  valid  leave  at  the
    time  that  the  Appellant  made  her  application  and  therefore  her
    application as her dependant failed.  Further, the Appellant was now 20
    years old and  not  eligible  to  apply  as  a  dependent  child.   The
    Appellant had provided evidence that she was  working  in  the  UK  and
    receiving financial  support  from  a  partner,  an  Italian  national,
    Emmanuel Logli, although there was no evidence  before  the  Respondent
    that the relationship was genuine or subsisting.

14.  The Respondent was of the view that this supported  the  position  that
    the Appellant was not wholly dependent on her parents and  was  leading
    an independent life.  As she was 20 years old there was no  reason  why
    she could not continue to enjoy her private life and  work  to  support
    herself in the Philippines. The Appellant had provided no  evidence  to
    suggest that she was suffering from any health or other wellbeing issue
    that would make  her  return  to  the  Philippines  unreasonable.   The
    Appellant had established her relationship with her partner and  family
    in the UK whilst her immigration status was only temporary and she  had
    no legitimate expectation to remain here indefinitely.   The  Appellant
    had entered the UK to join parents and siblings, however at present her
    family members were in the UK illegally.

15.  The Respondent's view was that the Appellant could maintain her  family
    life with her family in the  Philippines.  Alternatively,  her  parents
    could support her financially from abroad if their current applications
    were granted. The Appellant's latest partner was not a British  citizen
    and the Appellant was not claiming that they lived  together.   It  was
    therefore not accepted that the Appellant's return to her home  country
    would breach her Article 8 rights.

16.  There was no evidence from  the  Appellant  save  for  her  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal in which she states that she  applied
    for an extension of her leave to remain as a dependant of my mother who
    was working as a domestic helper. She submitted her application in time
    before her leave expired and she attached the confirmation letter  from
    the Home Office.  She believed that her status here  in  the  UK  would
    remain the  same  while  she  was  waiting  for  the  decision  of  her
    application for the extension of her leave. The Home Office refused the
    application and refused to give her  an  opportunity  to  appeal.   She
    decided to leave the UK in accordance with the Home Office decision and
    avoid further problems with Immigration. She voluntarily left the UK on
    16th April 2014.  She did not plan to overstay in the UK  and  remained
    to attend an interview scheduled by the Home Office.


17.  Accordingly, on the evidence before us, the Appellant is  over  18  and
    her application to remain as  a  dependant  of  her  mother  could  not
    succeed under the Immigration Rules.

18.  There was little evidence  of  the  Appellant's  relationship  with  an
    Italian national and she did not claim to live with him.  She had  been
    living in the  UK  for  two  years  and  four  months.  Therefore,  the
    Appellant's  application  could  not  succeed  under  Appendix  FM   or
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules.

19.  Considering the five stage test  in  Razgar  the  Appellant's  mother's
    leave expired in 2015.  She did not attend the hearing.  The  Appellant
    had failed to establish family life in the UK.  Her  private  life  was
    based on living in the UK temporarily for two  years  and  four  months
    with her family.  We are of the view that the refusal of leave and  the
    Appellant's removal from the UK would not interfere with her  right  to
    family life since she has lived separately from her mother.  We are  of
    the view that the refusal to vary leave to remain and  the  Appellant's
    departure from the UK did not interfere with her  right  to  family  or
    private   life   as   this   could   continue   in   the   Philippines.
    Notwithstanding the decision to refuse to vary leave was in  accordance
    with  the  Immigration  Rules  and  necessary  in  the   interests   of
    immigration control.

20.  Taking into account all the circumstances of the  case  and  given  the
    lack of evidence, the refusal of leave and the Appellant's removal  was
    not  disproportionate  in  all  the  circumstances.   Accordingly,  the
    Appellant's appeal against the refusal  to  extend  her  leave  and  to
    remove her from the UK is dismissed.


Notice of decision

The Respondent's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on
human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 1st June 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

We have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                                  Date 1st June 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
