

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06563/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 July 2016                                |On 6 July 2016               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before


                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                 (islamabad)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                            MISS SAMRA TUL HAYEE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Melvin, Home Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


   1. This is the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer but I will refer  to
      the Miss Hayee, a citizen of Pakistan, born on 24  May  1989,  as  the
      appellant herein. Her application for an entry clearance to  join  her
      partner,  the  sponsor,  Mr  Fawaz  Jamal,  a  British  Citizen,   for
      settlement in the United Kingdom was refused on 14 April 2014.

   2. The appellant's appeal came before a First-tier Judge on 21 July 2015.
      The determination is lengthy and detailed but it is not  necessary  to
      recite it as the judge found in favour of the  appellant  on  all  the
      issues that had been advanced by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  when
      reaching his decision and only  one  point  has  been  raised  in  the
      grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal. That  point  relates  to  the
      IELTS certificate tendered before the Entry  Clearance  Officer  which
      had passed the two year period of its validity.

   3. However the First-tier Judge took into account a new IELTS certificate
      issued on 22 July 2014 showing an overall band score of 7.5(3).

   4. In paragraph 52 of the determination the judge states:

           "As  to  the  outstanding  issue  of  [the]   English   language
           requirement, the IELTS certificate of July 2014 meets this."

   5. In the Entry Clearance Officer's grounds it is pointed  out  that  the
      certificate is clearly dated  after  the  date  of  decision  and  the
      appellant's application therefore failed under the rules and the First-
      tier Judge had erred in finding otherwise.

   6. Permission to appeal was granted on 23 May 2016.

   7. On 23 June 2016 the appellant's representatives wrote to the  Tribunal
      stating that the appellant had instructed them to withdraw the appeal.

   8. On 24 June 2016 the Tribunal  replied  pointing  out  that  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer had been granted permission to appeal and it was not
      for the appellant to withdraw. If she did  not  wish  to  proceed  she
      should contact the respondent.

   9. No one appeared before me on behalf of the appellant and I decided  to
      proceed with the hearing, given the circumstances, under rule 38.

  10. Mr Melvin said there was nothing on  his  file  from  the  appellant's
      side. He relied on the point on which permission to  appeal  had  been
      granted and invited me to allow the Entry Clearance Officer's appeal.

  11. At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision. The First-
      tier Judge went through all the disputed issues with great care and as
      I have mentioned resolved each one in favour of  the  appellant.  This
      was a complex case to determine. It is however clear that there was  a
      material error of law in that aspect of the decision in which reliance
      is placed on the IELTS certificate which post dates the decision.

  12. It may well  be  that  it  was  this  that  prompted  the  appellant's
      representatives to attempt to withdraw  the  appeal  as  their  remedy
      would appear to be a simple one: make a fresh application supported by
      the IELTS certificate rather than attempt to challenge the outcome  of
      the appeal. Mr Melvin could give no concessions as to the outcome  but
      observed that given the positive findings of fact that had  been  made
      and the limited challenge in the grounds to the  findings,  there  was
      every chance the  entry  clearance  would  be  granted  on  a  further
      application.

  13. It is clear the decision of the First-tier Judge  was  vitiated  by  a
      material error of law. In the premises I re-make the decision.

  14. The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is allowed.  The  appeal  of  the
      appellant is dismissed.

      Anonymity Order


      The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.


      Fee Award


      The First-tier Judge made a fee award in favour of the  appellant.  In
      the particular circumstances of this case,  although  the  appeal  was
      ultimately unsuccessful, the vast majority of the issues were resolved
      in favour of the appellant and the fee award should stand.






Signed
                               G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               5 July 2016



