
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/06742/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3rd July 2017                      |On 11th July 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                          mr adejimi asaye adeyemi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R O Ojukotola, SLA Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated 13th
    March 2015 to refuse his application for an EEA family permit  to  join
    his wife Mrs Chelia Maria Da Sa Pascoal, a Portuguese national.  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Harris  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 4 November 2016.

 2. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission was granted on 27th April 2017  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Page.

Background

 3. The Appellant's application for an EEA family permit was  submitted  on
    26th February 2015.  The Appellant was interviewed on 12th  March  2015
    and the Entry Clearance Officer issued the  refusal  decision  on  13th
    March 2015.  The Appellant lodged the appeal on 8th April 2015 and  the
    appeal was listed for hearing on the  first  occasion  on  11th  August
    2016.  On that occasion the Sponsor and a friend  attended  along  with
    Counsel.  However the case was adjourned but no new date was fixed  for
    the hearing.  On 18th August 2016 the parties  were  advised  that  the
    hearing was fixed for 8th September 2016.  On  5th  September  2016  an
    application was made on the Appellant's behalf for  an  adjournment  of
    the hearing and that application was refused by  the  Tribunal  on  7th
    September 2016.  At the hearing  on  8th  September  2016  neither  the
    Appellant or a representative appeared and there was no  representative
    on behalf of the Respondent.

 4. The main issue raised by the Grounds of appeal  is  whether  the  judge
    erred in proceeding to  hear  the  appeal  in  circumstances  where  an
    application for adjournment had been made three days before the hearing
    and refused by the Tribunal and where there was no  appearance  at  the
    hearing by or on behalf of the Appellant.  In the Rule  24  notice  the
    Secretary of State opposed the appeal on the basis that there had  been
    no renewed application for an adjournment at the hearing and  therefore
    the issue was not before the judge and  in  any  event  the  judge  was
    correct to proceed in all of the circumstances.

Submissions

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Ojukotola relied on the grounds.  Ground  1
    contends that the judge proceeded unfairly in failing  to  adjourn  the
    appeal and that it was in the interests  of  justice  and  fairness  to
    adjourn  the  appeal.   Mr  Ojukotola's   submitted   that   this   was
    particularly so given that this  case  was  one  where  the  Respondent
    alleged that this was a  marriage  of  convenience  and  therefore  the
    Appellant was not a spouse under Regulation 2 of the Immigration  (EEA)
    Regulations 2006.  In those circumstances the initial burden  of  proof
    was on the Respondent and that can switch to  the  Appellant.   In  his
    submission, given the nature of  this  case  and  particularly  in  the
    absence of the Respondent as was in the interests of fairness that  the
    Appellant be given opportunity to respond to  the  allegations  against
    him.  As the Appellant is not in the UK he can only be  represented  by
    the Sponsor who is in the UK.   He  submitted  that  at  the  time  she
    travelled the Sponsor was not aware of a new hearing date. He submitted
    that when the application for an adjournment was made on 5th  September
    copies of the flight tickets were  attached.   He  submitted  that  the
    adjournment application was refused on  7th  September  and  given  the
    proximity of time the Appellant could not have received notification of
    that refusal in Portugal in time.  The second ground contends that  the
    issues raised by the judge in dismissing the appeal  in  terms  of  the
    substantive issues should have been put to the  Appellant.   The  judge
    found as a factor against the Appellant the fact that the  Sponsor  did
    not attend the hearing and  it  is  contended  that  this  demonstrates
    further unfairness to the Appellant.  The third  ground  contends  that
    the Respondent did not attend the hearing and was not  represented  and
    the Respondent should  have  been  given  opportunity  to  subject  the
    Appellant's EEA Sponsor to cross-examination to establish the probative
    value of her witness statement and that the Respondent would  not  have
    been prejudiced as a result of the adjournment of the case.

 6. In response Mr Kandola submitted that the judge noted that there was no
    good reason why the application for an adjournment was  made  so  late.
    Mr Kandola accepted that the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 do not  require  a  renewed
    application to have been made at the hearing but submitted that such an
    application could have been made at the hearing.  No-one  attended  the
    hearing and there was no suggestion that  the  representatives  or  any
    witnesses were abroad.  The Appellant was represented and the  decision
    in relation to the adjournment was sent  to  the  representatives.   Mr
    Kandola accepted that the judge does not specifically refer to Rule  28
    of the Tribunal Procedure Rules 2014 but submitted that  at  paragraphs
    12  onwards  the  judge  examined  the   procedural   background,   the
    adjournment history and the lack of explanation as to why  the  Sponsor
    was unable to return  for  the  hearing  and  therefore  give  adequate
    consideration to the circumstances of the case.

 7. In response Mr Ojukotola submitted that the last sentence of  paragraph
    12 was a mistake in that it states that the Sponsor's flight was booked
    on 7th or 9th August 2016.  In  fact  he  showed  a  confirmation  from
    Ryanair that he said was submitted with the application for  permission
    to appeal.  Those confirmation emails show that the Appellant booked  a
    flight on 7th August 2016 to travel to Lisbon on 15th August and on 2nd
    September 2016 she booked a return flight to London for 12th September.
     He submitted that the case put here is  that  the  Appellant  and  the
    Sponsor were both  out  of  the  country  and  the  judge  should  have
    considered adjourning the case and exercising his discretion.  In light
    of the overriding objective at Rule 2 the case could not be dealt  with
    justly and fairly.  He submitted that the judge should  have  exercised
    his discretion differently.

Discussion

 8. The Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 set out the overriding objective at  Rule  2  which
    states:


         "2.-(1) The overriding objective of these Rules is  to  enable  the
             Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly.
             (2) Dealing with a case fairly and justly includes-
                  (a) dealing with the case in ways which are  proportionate
                      to the importance of the case, the complexity of  the
                      issues, the anticipated costs and  the  resources  of
                      the parties and of the Tribunal;
                  (b) avoiding unnecessary formality and seeking flexibility
                      in the proceedings;
                  (c) ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties  are
                      able to participate fully in the proceedings;
                  (d)  using  any  special   expertise   of   the   Tribunal
                      effectively; and
                  (e) avoiding delay,  so  far  as  compatible  with  proper
                      consideration of the issues.
             (3) The Tribunal must seek to give  effect  to  the  overriding
             objective when it-
                  (a) exercises any power under these Rules; or
                  (b) interprets any rule or practice direction.
             (4) Parties must-
                  (a) help the Tribunal to further the overriding objective;
                      and
                  (b) co-operate with the Tribunal generally."

         Rule 4 states:
         "4.-(1) Subject to the provisions of the 2007  Act  and  any  other
             enactment, the Tribunal may regulate its own procedure.
         (2) The Tribunal may give a direction in relation to the conduct or
             disposal of proceedings at any  time,  including  a  direction
             amending, suspending or setting aside an earlier direction.
         ((3) In particular, and without restricting the general  powers  in
             paragraphs (1) and (2), the Tribunal may-
             (a) extend or shorten the time for complying  with  any  rule,
                  practice direction or direction;
             (b)  consolidate  or  hear  together  two  or  more  sets   of
                  proceedings or parts of proceedings raising common issues;


             (c) permit or require a party to amend a document;
             (d) permit or require a party or  another  person  to  provide
                  documents, information, evidence  or  submissions  to  the
                  Tribunal or a party;
             (e) provide for a particular matter to  be  dealt  with  as  a
                  preliminary issue;
             (f) hold a hearing to consider any matter,  including  a  case
                  management issue;
             (g) decide the form of any hearing;
             (h) adjourn or postpone a hearing;
             ..."



         Rule 28 provides:
         "28. If a party fails to attend a hearing the Tribunal may  proceed
             with the hearing if the Tribunal-
             (a) is satisfied that the  party  has  been  notified  of  the
                  hearing or that reasonable steps have been taken to notify
                  the party of the hearing; and
             (b) considers that it  is  in  the  interests  of  justice  to
                  proceed with the hearing."

 9. It is clear from Rule 4 of the Rules that the Tribunal did not  require
    a further application for an adjournment  in  order  to  consider  this
    issue afresh at the hearing on 8th September.  In  determining  whether
    to proceed with the appeal in the absence of the  Appellant  the  judge
    was required under Rule 28 to be satisfied  that  the  party  had  been
    notified of the hearing and where the Tribunal considers that it is  in
    the interests of justice to proceed with  the  hearing.   There  is  no
    dispute in this case that the Appellant and the Sponsor were  aware  of
    the hearing.  I accept Mr Kandola's submission that  the  consideration
    at paragraphs 12 to 17  indicates  that  the  judge  did  consider  the
    background to the application for an adjournment. Whilst not  expressly
    referred to, I accept that it is clear that the judge decided that  was
    in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing.

10. No explanation was given by or on behalf of the Appellant as to why the
    application for an adjournment was only made  on  5th  September  given
    that the notice of hearing had been issued  on  18th  August.  Although
    that application was refused on 7th September  it  was  served  on  the
    Appellant's solicitors.   In  the  absence  of  confirmation  that  the
    hearing had been adjourned the Appellant and his  representatives  were
    not entitled to assume  that  it  was  so  adjourned  and  should  have
    attended the hearing if  they  wished  renew  the  application  for  an
    adjournment.  Again no explanation  was  given  for  their  failure  to
    attend and this too is noted by the judge.   The  judge  further  noted
    that no other witnesses attended the hearing and  that  no  explanation
    had been given for their non-attendance.

11. The judge also noted that it had not been explained why the Sponsor was
    unable to return a few days earlier to the UK in order  to  attend  the
    hearing.  The emails sent to the  Tribunal  with  the  application  for
    adjournment dated 5th September 2015 show an email to the Sponsor  from
    Ryanair dated 2nd September  2016  confirming  her  reservation  for  a
    flight on 12th September 2016.  This is consistent with Mr  Ojukotola's
    submission that the Sponsor only booked a one way ticket on 7th August.
     She appears to have booked a return trip on 2nd  September.   At  this
    stage she would have been aware of the  hearing  date  which  had  been
    notified on 18th August.  The judge noted that it was asserted that the
    Sponsor was unable to attend the hearing as she travelled  to  Portugal
    for an emergency matter.  However the judge noted  that  the  Appellant
    had not explained the nature of the  emergency  that  required  her  to
    travel to Portugal.  The judge was entitled to take  this  matter  into
    account also.

12. In my view the judge took into account all relevant matters in deciding
    whether to proceed in the absence of the Appellant and made a  decision
    open to him on the basis of that evidence. The judge clearly  exercised
    his discretion to proceed with  the  hearing  in  the  absence  of  the
    Appellant or his representative.  On the basis of the  evidence  before
    him this was a decision which the judge was entitled to reach.

13. I note the guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in the case of  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC) where the Tribunal gave
    the following guidance as summarised in the head note:

         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects; these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude,
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness: Was there any depravation of the affected  parties  to  a
         fair hearing?  See SH (Afghanistan) v  Secretary  of  State  [2011]
         EWCA Civ 1284."

14. In this case I am satisfied  that  the  judge  took  into  account  all
    material considerations and made a decision to proceed with the hearing
    in the absence of the Appellant which was open to him on the  basis  of
    the evidence before him.

15. In these circumstances there is no unfairness and no material error  in
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not contain any  material
error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 10th July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 10th July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

