

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal nos: OA/06696/2014, OA/06691/2014,
       OA/06698/2014 & OA/06704/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on    4 May and 3 August 2016         |       On  12 August 2016            |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                        LIBAAN Mohd. Awil & 3 others
                                                                  appellants
                                     and

                                   NAIROBI

                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellant:  Priya Solanki (counsel instructed by Wilson LLP)
For the respondent: Mr Keith Norton


                           DETERMINATION & REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the s, against the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Owusu Abebrese), sitting at Taylor House on  6  January
    2015, to  refugee family reunion  appeals by a citizen of Somalia  [the
    father], born 21 November 1976, and his three children. The refugee  in
    question is the children's mother [the sponsor], and before turning  to
    the issues, I need to say something about the family history.

 2. History   The sponsor and the father  were  married  in  a  traditional
    shari'a ceremony in Somalia in 2000 or earlier: they went  on  to  have
    three children, the other appellants,, a daughter Fadumo born 4 October
    2001, and two sons, Abdifataah, born 9 November 2002,  and  Abdirashid,
    born 17 May 2004. The events crucial to this case took place in 2005.

 3. On the evidence before the judge, the father pronounced  talaq  against
    the sponsor in March 2005. Then she left Somalia at  the  end  of  May,
    leaving the children with their father, and arriving at the end of June
    in Addis Ababa. There in July she married another Somali, Abdikadir Ali
    Abdi [the second husband], who had asylum in this country. As a  result
    of that she was able to apply for a visa in  August  to  come  to  this
    country as his dependant, which she did in October. However,  meanwhile
    the father had gone to Ethiopia himself, leaving the children with  his
    mother,  arriving  on  1  September,  according  to  his  current  visa
    application form. There he and the sponsor  got  back  together  again,
    resulting in the birth to her, in this country, of a fourth child on 26
    June 2006, another son, called Mahad, who has leave to remain  here  as
    her dependant. The father returned to Somalia, and he and the  children
    lived in various places with his mother till 2010, when they  left  for
    Kenya.

 4. After making an unsuccessful asylum application  in  a  false  name  in
    2006, the sponsor was refused further leave to  remain  as  her  second
    husband's dependant in 2008, and, after re-applying in her real name in
    2009, finally  granted asylum, as a member of the Midgan minority clan,
    in 2012. At her asylum interview she made it clear that her marriage to
    her second husband had been a ruse to get into  this  country,  with  a
    view to bringing the children and their father here too.  She  said  in
    the statement she made for the first-tier  appeal  (17  December  2014,
    paragraph 13) that the talaq  had been rescinded in 2005, when she  and
    the father got  back together again. They had got back in touch through
    a friend in 2010, by which time the father and  the  children  were  in
    Kenya, and she went to visit them there from August  to  October  2014.
    Meanwhile they had made applications for family reunion with her  here,
    which were all refused on 29 April 2014,  under  the  provisions  which
    follow.

 5. Decision under appeal  The operative provision in the father's case  is
    paragraph 352A of  the  Rules.  The  requirements  on  which  his  visa
    application was refused were these:

        (i)  the applicant is married to ... a person who has been granted
        refugee status; and
        ...
        (iv)        each of the parties intends to live permanently with
        the other as his or her spouse ... and the marriage is subsisting;

    The children's applications were refused  under  paragraph  352D  (iv),
    which requires an applicant who  is  the  child  under  18  of  someone
    granted asylum in this country to show that he
             ... was part of the family unit of the person  granted  asylum
             at the time that the person granted asylum left the country  of
             his habitual residence in order to seek asylum

 6. Issues    From what the judge said at paragraph 11  about  the  use  of
    phone cards and the lack of other communication between the father  and
    the sponsor after 2010, it seems, though he did not  make  himself  too
    clear about this, that he intended to dismiss the father's appeal under
    paragraph 352A (iv). However, Mr Norton did not  seek  to  support  his
    decision on that ground. On (i), while the judge was prepared to accept
    as a matter of fact that the talaq  had been rescinded, he did not make
    any finding as  to  when  that  had  happened,  beyond  (see  his  long
    paragraph 10, last section) that  it  had  been  in  2005.  (The  entry
    clearance officer had been under the misapprehension, encouraged by the
    terms of the solicitors' covering letter to the applications - see  the
    first section of that paragraph - that it had been in 2010).

 7. Nor did the judge consider what the operative law was, or its effect on
    the rescission (revocation might  be  a  better  word)  of  the  talaq.
    Clearly until the sponsor came to this country and was recognized as  a
    refugee, she was still domiciled in Somalia; and the father never  lost
    his domicile of origin there, having never intended to settle in Kenya.
    So in 2005, their personal marriage law, under which  the  validity  of
    the revocation of the talaq  had  to  be  decided,  was  the  customary
    shari'a-based marriage law of Somalia.

 8. This was why, when the case first  came  before  me  on  7  January,  I
    directed that this question should  be  dealt  with  as  a  preliminary
    issue, and gave encouragement for public funding to be granted to cover
    the cost of an expert report. I am glad  to  say  this  was  eventually
    done, and the report produced, by Mrs  Maimuna  Mohamud:  of  course  I
    admit it under r. 15 (2A)  of  the  Procedure  Rules,  since  it  makes
    possible the resolution of a question  of  foreign  law,  which  should
    have, but did not occur to the judge..

 9. Both sides accepted Mrs Mohamud's conclusions, so there is no  need  to
    say more about her qualifications; but I regard her report as  a  model
    of its kind. She concisely and clearly sets out the operative  law  and
    its sources, and gives her opinion on two alternative chronologies  for
    the talaq and its revocation, and  their  effect  on  the  revocation's
    validity. That will result in what I hope  will  be  an  equally  short
    clear treatment of the husband's marriage  appeal,  following  which  I
    shall  turn  to  the  position  of  the  children,  which  raises  more
    complicated issues of fact.

10. Father's appeal Mrs Mohamud gives her opinion  as  follows:  the  talaq
    pronounced in 2005 would be considered a formal divorce  under  shari'a
    law as practised in Somalia. A talaq  involves a three-month  'cooling-
    off period' (my expression: to cover the possibility of the wife having
    been pregnant by her husband when talaq  is pronounced): this period is
    known as iddah. During iddah, the man may simply take  back  his  wife,
    declaring that he is doing so, and then there is no need for  a  formal
    renewal of the marriage contract. However, once iddah has  passed,  the
    talaq  becomes final, and the man must renew the marriage formally in a
    ceremony conducted by a  religious  or  community  figure  and  in  the
    presence of witnesses.

11. Mrs Mohamud gave her opinion on  a  number  of  questions:  the  'first
    account' she refers to is the one before the judge, which had  remained
    essentially the same between the appellant's first  (asylum)  statement
    (26 May 2009 [RB 54 - 61]) and her 2014 statement before the  judge.  I
    have given the chronology at 3. The effect, on Mrs Mohamud's  evidence,
    is that the talaq pronounced in  March  2005  became  final,  following
    iddah, by June; so her marriage to her second husband  in  Ethiopia  in
    July was valid. As for the father's declaration of revocation there  in
    September, that could have had no effect in any case after the  end  of
    iddah, (even together with the intercourse which led to  the  birth  of
    Mahad the following June), without  a  ceremony  before  witnesses,  of
    which there is no evidence.

12. What is more, as Mrs Mohamud also makes clear, though it is in any case
    common knowledge, polyandry is forbidden for women in shari'a  law;  so
    the sponsor's valid marriage to  her  second  husband  meant  that  her
    marriage to the father could not be revived in  any  case,  unless  and
    until her second marriage was validly dissolved,  which  did  not  take
    place till decree absolute was given, in proceedings in  this  country,
    on 11 May 2010; and there is no evidence of any re-marriage after that.
    It follows that, on the account which was before  the  judge,  and  the
    agreed expert evidence of the relevant law, there is no basis on  which
    the father could have succeeded on his  appeal  against  refusal  of  a
    family reunion visa under paragraph 352A.

13. There was a second account, dealt with by Mrs Mohamud, and  before  her
    by way of a draft statement from the sponsor  of  31  March  2016  (now
    signed 22 April), produced in case the decision on the father's  appeal
    came to be re-made on the facts. On the basis of that  second  account,
    giving a delay of only two months between the talaq and its revocation,
    Mrs Mohamud makes clear, in accordance with the rules already set  out,
    that the revocation would have been valid, and the second  marriage  of
    no effect.

14. If I had come to the point of deciding whether  or  not  to  admit  the
    sponsor's 2016 statement (and a further one by the father, of the  same
    date), then I should have noted the terms of r. 15 (2A) (b):

       When considering whether to admit evidence that was  not  before  the
       First-tier Tribunal, the Upper Tribunal must have regard  to  whether
       there has been unreasonable delay in producing the evidence.

15. Of course the father is in Nairobi; but he  was  able  to  approve  his
    statement within a very short period (between the sponsor's  draft  and
    the signed version), and it contains no explanation  of  how  he  could
    have revoked the talaq only two months after it was pronounced in March
    2005, when he himself did not join the sponsor in Ethiopia  (and  beget
    Mahad) till September.  Nor  is  there  any  such  explanation  in  the
    sponsor's statement.

16. The purpose of admitting these statements is said to  be  clarification
    of the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, now well  over  a  year
    ago; but nothing was said about  any  need  for  clarification  on  the
    application for permission, or the renewed  application  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal; or indeed till  nearly  four  months  after  I  had  given  a
    direction for expert evidence on 7 January. I do  not  regard  them  as
    'clarification', so far as the time-scale is concerned, for the reasons
    just given; and I regard the delay in producing them  as  unreasonable.
    For those reasons, I should have declined to admit the 2016 statements.

17. It follows from what I have said at 10 - 12 that  the  father's  appeal
    against the decision under paragraph 352A cannot  succeed.  Unless  the
    children are admitted, he will  clearly  have  no  arguable  article  8
    appeal; but, if they are, he may have one,  since  the  judge  was  not
    dealing with that situation. It follows that the father's appeal is not
    dismissed, but remains alive for that purpose only till the  children's
    appeals are finally decided. So far as the father's appeal, though  not
    the children's, is concerned, it will  be  necessary  to  consider  the
    public interest in not admitting persons guilty  of  fraud,  especially
    when committed for immigration purposes.


18. Children's appeals            The basis on which  the  judge  dismissed
    these (at paragraph 10 p 8) was that "The fact that she  had  left  the
    appellants in 2005 [meant] she was no longer  a  part  of  that  family
    unit": he also noted that she had done so for the fraudulent purpose of
    going to marry another man to get into this  country.  While  at  first
    sight there may seem to be obvious  common-sense  reasons  for  such  a
    conclusion, paragraph 352D is clearly looking back at a time before the
    sponsor in a given case left the children to seek asylum.

19. In this context, Miss Solanki referred  me  to  BM  &  AL  (352D  (iv);
    meaning of 'family unit') Colombia [2007] UKAIT 55. The judicial  head-
    note is as follows:

       What is a 'family unit' ... is a question of fact. It is not  limited
       to children who lived in the same household as the  refugee.  But  if
       the child belonged to another family  unit  in  the  country  of  the
       refugee's habitual residence, it will be hard to establish  that  the
       child was then part  of  two  different  'family  units'  and  should
       properly be separated from the 'family  unit'  that  remains  in  the
       country of origin.

    In BM & AL, the children  in  question  had  always  lived  with  their
    mothers and maternal grandparents; it was held that  a  family  reunion
    application by their father was rightly refused. As the Tribunal noted,
    it was a question of fact in every  case:  they  made  the  distinction
    between (paragraph 27) a situation where the family had  separated  for
    reasons associated with the refugee sponsor's claim of persecution; and
    (at 28) one where it was the result of social choice by the parties.

20. Mr Norton did his level best to persuade me that, on the facts of  this
    case, it was clear beyond doubt that, after the sponsor  left  Somalia,
    the children had come to form part of another family  unit,  consisting
    in them, their father and their paternal grandmother. If  the  question
    were simply about who lived in the same  household  at  a  given  time,
    there might be much to be said for that point; but, as made clear in BM
    & AL, that is not the only question: the reason for the separation  has
    to be considered.

21. So far as the judge did that in this  case,  it  was  only  by  way  of
    expressing disapproval of the fraud practised by the  sponsor  and  the
    father, in which he was no doubt justified. The trouble with  that,  in
    terms of the children's case, is that the more  fraudulent  the  second
    marriage, the less it represented a social choice, and the more it  was
    likely to have to do with the sponsor (and the father's) plan  for  her
    to get out of Somalia, for whatever reason, and establish what might be
    regarded as a bridge-head for the family in this country.

22. Again Mr Norton did his best to persuade me  that  the  requirement  in
    paragraph 352D (iv) that the children should  have  been  part  of  the
    sponsor's family unit at the time  she  "...left  the  country  of  her
    habitual  residence  in  order  to  seek  asylum"  should  be  strictly
    interpreted. He pointed out that, when the  sponsor  left  Somalia  for
    Ethiopia, it was to contract a fraudulent marriage  there;  then,  when
    she got a visa to come here in 2006 as her second husband's  wife,  and
    applied to renew it in 2008, immigration on that basis, and not seeking
    asylum (other than by way of the false claim  in  2006),  remained  her
    purpose till she  finally  did  claim  under  her  real  name  in  2009
    (eventually dealt with in 2012).





23. While there might be a good deal to  be  said  for  that  on  a  strict
    construction basis, the Immigration Rules are not statutes, and  should
    not be read as if they were. Paragraph 352D is dealing exclusively with
    sponsors who have been recognized as refugees, and is concerned with re-
    uniting  them  with  the  families  they  have  left  behind  on  their
    departure. While on the evidence before  the  judge  this  sponsor  had
    parted from her children, as well as from her husband, in  March  2005,
    some time before she left  Somalia  in  May,  it  might  be  considered
    implicit in what the judge said about  the  parents'  fraud  that  this
    might be considered, not as a real social choice, but  as  a  stratagem
    designed to achieve reunion under more favourable conditions  here,  at
    the price of what was no doubt hoped would be a temporary separation.

24. While that  stratagem  was  put  in  hand  by  means  of  a  completely
    fraudulent  marriage,  and  consequently  similar  visa  and  extension
    applications, the object may well be considered as achieving settlement
    here by any means possible. Eventually, as it turned out,  the  sponsor
    was recognized as a refugee: while  this  may  have  been  largely  the
    result of her minority clan membership, the  decision  did  acknowledge
    that she had a well-founded fear of persecution in Somalia.

25. For the reasons I have given, it did not seem to me  that  the  judge's
    decision must as a matter of law inevitably be upheld, for the  reasons
    he gave, on  the  basis  that  the  sponsor  could  not  reasonably  be
    described as leaving Somalia 'in order to claim asylum' when  she  left
    for Ethiopia in 2005. Since the judge's investigations into the reasons
    for her leaving her family behind did not go beyond the  accepted  fact
    of the fraud, the questions of

     a)     whether these children were part of the sponsor's  family  unit
        at the time she left Somalia (so far as that may be in issue); and

     b)      whether when she did so it was 'in order to claim asylum'

    required further  consideration,  which  eventually  took  place  on  3
    August.

RE-HEARING

26. The father             For the  reasons  already  given,  the  father's
    appeal against the judge's  decision  under  paragraph  352A  has  been
    dismissed. On the other hand, when it  came  to  3  August,  Mr  Norton
    helpfully conceded that, if the children's appeals were to be  allowed,
    either under the Rules or under article 8, then the father's article  8
    appeal must realistically be allowed too, for their sakes.

27. The children    In their case, Mr Norton did not suggest that they  had
    not formed part of the sponsor's family  unit  at  the  time  she  left
    Somalia in 2005. The result is that the only question under  the  Rules
    is whether she did so 'in order  to  claim  asylum'.  For  the  reasons
    already given, leaving the country of one's habitual residence in order
    to get into another by some other means  may  not  necessarily  exclude
    that purpose; but the history of each case has to be looked at  on  its
    own facts.


28. It is perfectly possible to imagine a case where necessity  had  forced
    someone to get into their chosen country of refuge by  some  stratagem,
    in order to make their claim there. Whatever might be thought  of  such
    conduct from  the  point  of  view  of  public  policy,  it  could  not
    reasonably be suggested that an asylum-seeker who had left her  country
    by stowing away in a ship  or  aircraft,  with  a  view  to  presenting
    herself to the authorities on  arrival,  had  done  so  for  any  other
    purpose than to claim asylum.

29. On the other hand, it is equally possible to imagine a different  case,
    where someone had remained several years in their destination  country,
    on some quite different basis, and only made a claim then,  whether  or
    not because of events which had occurred sur place. In that case,  they
    could not be said to have left their own  country  in  order  to  claim
    asylum. There is  a  spectrum  of  possible  cases  between  those  two
    extremes, and the question is where this sponsor's came on it.

30. The respondent has recognized, by granting the sponsor asylum in  2012,
    that she had a well-founded fear of persecution then; since  the  grant
    was apparently based on her tribal  origin,  there  is  nothing  to  be
    gained by re-opening the question of whether or not she did so in 2005.
    Clearly her intention in leaving Somalia then was,  by  fair  means  or
    foul (but she chose foul) to gain a long-term refuge  for  herself  and
    her family, meaning these appellants. Does that mean she left 'in order
    to claim asylum'?

31. What the sponsor actually did was to travel to Ethiopia, and  there  go
    through a marriage of convenience, on the basis of which she  was  able
    to get into this country, not on the strength of whatever  well-founded
    fear of persecution  she  had  herself,  but  through  a  wholly  false
    stratagem. If she had nevertheless claimed asylum in good faith on,  or
    even soon after her arrival, then it might have been possible to regard
    that as all part of her purpose in leaving Somalia in 2005; but she did
    not do so. Instead she made a false asylum claim here in 2006,  and  an
    application for  further  leave  to  remain  as  her  second  husband's
    dependant in 2008. Only after both of these had failed, and she had had
    advice from her present solicitors, did she make her 2009 claim.

32. While that claim has been recognized as well-founded, I do not think it
    can reasonably be regarded as part of the sponsor's purpose in  leaving
    Somalia in 2005. Whatever reasons she has given,  and  whatever  regret
    she may have expressed for her conduct since then, there simply was not
    the nexus between her 2005 departure and her  2009  claim  required  to
    satisfy  paragraph  352D  (iv)  of  the  Rules.  It  follows  that  the
    children's appeals must also be dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

      LAW

33. Discussion             It is now perfectly clear that article 8 appeals
    must be considered in the light of the appellants' position  under  the
    Rules which represent  the  norm  in  a  case  of  the  relevant  kind.
    Sometimes the Rules will represent a complete code, as  in  deportation
    cases, where 'exceptional and compelling  circumstances'  are  required
    for a claim under article 8 to succeed outside them: see  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192. The rationale given there is that the deportation
    Rules themselves make varying  degrees  of  allowance  for  exceptional
    cases.

34. Miss Solanki relied on the absence of any exceptions to  the  terms  of
    paragraph 352D. She also referred me to SS (Congo) & others [2015] EWCA
    Civ 387, and in particular to the passages which follow:  SS   involved
    the leave to enter section of the new Rules that came out in July 2012,
    and  in  particular  their  minimum  income  requirements  for  someone
    sponsoring a family member overseas.

       29.    It is clear, therefore, that it  cannot  be  maintained  as  a
             general proposition that LTR or  LTE  outside  the  Immigration
             Rules should only be granted in exceptional cases. However,  in
             certain specific contexts, a proper application  of  Article  8
             may itself make it clear that the legal test for grant  of  LTR
             or  LTE  outside  the  Rules  should  indeed  be  a   test   of
             exceptionality. This has now been identified to be the case, on
             the basis of the constant jurisprudence of the ECtHR itself, in
             relation to applications for LTR outside the Rules on the basis
             of family life (where no children are involved) established  in
             the United Kingdom at a time when the presence of one or  other
             of the partners was known to be precarious ...

       40.    ... The LTE Rules therefore  maintain,  in  general  terms,  a
             reasonable relationship with the requirements of Article  8  in
             the ordinary run of cases.  However,  it  remains  possible  to
             imagine cases where the individual interests at stake are of  a
             particularly pressing nature so that a good claim for  LTE  can
             be established outside the Rules. In our view, the  appropriate
             general formulation for this category is that such  cases  will
             arise where an applicant  for  LTE  can  show  that  compelling
             circumstances exist  (which  are  not  sufficiently  recognised
             under the new Rules) to require the grant of such leave.

35. Mr Norton on the other hand referred me to the very recent decision  in
    ZAT & others  (Syria) [2016] EWCA  Civ  810.  this  was  about  whether
    unaccompanied minor asylum-seekers in  the  notorious  Calais  'jungle'
    should be admitted to join their older siblings in this country without
    being required first to make their own asylum  claims  in  France.  The
    Court of Appeal (per Beatson LJ) discussed a previous  decision,  given
    by Laws LJ, in R (CK (Afghanistan) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department [2016] EWCA  Civ  166,  where  he  had  held  that  "...  an
    especially  compelling  case  under  Article  8  would   have   to   be
    demonstrated to deny removal of the affected person following a  Dublin
    II decision".

36. The Court of Appeal noted the terms of the decision under appeal, where
    it had been acknowledged that the Dublin Regulations formed a

       ... "material consideration of undeniable potency", that  vindication
       of an Article 8 human rights challenge "will  require  a  strong  and
       persuasive case", that judges will not lightly find  that  Article  8
       "operates in a manner  which  permits  circumvention  of  the  Dublin
       procedures and mechanisms".

    However, they  re-affirmed,  for  the  Dublin  III  r�gime,  Laws  LJ's
    formulation, and his rationale for it, to the effect that

       "if it were seen as establishing little more than a presumption as to
       which State should deal  with  which  claim,  its  purpose  would  be
       critically undermined"


37.  Conclusions      How  much  real  difference  there  may  be   between
    'compelling circumstances' and 'an especially compelling case' might be
    a matter for speculation, though clearly the latter required  something
    more than 'a strong and persuasive case'. SS  contains  very  extensive
    discussion of the rationale behind the formula reached at paragraph  40
    (see above); however, it was not the subject of any argument before me,
    except for a reference by Miss Solanki to paragraph 36, where the Court
    of Appeal drew the distinction between the  'legitimate'  establishment
    of a family life  overseas,  and  someone  already  here  doing  so  in
    'precarious' circumstances.

38. The Court themselves repeated at paragraph 47 what had been said in  MF
    (Nigeria) about the sterility of  the  exercise  involved  in  deciding
    whether a particular part of the Rules was a 'complete  code'  or  not.
    They went on to say this:

       48.    What does matter, however - whether  one  is  dealing  with  a
             section of the Rules which constitutes a "complete code" (as in
             MF (Nigeria)) or with a section of the Rules  which  is  not  a
             "complete code" (as in Nagre and the present appeals) -  is  to
             identify, for the purposes of application  of  Article  8,  the
             degree of weight to be attached to  the  expression  of  public
             policy in the substantive part of the Rules in  the  particular
             context in question ..., as well as the other factors  relevant
             to the Article 8 balancing exercise in the particular case ...

39. The obligation recognized in paragraph 352D is not so much  a  question
    of public policy, as of giving effect to an  international  obligation,
    in this case the one set out in recommendation B ('the principle of the
    unity of the family') of the 1951 Geneva Conference which  adopted  the
    Refugee Convention. This is no doubt why it is so wide  in  its  terms,
    compared to the strict funding  requirements  of  the  leave  to  enter
    Rules, dealt with in MM &  others  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985  and  further
    discussed in SS. This country  agreed  to  respect  that  principle  by
    taking

       ... the necessary measures for the protection of the refugee's family
       especially with a view to:

       (1)    Ensuring that the unity of the refugee's family is maintained
             particularly in cases where the head of the family has
             fulfilled the necessary conditions for admission to a
             particular country,
       (2)    The protection of refugees who are minors, in particular
             unaccompanied children and girls, with special reference to
             guardianship and adoption.

40. The provision made in 352D maintains aim (1) by allowing family reunion
    for those who have 'legitimate' families (see 37) overseas,  whom  they
    have had to leave behind when they left their own countries in order to
    seek asylum.  It  does  not  extend  that  to  people  who,  like  this
    appellant, have left their families  behind  while  they  try,  for  an
    extended period, to secure their position in this country by any  means
    open to them, legitimate or not; and it does not seem to me that it was
    required to do so.

41. It might be argued that the very wide terms of 352D  provide  no  basis
    for excluding any refugee from achieving family reunion through article
    8; and it would be  wrong  to  deal  with  its  effect  on  the  strict
    principle of inclusio unius,  exclusio  alterius.  However,  where  the
    Rules set out a defined basis for allowing  family  reunion,  which  is
    entirely inclusionary as far as it goes, rather than  being  set  about
    with exclusions and qualifications, like the current general  leave  to
    enter Rules, then it would be possible to  say  that  the  inclusionary
    rule should  not  be  extended  even  further  than  it  goes,  without
    something more  than  "compelling  circumstances  ...  (which  are  not
    sufficiently recognised under the new Rules)"  [see  SS  paragraph  40,
    above]. However, I shall consider the facts before  me  on  this  basis
    first of all, before turning, if necessary, to the question of  whether
    an 'especially compelling case' (see ZAT) is made out. Only if  I  took
    the view that the appeals succeeded on the SS test, but would  fail  on
    the one in ZAT, should I need to resolve this question of law.

42. The well-known questions posed in Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 are as follows:

      (1) Will the proposed removal be an interference by a public authority
      with the exercise of the applicant's right to respect for his  private
      or (as the case may be) family life?
      (2) If so, will such interference have consequences of such gravity as
      potentially to engage the operation of article 8?
      (3) If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?
      (4) If so, is such interference necessary in a democratic  society  in
      the interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-
      being of the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
      protection of health or morals, or for the protection  of  the  rights
      and freedoms of others?
      (5) If so, is such interference proportionate to the legitimate public
      end sought to be achieved?

43. As usual in cases involving children of these ages, questions  (1)  and
    (2) must be answered yes. (3) must get the same answer, on my  view  of
    the effect of the  Rules.  Since  the  principle  of  family  unity  is
    adequately recognized by their terms,  and  states  are  unquestionably
    entitled to pursue the legitimate purpose of  immigration  control,  so
    must (4). As is  almost  always  the  case,  the  only  question  which
    requires resolution on full consideration of the facts is (5).

44. That has to be done taking  full  account  of  the  following  relevant
    provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:

       117B Article 8: public  interest  considerations  applicable  in  all
       cases
       (1) The maintenance of effective  immigration  controls  is  in  the
          public interest.
       (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
          of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
          seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom
          are able to speak English, because persons who can speak English-
           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.
       (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in the interests
          of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that persons who
          seek to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
          independent, because such persons-
           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and
           (b) are better able to integrate into society.









          FACTS

45. I have given a general outline of the family history at 2 - 4. As  will
    already be clear, the main public interest considerations are those set
    out at s. 117B (1) - (3), and as to those,  none  of  the  three  older
    children speaks English: all were interviewed through  an  interpreter.
    Equally, none of them will be in a position to earn  their  own  living
    for some years to come.

46. The only seriously relevant consideration on the  appellants'  side  is
    the  best  interests  of  the  children,  not  only  Fadumo,  now   14,
    Abdifataah, 13, and Abdirashid, 12, who are appellants themselves,  but
    also Mahad, now 10. By this time it is hardly necessary to say that, in
    an immigration case,  those  interests  are  a  primary,  but  not  the
    paramount consideration. One may be sorry  for  their  father  and  the
    sponsor; but the situation in which their parents find  themselves  was
    brought about by their own fraudulent stratagem. A brief summary of how
    the family got in touch again can be seen at 4.

47. Statements              There  are  statements  from  the  three  older
    children, the material taken over the phone by Eleanor Simon, a trainee
    solicitor  with  those  representing  the  appellants,  and  the   text
    confirmed by her with the interpreter involved. In each case, there was
    a 2014 version before the judge, and there is now a 2016 update  before
    me. So far as Mahad is concerned, there  are  letters  which  he  wrote
    himself at the same times: they read like  a  very  much  more  genuine
    expression of his views than is usual in cases of this kind.

48. Reports   There is also a 2014 report by  Hannah  Prince,  and  a  2016
    update, by Jasmine Smith, both independent social  workers.  Both  have
    several years' relevant social work experience with  children  in  this
    country; though neither claims any particular inter-country  expertise,
    Miss Smith lists a number of sources relevant to considerations of that
    kind. Again, both talked to the sponsor and to Mahad;  but  while  both
    spoke to the father, only Miss Smith spoke, on the phone of course,  to
    all four  appellants.  In  the  circumstances,  her  up-to-date  report
    carries a good deal more weight than the previous  one,  and  only  her
    conclusions need be considered.

49. Miss Smith's conclusions as to the children's best interests  lying  in
    coming to this country with their father appear at paragraph 4.17,  and
    I shall summarize them under the sub-paragraph headings there.  I  need
    not deal with 4.18, since it is conceded that, if they are  allowed  to
    come, their father must come too. Obviously Miss Smith takes her  facts
    from what the appellants have told her, and  also  from  Miss  Prince's
    report; but Mr Norton did not challenge the facts relied on, as opposed
    to the conclusions drawn.

     1)     is perhaps intended as a conclusion, though it comes before the
        individual observations which might support it.

     2) The background to this is given at 4.5.1: the  children  live  with
        their father in a shared building in Eastleigh (a  well-known  low-
        income area of Nairobi). They have one room, with a shared bathroom
        for the whole  building:  the  sponsor  pays  the  rent.  "...  the
        sanitary conditions are reported  as  very  poor.  There  are  many
        mosquitoes and the whole family has suffered from malaria. They  do
        not have immigration status in Kenya and are living there illegally
        ... [their paternal grandmother] has been deported back to Somalia.
        Miss Prince had  called  these  conditions,  as  described  by  the
        sponsor, 'dreadful'; and mentioned  that  children  born  in  Kenya
        regarded them as outsiders. Miss Smith  thought  the  children  had
        gone back, if anything, since then, in terms of mixing with others.

     3) The children did not even speak to Miss Smith of leaving the family
        house: "... they appear to  be  reclusive,  which  may  pose  grave
        implications to their mental wellbeing. It is all  too  common  for
        children who live in Somalia  or  countries  facing  civil  war  to
        suffer post-traumatic stress disorder." Miss Smith does not explain
        what specific events in these children's history could lead to such
        a diagnosis.

     4) "In my experience of working with mental health adolescent  asylum-
        seekers, the USA, UK and Europe is [sic] often the only  hope  many
        of  these  children  have  to  enable  them  to  make  a  healthier
        transition  to  adulthood.  These  children  are  by  no  means  an
        exception and with reference to  Article  26  they  should  not  be
        discriminated against." Miss Smith does not say  which  article  26
        she is referring to, or who are the comparators she  has  in  mind:
        article 26 of the UN Convention on the Rights of the  Child,  which
        she lists under her references at 1.5 (u)  contains  nothing  about
        discrimination.  Nor  does  she   explain   the   basis   for   her
        qualifications  to  make  a  telephone  diagnosis  of   psychiatric
        disorder.

     5) Without asylum in Kenya, the children's residence there is  'simply
        a means of survival': even if their father were now  to  apply  for
        asylum, he would most likely be out of time under the relevant law.

     6) The sponsor had told Miss Prince that the children were not 'street-
        wise'; if their father were to be deported, "it is unimaginable  to
        think what the future for these children would hold". She  goes  on
        "Emphasis must be given to Fadumo as a female, owing to Kenya being
        a country where gender division is explicit"; but does not  explain
        what she means  by  this  piece  of  jargon,  till  the  next  sub-
        paragraph.

     7) "Sexual abuse is a major gender issue affecting  girl  children  in
        Kenya ... child brides are common ... whereby they are  exposed  to
        trauma  from   inappropriate   sexual   experiences.   When   these
        relationships end, the child often ends up destitute on the streets
        or earning income as a sex worker as a means of survival."

     8) "Charities such as Save the Children are committed to strengthening
        child protection systems [but] it is hugely  unlikely  that  [these
        children] will be included in such measures, if they  are  not  yet
        recognised as citizens ...".

     9) The children have never been to school, cannot read and  write,  or
        understand any of the languages of Kenya: if they  had  mixed  with
        other children, or been to school, then they would most likely have
        been able to speak Swahili, or even English.

    10) Speaking a second language is very good for children.

    11) Education is a much wider concept,  and  it  is  a  pity  that  the
        children have no chance of mixing with others and getting the usual
        social skills.




50. The children's views   Fadumo says she  and  her  father  and  brothers
    speak very often to her mother and Mahad on  the  phone  (a  number  of
    cards are included in the bundle, and all the  children  give  what  is
    presumably their father's Kenyan mobile number). Mahad  tells  her  all
    about school, and life in this country; her mother and  she  have  more
    emotional conversations, and, as the only girl in the family, she would
    like  to  talk  more  to  her  about  growing  up.  Fadumo  misses  her
    grandmother very much, and is afraid of what would happen if her father
    were detained and sent back to Somalia. Meanwhile he looks  after  them
    well on a practical level, including cooking nice food. She badly wants
    for them all to be able to join her mother in this country.

51. Abdirashid says their father teaches them to write Somali and do maths;
    but he wishes he could go to school. He talks to his mother  and  Mahad
    about coming here; but sometimes that makes him sad and cry. Mahad  has
    told him all about London and going to school here. He too  misses  his
    mother and grandmother. He says the children only  go  out  with  their
    father, and are afraid of being  caught  by  the  police  and  sent  to
    Somalia, like their grandmother. Abdifataah says  very  much  the  same
    things as his brother.

52. Mahad's own letter is worth giving in full:

       I miss my dad and my family. I've only seen them once. I wish I could
       see them again walking and talking in the house.  That  would  fulfil
       both my hopes and dreams. I had so much fun with my family in  Kenya.
       I wish I could have that fun with them everyday of my life. I  always
       got green with envy everytime I saw a person or my friends with a dad
       or siblings. If I had mine I would feel a whole lot better. If my dad
       was here he could possibly help me with my school and my homework and
       when celebrating festivals like  Eid-al-fitr  and  Ramadan  he  could
       [take] me and my siblings with my  mum  to  a  cousin's  house  or  a
       carnival. If they were all here  we  could  have  fun,  go  shopping,
       celebrate and dad could even bring us to school. If dad was  here  in
       England my mum could stay at home and dad could go to work  and  earn
       money for the family. Mum could be a bit calmer and not  be  stressed
       from working and she could prepare food quicker and without having to
       buy it as fast food.

      CONCLUSIONS

53. It is common knowledge that there is a very large Somali  community  in
    Nairobi, especially in Eastleigh.  Many  have  no  official  status  in
    Kenya: the effects are described by the father at paragraph 16  of  his
    2014 statement, before the judge. The  police  regularly  come  to  the
    house and demand money, which he has to pay: this  is  his  neighbours'
    common experience too. He says "We pay rent to live in a prison".

54. It is quite clear from Abdirashid's statement however that the children
    are not confined to the house all the time, as Miss Prince was inclined
    to suggest: no doubt their father is  afraid,  for  what  may  be  good
    reason, to let them go out by themselves, but they do go out with  him.
    They are learning from him  to  write  Somali  (which  uses  the  Roman
    alphabet) and to do some maths; but they are unable to learn Swahili or
    English, which they would need to mix outside the Somali community,  or
    to have any of the other advantages of going to school. Their situation
    in Kenya can go on as it is, so long as their father is  free  to  look
    after them; but without much hope of improvement.

55. The children, as might be expected, say little  or  nothing  about  the
    physical conditions of their  life:  probably  those  did  shock  their
    mother, after a number of years in this country; but this is  the  sort
    of thing children can adapt to. What  they  obviously  really  miss  is
    being together as a family, as they were for a limited time during  the
    sponsor's 2014 visit. This is what Mahad means by 'walking and  talking
    in the house', for which talking on the  phone  cannot  be  a  complete
    substitute: some of his phrases, where he talks  about  fulfilling  his
    hopes and dreams, and about 'siblings', don't sound like those of a ten-
    year old boy; but the letter as a whole rings true.

56. I see no reason to be concerned about  any  of  the  children's  mental
    health, for the reasons I have given in discussing Miss Smith's report.
    As for their security, including any particular concerns about  Fadumo,
    I see no reason for concern either, so long as their father  is  there.
    He does not say how their grandmother came to be sent back to  Somalia;
    but clearly, with the help of some remittances from the sponsor, he  is
    able to pay off the local police to leave the family alone.

57. Clearly the three older children badly need to go  to  school,  and  to
    have the support of their mother: Fadumo in particular needs that, as a
    girl growing up. Mahad gets those things; but he badly wants to be with
    his siblings and his father. What he says about his father helping  him
    with school-work is hardly realistic, but  the  feeling  behind  it  is
    obvious and understandable. It is quite clear  that,  while  the  three
    older children can manage as they are for the time being, they would be
    very much happier if they could join their mother  and  Mahad  in  this
    country.

58. The sponsor's story of how she got back in touch  with  her  family  is
    clearly also true, and rather affecting. If I could simply wave a magic
    wand, and give her and the children the happy ending they so much want,
    there would be every temptation to do so; but this is a judgment, not a
    fairy-tale, and I need to consider the public interest too. Looking  at
    the considerations under s.117B:

     1) there is of course an interest, in  this  case  as  in  others,  in
        maintaining proper immigration control. Though it can at  least  be
        said for these appellants that they have applied for visas  in  the
        proper way, rather than getting themselves  into  this  country  by
        whatever means, as the sponsor did, as a result of her actions  the
        requirements of paragraph 352D of the Rules  cannot  be  satisfied;
        and there is no suggestion that those of appendix FM, especially as
        to funding, could be satisfied either.

     2) None of the appellants speaks English: no doubt it  would  be  much
        easier for the children to learn, at their  ages,  than  for  their
        father; but even they are all now beyond primary school age, and it
        would take them some time before they were able to go on  with  the
        general education they would need to take their  place  in  society
        here;

     3) None of the children has any earning  capacity,  or  would  do  for
        several years, by the time they had finished  their  education;  as
        for  their  father,  though  he   is   clearly   enterprising   and
        resourceful,  there  is  nothing  to  suggest  that  he   has   any
        qualifications or experience which would help him to get a  job  in
        this country, whatever Mahad's hopes in that direction.

59. As Mr Norton pointed out, the children are in the  same  boat  as  many
    other displaced Somalis in Kenya. While that is clearly not  at  all  a
    good place to be, even adopting the SS  test ("compelling circumstances
    ... (which are not sufficiently recognised under the new Rules)", it is
    only the fact that they have a mother who could, perhaps, call them  to
    this country which puts them  in  any  different  position  from  their
    fellow-countrymen. Once here, they would have a long way to go in terms
    of language, general education and time itself, before they could  take
    their place as self-supporting members of society. I am  not  persuaded
    that they have made their case for leave to enter under article 8.

      Appeals against first-tier decision allowed: decision re-made
      Appeals against refusal of visas dismissed



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



