
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber                                  Appeal
Number:     OA/06906/2015
                                                               OA/06908/2015
                                                               OA/06909/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 April 2018                              |On 10 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                 ABIODUN [O]
                                OLUWATOBI [O]
                                    [E O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, LAGOS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     The sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This an appeal by the appellants against a decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal issued on 22 August 2016 dismissing their appeals against  the
    respondent's decisions of 13 and 17 February 2015 refusing  them  entry
    clearance as the dependent children of their father, the sponsor.

2.    The first and second appellants are brothers born on 20 December  1996
    and 25 September 1999 respectively and the  third  appellant  is  their
    sister, born on 30 March 2002.  They are all citizens  of  Nigeria  and
    are the children of their  father,  a  British  and  Nigerian  citizen,
    living in the UK.   Their  mother  is  a  Nigerian  citizen  living  in
    Nigeria.

3.    In December 2014 the appellants applied for entry  clearance  to  join
    the sponsor in the UK under para 297 of the Rules.  Their  applications
    were refused as the respondent was not satisfied that the  sponsor  had
    had sole responsibility for them  or  that  their  natural  mother  had
    decided to relinquish custody to the sponsor.  In the light of the lack
    of detail regarding their current living circumstances in Nigeria,  the
    respondent was not satisfied that there  were  serious  and  compelling
    family or other considerations making their exclusion undesirable.   He
    also took into account a previous application which had been refused, a
    subsequent  appeal  being  dismissed  in  2012,  the  judge  not  being
    satisfied that the sponsor had sole responsibility  for  them  or  that
    their  mother  had  disappeared  from  their  lives  or  abdicated  all
    responsibility and interest in their care and welfare.

The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

4.    At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal,  the  sponsor  and  his
    second wife gave oral evidence.  His evidence is  summarised  at  [35]-
    [50] of the decision and the evidence of his wife  at  [52]-[55].   The
    judge was referred to the previous decision and to the finding that the
    sponsor did not  have  sole  responsibility  for  the  appellants.   He
    commented that at the time of that appeal the sponsor's mother had died
    and the arrangements for the children were virtually the same  as  they
    were now, attending boarding school  and  living  with  the  headmaster
    during the school holidays [76].

5.    The judge said at [77] that he did not accept the  sponsor's  evidence
    that the appellants' mother had abandoned all interest in the  children
    and had not played any part in their upbringing since  2007,  when  she
    and the sponsor separated.  He said at  [78]  that  he  approached  the
    evidence of the sponsor and his second wife with  considerable  caution
    as the sponsor in giving oral evidence was not convincing and his  very
    specific evidence that his second wife had no close family  in  Nigeria
    was not true, given that she had a disabled sister living in Lagos.  He
    had said that she spent 6 to 8 weeks with her sister each year and that
    the appellants came to stay with them. He  also  noted  that  when  the
    appellant submitted their applications the sponsor was interviewed, and
    the respondent formed the distinct impression  that  he  did  not  know
    without reading off a piece of paper the identity of the  schools  that
    the children were attending [79].

6.    The appellants relied on a complaint made to the Office of  Youth  and
    Social Development in Lagos dated 3 September 2014 that the  appellants
    had not seen their mother for a considerable time.  However, the  judge
    was not satisfied that this was an objective assessment of the position
    and found that it was contradicted by letters written by the appellants
    referred to at [82] - [84].

7.    Whilst the judge accepted that the sponsor paid  some  money  for  the
    support of the  appellants  and  paid  for  school  fees,  he  was  not
    satisfied that he had had  sole  responsibility  for  their  upbringing
    after he separated from his wife in  2007.   He  went  on  to  consider
    whether the appellants were entitled  to  leave  to  enter  under  para
    297(1)(f) and found that, although the appellants may  be  dissatisfied
    with their current living conditions and the sponsor's second wife  had
    expressed some concerns about their safety in Lagos,  no  evidence  had
    been produced to show that there were serious  and  compelling  reasons
    for the appellants to be admitted to the UK.

8.    Having found that the appellants did not meet the  provisions  of  the
    Rules, the judge went on to consider article 8.  He accepted  that  the
    decision interfered with the resumption  of  family  life  between  the
    appellants and the sponsor but it did not  interfere  with  the  family
    life currently existing between them.  He found that  any  interference
    was proportionate to  the  legitimate  end  of  preserving  immigration
    control and the economic well-being of the country.  For these reasons,
    the appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

9.    Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  firstly,
    on the basis that the application had been submitted out  of  time  and
    there was no adequate explanation for this and  secondly,  because  the
    grounds did not disclose any properly arguable points of law.

10.   The application was  renewed  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  adopting  the
    grounds submitted to the First-tier Tribunal but adding an  explanation
    for the delay in submitting the first application, namely that  it  was
    submitted in time by email on 14 September 2016 but following enquiries
    from the appellants' solicitors in May 2017,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had no record of  having  received  it  and  the  application  was  re-
    submitted.  In the grounds it is argued that the judge's findings,  and
    in particular his comment at [62] that the claim by the sponsor that he
    had sole responsibility for the children did not sit  comfortably  with
    one visit a year to Nigeria sometimes of only two weeks duration,  were
    grossly misconceived as the sponsor could not be  expected  to  abandon
    his work in the UK, he spoke to the appellants virtually every day  and
    sent money regularly for their upkeep.

11.   It is further argued that the judge failed to consider the  children's
    welfare and best interests which were not made a primary consideration;
     that it  was  very  clear  from  the  documentary  evidence  that  the
    appellant's mother had indeed abandoned them;  a complaint this  effect
    made to the Office of Youth and Social  Development  was  not  properly
    taken into account;  the judge had failed to take proper account of the
    letters written by the appellants showing that  there  was  no  contact
    between them and their mother and  generally  that  his  findings  were
    against the weight of the evidence, misconceived and arbitrary.

12.   Permission was granted by the Upper Tribunal the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that the  judge  had  failed  to  give  primary  and  detailed
    consideration to the best interests of the appellants and there was  no
    evidence that the appellants were living with their mother or that  she
    shared responsibility for them with their sponsor.

13.   At the hearing before me the appellants were not  legally  represented
    but the sponsor did attend the hearing.  An application had  been  made
    for an adjournment by their solicitors by letter dated 17 April 2018 on
    the basis that the sponsor would be unable to  attend  the  hearing  as
    result of his ill health.  This was supported by evidence that  he  was
    being treated for acute coronary syndrome following a heart attack  and
    was awaiting an urgent investigation.  The application was refused  the
    basis that the hearing could proceed as the issue of whether there  was
    an error of law could be properly considered  and  no  explanation  was
    provided as to how his presence at the hearing  could  assist  on  that
    issue.  Following notification of the refusal,  a  further  letter  was
    received from the appellants' solicitors dated 24 April 2018 indicating
    that they had their client's instructions that  the  hearing  could  be
    dealt with  on  paper  only  and  that  the  appellants  would  not  be
    represented.

14.   I asked the sponsor whether he wanted  the  hearing  to  go  ahead  or
    whether he wished to apply for an adjournment so  that  the  appellants
    could be legally represented.  After some consideration, he  said  that
    he was happy for the appeal to go ahead as he was  there  to  represent
    his children and he wanted the matter to  be  resolved.   He  explained
    that he had been solely responsible for his  children.   When  he  left
    Nigeria, he had put them into a boarding school.  Initially,  they  had
    stayed with his mother but after she died, they  had  stayed  with  the
    headmaster of the school.  He had continued to send money to them.   He
    had had anxieties about how they were being cared  for  at  school  and
    they had complained that they did not receive any of the money he sent.
     The appellant's mother did not have any  contact  with  them  and  had
    abandoned them.  This has caused him a lot  of  stress.   He  explained
    that he had to do three  jobs  to  support  his  family.   He  had  not
    abandoned his children and when things had gone wrong, he had made this
    application.

15.   Mr Tufan  raised  the  issue  of  whether  the  Upper  Tribunal  judge
    granting  permission  had  dealt  properly  with  the  fact  that   the
    application had been refused by the First-tier Tribunal because it  was
    out of time.  Any question of a further extension of time had not  been
    addressed.  In the alternative, he submitted that the grounds  did  not
    raise any issues of law.  In substance, they sought to re-argue  issues
    of fact where the judge had reached findings properly open to  him  and
    had given clear reasons for his conclusions.



Assessment of the issues

16.   The position in relation to whether the Upper  Tribunal  Judge  should
    have dealt with the issue of the delay in filing the grounds of  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal is not without its difficulties.  Rule 21(7)
    of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  sets  out  a
    procedure to be followed by an applicant applying to the Upper Tribunal
    when his  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was not admitted because it was made out  of  time.   However,
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014 appear to make provision for applications not to be
    admitted only in circumstances where a written statement of reasons has
    been refused because that application was received out of time.  In the
    present application the appellants gave an explanation  for  the  delay
    and there is no reason to think that the judge did not see it.  I  will
    proceed on the basis that, particularly as this was  a  case  involving
    children, the judge must have been satisfied that  the  effect  of  the
    delay, if any, was not such as to justify a refusal  of  permission  in
    the light of the issues identified as arguable.

17.   In order to succeed in their application, the appellants had  to  meet
    the provisions of para 297 of  the  Rules  and  this  included  showing
    either that one parent was present and settled in  the  United  Kingdom
    and had had sole responsibility for their upbringing (para297(i)(e)) or
    that there were serious and compelling family or  other  considerations
    making their exclusion undesirable and suitable arrangements  had  been
    made for their care (para297(i)(f)).

18.   The judge, however, was not satisfied on the evidence before him  that
    the sponsor had had sole responsibility.  This was an issue of fact for
    him to resolve on the available evidence.  He made a clear  finding  of
    fact at [86] that he was not satisfied that the sponsor  had  had  sole
    responsibility for the appellants since separating  from  his  wife  in
    2007.  When reaching this decision, he took into account  the  findings
    in the previous appeal. He also took into account the complaint made to
    the Office of Youth and Social Development but was entitled to  comment
    that the contents of the complaint showed that it was instigated by the
    sponsor and there was no indication that  the  appellants'  mother  was
    even aware that it was being made.

19.   He also found that the  complaint  was  contradicted  by  the  letters
    written by the appellants, in one of which the writer says that  he  is
    "sick and tired of  this  woman  you  called  our  mother".  The  judge
    inferred from this letter that, whilst the writer was dissatisfied with
    his current situation,  he  was  not  estranged  from  his  mother  and
    received little in the way of emotional support from the sponsor.  This
    was an inference of fact that the judge was entitled to draw.  He  also
    referred to the fact that the sponsor had produced call logs  which  he
    claimed showed that he regularly contacted the appellants  in  Nigeria.
    The judge acknowledged that they post-dated the previous  decision  but
    there was no information or evidence what the purpose of the  telephone
    calls were or in what way the sponsor exercised responsibility over the
    appellants.  I am satisfied that the judge's findings on the  issue  of
    sole responsibility were properly open to  him  for  reasons  he  gave.
    Similarly, for the reasons the judge gave in [89], he was  entitled  to
    find that the appellants had failed to show that there were serious and
    compelling reasons for them to be admitted to the UK.

20.   When granting permission to appeal in the Upper  Tribunal,  the  first
    issue identified as arguable was that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    failed to give primary and detailed consideration to the best interests
    of the appellants.  I am not satisfied that there is any  substance  in
    this ground. The judge prefaced his consideration of  the  evidence  at
    [72] with a reminder himself that he  must  have  regard  to  the  best
    interests of the appellants as children and that  this  was  a  primary
    consideration.  Further, in [103] the  judge  dealt  more  specifically
    with the best interests of the children in the context  of  considering
    article 8. There is no reason to believe that the judge  did  not  give
    proper consideration to the best interests of the appellants.

21.   The second issue raised when permission  to  appeal  was  granted  was
    that it was arguable that there was no evidence that the appellants had
    been living with their mother or that  she  shared  responsibility  for
    them with the sponsor.  However, this refers to  factual  issues  where
    the onus was on the appellants to produce the evidence to show that the
    sponsor had sole responsibility for them. For  the  reasons  the  judge
    gave, he did not accept that  evidence  and  therefore  the  appellants
    failed to discharge the onus upon them of showing that they  were  able
    to meet the requirements of the Rules.  This was not a  case  where  an
    inference could properly be drawn from a lack of evidence following the
    rejection of the evidence on these issues  adduced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellants.

22.   In the grounds of appeal, the appellants sought to challenge a  number
    of the judge's findings of fact and the inferences  he  drew  from  the
    evidence.  However, these were all issues of  fact  for  the  judge  to
    assess and it was for him to decide what inferences should be drawn not
    only from the oral evidence but also from the documentary evidence such
    as the complaint with the Office of Youth and  Social  Development  and
    the letters from the children.  In substance, the grounds  are  seeking
    to rehearse and reargue issues of fact where the judge reached findings
    properly open to him for the  reasons  he  gave.  The  grounds  do  not
    satisfy me that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law.

Decision

23.   The First-tier Tribunal did not in law and its decision stands.


Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 8 May 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
