
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06504/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Sent to parties on:          |
|On 1 August 2016                              |On 8 August 2016             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR KEVIN JOHN REDDY
                       (Anonymity DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant in this appeal to the Upper Tribunal  is  the  Secretary
of State for the Home Department (hereinafter "Secretary  of  State").  The
respondent is Mr Kevin John Reddy (hereinafter "the claimant").  This  is
the Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal,  brought  with
permission, against a decision of the  First-tier Tribunal  (Judge Telford
hereinafter "the Judge") to allow the claimant's appeal against a  decision
of an Entry Clearance Officer made on 25 March 2015, refusing to grant him
entry clearance to come to the UK, with a view to settlement, as  a  spouse.


2.    There have, in fact, been significant  developments  since  the Judge
made his decision and, indeed, since permission to appeal was granted.   The
appellant, who is represented by the Immigration Advice  Service  (but  who
did not attend before me), has been issued a Visa on the basis of his  being
the spouse of his British  citizen  sponsor  so  that,  as  the  Immigration
Advice Service now puts it in writing to the Upper Tribunal, this appeal is
"largely redundant".  Indeed, it might be said that it  is  probably  wholly
redundant.  Nevertheless, it has not actually been withdrawn and so  I  will
determine it albeit that, in the circumstances, this determination  will  be
relatively brief.

3.    The appellant, who is a national of  New Zealand,  had  been  refused
entry  clearance  because  it  had  been  decided  he  did  not   meet   the
requirements as contained  within  Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration Rules
insofar as they  relate  to  what  might  be  described  as  the  "financial
requirements".  It was also said, in this context, that  the  appellant  had
failed to comply with necessary  evidential  requirements  relating  to  the
production of specific evidence concerning financial matters under  Appendix
FM-SE.  The Judge, though, allowed his appeal under the Immigration Rules,
concluding that at the material time the relevant income threshold had  been
reached.  The complaint made by the Secretary of  State  in  the  successful
application for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal  was  to  the
effect  that  the Judge  failed  to  consider   whether   the   evidential
requirements as set out in Appendix FM-SE had been met and  that,  if  they
were not, the appeal could not succeed under the Rules.  So, the  Judge  had
failed, it was said, to consider a relevant matter.

4.    Mrs Pettersen, at the hearing before me, maintained the Secretary  of
State's position whilst acknowledging that, in the circumstances, it  really
did not matter anymore whether this appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal  should
succeed or not.  I conclude, though, that the grounds  do  demonstrate  that
the Judge made the error referred to above in failing to  consider  whether
the requirements of  Appendix FM-SE  were  met.   Accordingly,  I  set  the
decision aside.  In  remaking  the  decision  I  decide  that,  because  the
requirements of the Rules were not met, the claimant's  appeal  against  the
decision of the Entry Clearance Officer fails.  However, as I say,  none  of
this affects the position in  that Mr Reddy now has been granted a Visa and
will, in consequence, have leave to enter as a spouse  once  he  arrives  in
the UK if, indeed,  he,  has  not  done  so  already.   That  leave  remains
entirely unaffected by this decision.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law and is set aside.
In remaking the decision I dismiss the appeal of the  claimant  against  the
decision of the Entry Clearance Officer of 25 March 2015.

Anonymity

I make no anonymity direction.
Signed:                                  Date:
M R Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.
Signed:                           Date:
M R Hemingway
