
[pic]
IAC-AH-pc/sc-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06948/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st October 2015                 |On 25th November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                               Mrs Aisha Bibi
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss L Barton, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Pakistan national born on 7th September  1994.   The
    Appellant applied for a certificate of  entitlement  to  the  right  of
    abode in the UK and her application was considered pursuant to  Section
    2 of the Immigration Act 1971.  On 7th May  2014  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer refused the application on the basis that  on  the  balance  of
    probability  the  Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied  that   the
    certificate of registration and the UK birth  certificate  provided  by
    the applicant related to her.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Nicol sitting at Manchester  on  3rd  June  2015.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 12th June 2015 the Appellant's appeal  was
    allowed under the Immigration Act.

 3. On 17th June 2015 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  On 21st August  2015  Designated  Judge  Woodcraft
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Woodcraft noted that the cause  of
    the Respondent's concern was that the  Appellant's  previous  Pakistani
    passport  valid  from  July  2010  to  2015  and  presented  with   the
    application showed her place of birth as  being  in  Pakistan  not  the
    United Kingdom.  The Appellant was issued with a second passport a  few
    days after the  refusal  decision  (and  a  year  before  the  previous
    passport was due to expire) this time showing her place of birth as the
    United Kingdom.  Judge  Woodcraft  assumed  that  the  reason  why  the
    Appellant's two previous applications for a passport were refused  were
    because of this  discrepancy  but  if  there  were  other  reasons  the
    Respondent should give them if he wishes to rely on  the  previous  two
    refusals as tending to undermine the credibility of  this  application.
    He noted that there was no DNA evidence to link the Appellant with  the
    two UK citizens said to be her parents and  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager refers to DNA evidence produced with the application but  which
    related to somebody else altogether.  Judge  Woodcraft  noted  that  at
    paragraph 25 of the determination the judge found there to be an  error
    in the first passport which he could not explain and that arguably  the
    judge had given insufficient reasons why he proceeded to  overlook  the
    discrepancy between the passport and the two UK documents.

 4. There does not appear to be any Rule 24 response served in this matter.
     I note that this is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State.   For  the
    purpose of continuity throughout the appeal process however Ms Bibi  is
    referred to herein as the Appellant and the Secretary of State  as  the
    Respondent.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed  Counsel  Miss
    Barton.  Miss Barton is  familiar  with  this  matter  having  appeared
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Secretary of State appears by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submissions/Discussions

 5. The Grounds of Appeal  contend  that  the  judge  made  inadequate  and
    speculative findings by finding that the Appellant should  be  entitled
    to the certificate of entitlement to enter the UK.   They  submit  that
    the Appellant's credibility is seriously undermined by having made  two
    previous applications for a British passport on 2nd April 2013 and 13th
    November 2013 both of which were refused.  They submit that it  is  not
    credible that upon receiving a new  Pakistani  passport  an  individual
    would not straightaway check that all the details were correct and seek
    to rectify the error at the first opportunity.

 6. The grounds further contend that although the judge  had  given  little
    weight to the witness statements produced in support of the application
    it is clearly demonstrated that the statements were unreliable and that
    they further enhance the lack of credibility on  the  entirety  of  the
    Appellant's application.  They contend that the Appellant's own witness
    statement clearly demonstrates that her credibility is not genuine  and
    that she had said she was born in "Nottingham, Pakistan" which  clearly
    does not exist.  In the determination they allege that the judge relied
    heavily on the Appellant's father's  oral  evidence  and  although  the
    judge states that his  oral  evidence  was  backed  up  by  documentary
    evidence the most important documentary evidence had not been  produced
    and that given the severe lack of credibility in the  Appellant's  case
    rigorous consideration will need to be  applied  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant's birth certificate and other accepted documents by the judge
    are genuine.

 7. I recite these grounds from the written Grounds of  Appeal  because  Mr
    Harrison as the basis of his submissions does no more  than  rely  upon
    them.

 8. In response Miss Barton states that the judgment is lengthy  and  well-
    reasoned and refers me to the conclusions reached at paragraph 20 to 27
    and that the judge was entitled to come to the  decision  that  he  did
    having seen the documents.  She  submits  that  paragraph  2  of  Judge
    Woodcraft's permission to appeal seeks to  give  advice  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal and she asks me to ignore such comments as  they  are  not  in
    accordance with the mode to which grants of  permission  are/should  be
    made.  I agree with  that  contention.   She  goes  on  to  state  that
    paragraph 25 of the decision refers to the Appellant's  first  passport
    having been issued in error and that whilst that  cannot  be  explained
    the judge is satisfied that the other  documentation  provided  is  not
    part of a connected chain.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.



Findings

11. This is a well-constructed determination by an experienced judge.   The
    judge has had the benefit of seeing the  documentation  that  has  been
    produced and of hearing the evidence.  He  has  noted  that  the  birth
    certificate is a true copy of an entry  on  the  relevant  register  in
    Nottingham and that it appears to be accepted by the Secretary of State
    that the person named in that certificate is entitled to be  registered
    as a British citizen having regard to the agreed immigration status  of
    her parents.  Further the second  Pakistani  passport  is  accepted  as
    genuine and that the holder of that passport would  be  entitled  to  a
    right of abode in the UK.

12. The  judge  has  made  a  finding  that  it  would  be  a  considerable
    coincidence if there were two people born on the same day with  parents
    having the same name so that their identities were interchangeable.  He
    quite properly has found that such a finding  would  not  be  credible.
    Thereafter he has gone on to consider the possibility of identity theft
    and has not found that to be a credible argument.  Further he found the
    account provided by Mr Abdullah  to  be  credible  and  the  supporting
    documentation.  Having heard all the evidence the judge  made  findings
    that he was entitled to and that the Appellant met the requirements  of
    Section 2 of the Immigration Act 1971.

13. In such circumstances this  judge  has  carried  out  a  very  thorough
    analysis of all the relevant facts and documents and the submissions of
    the Secretary of State  are  little  more  than  disagreement.   It  is
    telling that Mr Harrison quite properly does little more than  rely  on
    the grounds.  There is little further that he can say.  However  it  is
    clear for all the reasons given above that this judge has analysed  the
    documentation, heard  the  evidence  and  made  findings  that  he  was
    perfectly entitled to.  In such circumstances the decision discloses no
    material error of law and the appeal  of  the  Secretary  of  State  is
    dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  is
    maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and  the  decision  of
the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

