
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/06385/2014
                                                               OA/06388/2014
                                                               OA/06389/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 January 2016                    |On 15 January 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     SH
                                     MaY
                                     MoY
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. G. Mellon of Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellants against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Callow promulgated on 16 June 2015 in which he dismissed
    the Appellants' appeals against the Respondent's decisions to refuse to
    grant entry clearance as the relatives of the Sponsor, a refugee.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:
         "The decision shows that, when considering Article  8  issues,  the
         Judge placed emphasis on the fact that the appellants could not  be
         adequately  maintained  without  recourse  to  public  funds  when,
         arguably, there is little specific consideration of the nature  and
         extent of the family life which the Judge accepted existed and  the
         best interests of the child appellants.   Even  though  the  appeal
         related to entry  clearance,  the  Upper  Tribunal  made  clear  in
         Mundeba (S55 Para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88  (IAC)  that,  although
         Section 55 only applied to children within the United Kingdom,  the
         duty to consider  the  best  interests  of  the  children  remains.
         Further, although the decision makes copious reference to  relevant
         case law, the analysis of the appellants' position and the  Article
         8 claim is limited to one short paragraph (15) and so  is  arguably
         inadequate.   An arguable error is shown."

 3. At the hearing I heard submissions from both representatives, following
    which I announced that I considered  that  the  decision  involved  the
    making of a material error of law and I set  the  decision  aside.   My
    reasons are set out in full below.

Submissions

 4. Ms Mellon relied on the grounds of appeal  and  the  skeleton  argument
    which was before the First-tier Tribunal.   There  were  five  children
    living in the United Kingdom, three of whom were under 18.  One of  the
    Appellants is only five years old.  Nevertheless,  there  had  been  no
    identification of the children's best interests or a balancing of their
    best interests in the proportionality assessment.  I  was  referred  to
    paragraphs [11] and [13].  It was submitted that the application of the
    caselaw to  the  facts  was  inadequate.   The  judge  had  focused  on
    maintenance and had not balanced this  with  the  other  factors  which
    should have been considered.  He had accepted the vulnerability of  the
    Appellants, but had not factored this in  to  the  balancing  exercise.
    Further there was nothing regarding the children living in  the  United
    Kingdom.  There was ample evidence before the judge of the close family
    life that the Appellants had had with their brothers and sisters in the
    United Kingdom.  The judge had been  obliged  to  consider  that  under
    section 55.

 5. The case of AAO [2011] EWCA Civ 840 to which  the  judge  referred  was
    decided before section 117 had come into force,  and  was  an  entirely
    different factual scenario involving an adult dependent  where  a  weak
    family life had been found.  In summary, the decision was  inadequately
    reasoned and the Appellants had a strong Article 8 case.

 6. Mr. Bramble accepted that a large proportion of the decision  consisted
    of a setting out of the requirements  of  the  approach  to  be  taken.
    However, the judge was entitled to  take  into  account  the  financial
    circumstances and the fact that the Sponsor was unable to  support  the
    Appellants.  He submitted there was nothing wrong in the  approach  and
    the assessment  was  not  unbalanced.   The  judge  was  aware  of  the
    vulnerability of the Appellants.  Although paragraph  [15]  was  brief,
    all the relevant  factors  had  been  taken  into  account.   The  best
    interests were not set out in one particular paragraph, but  they  were
    listed and had been taken  into  account.   The  judge  had  come  down
    against the Appellants having considered all of the relevant factors.

 7. In response Ms Mellon submitted that the findings  were  not  disputed,
    but only the proportionality exercise.  There was  no  indication  that
    the judge had taken all of the Appellants' circumstances  into  account
    when carrying out the proportionality exercise.  The best interests  of
    the children in the United Kingdom had not  been  taken  into  account.
    Paragraph [8] was no answer to the criteria set out in  JO  and  Others
    (section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC).

 8. I was referred to paragraph [19] of the skeleton  argument.   The  fact
    that the Appellant's Sponsor was a refugee and  therefore  that  family
    life could not be enjoyed elsewhere had not featured in  paragraph  [8]
    at all.

Error of law

 9. Although the findings are set out  from  paragraphs  [8]  to  [15],  as
    agreed by Mr. Bramble, much of this is taken up with a rehearsal of the
    approach to be taken in such cases with reference to case  law,  rather
    than findings specific to the Appellants.  The  main  paragraphs  which
    contain specific findings are paragraphs [8] and [15].

10. Paragraph [8] states as follows:
         "This is a difficult case charged with much emotion.  The witnesses
         were  credible  in  giving  their  evidence.   The  facts  of   the
         appellants' applications summarised  in  para  4  above  have  been
         established on a balance of probabilities.  Of critical importance,
         weight is attached to the fact that the sponsor is  a  refugee  and
         that she and the immediate members of her family have been  granted
         leave to live in the UK.  It is neither practical nor desirable for
         any of them to  return  to  Kenya  to  attempt  to  live  with  the
         appellants.  The appellants are  undoubtedly  vulnerable  children.
         They live alone without consistent adult care.  They have no status
         in Kenya and are at  risk  of  return  to  Somalia.   Their  living
         conditions are undesirable exceptional compassionate  circumstances
         compared with the lot of children living in Somalia."

11. Paragraph [15] states as follows:
         "In all of the circumstances I conclude that the interference  with
         the appellants' family life rights and  those  of  the  sponsor  is
         justified and proportionate.  The appellants cannot  be  adequately
         maintained  without  recourse  to  additional  public  funds.    In
         considering the public interest  question  weight  is  attached  to
         s.117B(1), (2) and (3) of the Act.  The  maintenance  of  effective
         immigration control is in the public interest.  It  counts  against
         the appellants that they are unable to speak English and that  they
         are  not  financially  independent.   Accordingly  the  appellants'
         appeals fall to be dismissed under Article 8."

12. Paragraph [15] contains the entire analysis of the Appellants' position
    and the proportionality exercise.  I find  that  it  is  an  inadequate
    assessment of their circumstances, and inadequate reasons are given for
    the finding that  the  interference  is  proportionate  and  justified.
    Paragraph [15] contains no reference to any of the factors set  out  in
    paragraph [8].  The judge refers to the factors in section 117B(2)  and
    (3), the inability of the Appellants to speak English and the fact that
    they are not financially independent, but he has not referred to any of
    the factors in favour of the Appellants when  giving  reasons  for  his
    decision  that  interference  with  the  family  life  rights  of   the
    Appellants and Sponsor is not disproportionate.

13. Further, there is no assessment in the decision of the  best  interests
    of  the  Appellants  or  the  children  in  the  United  Kingdom,   and
    accordingly no factoring of their best interests in the proportionality
    exercise in paragraph [15].  Although the judge  has  referred  to  the
    family living in the United Kingdom [8], there is no identification  of
    the best interests of the children who form part of this family.

14. Further there is no reference in paragraph [15] to the fact that family
    life could not be enjoyed elsewhere, and the  weight  to  be  given  to
    that.   Although  the  judge  has  found  in  paragraph  [8]  that  the
    Appellants  are  living  in  "undesirable   exceptional   compassionate
    circumstances" there is no consideration of the weight to  be  attached
    to  this.   Paragraph  [15]  is  an  inadequate   assessment   of   the
    circumstances of  the  Appellants  and  an  inadequate  proportionality
    assessment.  The judge has placed weight on the fact that  the  Sponsor
    cannot maintain the Appellants, but has not given reasons for  why  the
    weight to be attached to this outweighs the weight to  be  attached  to
    the factors in favour of the Appellants.

15. I find that the decision is inadequately reasoned, and  the  Article  8
    proportionality assessment is inadequate.  There  has  been  a  failure
    properly to consider the best interests both of the Appellants  and  of
    the children living in the United Kingdom.

Decision

The decision does [involve] the making of an error on a point of law  and  I
set it aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  remade  in  respect
of Article 8.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 15 January 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
