
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06954/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th October 2016                 |On 1st November 2016                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                Ms G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                     k m
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Appiah (Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  It comes before me for  consideration
    as to whether or not there is a material error of law in  the  decision
    the First -tier Tribunal ( Judge Callow)("FtT") promulgated by  on  2nd
    July 2015 in which the  appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  under  the
    Immigration Rules paragraph 352 and under  Article  8  outside  of  the
    Rules. The FtT found no  evidence  of  any  deception  under  paragraph
    320(7A), which was relied on by the respondent.

Background

2.   The appellant is a minor whose date of birth is 1st March 2005,  and  a
    citizen of Eritrea, living in Khartoum, Sudan.  She  is  the  child  of
    refugees from Eritrea. The sponsor's wife is not her biological mother.
    In the course of proceedings it was discovered that the sponsor was not
    her biological father as was believed to be the case  by  the  parties.
    The appeal was determined on the basis that the appellant  was  the  de
    facto  child  of  the  sponsor  and  his  wife  and  family  life   was
    established.

First -tier Tribunal decision

3.   The FtT found that there was no deception [17] and this  issue  is  not
    challenged.  The FtT thereafter found that the appellant  was  not  the
    (biological) child of a refugee under paragraph 352D(i)  of  the  Rules
    [19]. The FtT considered Article 8 following Razgar and  Huang  [20-25]
    and concluded that family life was established and Article  8  engaged.
    In assessing proportionality the FtT made  reference  to  the  need  to
    consider where the best interests  of  the  child  lay  [24]  and  then
    concluded that the public interest  in  economic  factors  and  factors
    under section 117B(1)(2) & (3)   outweighed  the  family  life  of  the
    appellant [26].

Grounds of appeal

4.   Grounds  of  appeal  argued  that  the  FtT  should  have  treated  the
    appellant as a de facto adopted child and considered  Paragraph  309(A)
    of the Rules given that the sponsor had cared for the  appellant  since
    2005. Reliance was placed on AA (Somalia) v SSHD  [2013]  UKSC  81  and
    Mohamoud (paras 352D & 309A- de facto adoption)  Ethiopia  [2011]  UKUT
    00378 (IAC).

5.   The FtT failed  to  place  weight  on  material  matters  (age,  living
    conditions,  family  relationship)  and  placed  weight  on  immaterial
    matters (inability to speak English  &  public  funds)  in  considering
    proportionality.

Grant of permission

6.   Permission to appeal  was  refused  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FTJ
    Garratt) and on renewal by the  Upper  Tribunal  (UJT  Grubb).  It  was
    granted by the  Vice  President  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  following  a
    successful application for judicial review on  12th  February  2016  in
    which the High Court referred to the failure to consider paragraph  309
    together with Home Office guidance and the impact of  that  failure  on
    the Article 8 claim.

Rule 24 response

7.   The respondent opposed the appeal as it was difficult to  see  how  the
    circumstances of the case could be  anticipated  under  paragraph  309A
    together with relevant guidance.  The Article 8 findings were  open  to
    the FtT to make on the evidence before it.

Submisssions

8.   Ms Appiah expanded on the grounds for  judicial  relief.   The  sponsor
    was acting in person  at  the  FtT.  A  strict  interpretation  of  the
    requirements under 309A(b)(i) of  living  together  was  not  necessary
    having regard to the guidelines which would allow for a  more  flexible
    approach and were consistent with AA (Somalia).  In terms of Article  8
    the FtT failed to consider the impact of not meeting the rules and  had
    attached weight to immaterial matters in relation to a  child.  Section
    117 was not exhaustive.

9.   Mr Staunton relied on the  Rules  24  response.   The  requirements  of
    paragraph 309 were not met by a long period of time and as such it  was
    right that the respondent did not exercise discretion in favour of  the
    appellant.

Discussion and conclusion

10.  I  allowed  the  appeal  on  both  grounds  and  then  went  onto  hear
    submissions and oral evidence in remaking the decision. My error of law
    reasons are as follows. The FtT acknowledged that the appellant had not
    been formally  adopted  but  that  the  sensitive  facts  of  the  case
    established "the very existence of family life"  [23].   There  was  no
    application made under paragraph 309A, however, I  am  mindful  of  the
    fact that the appellant was not  legally  represented  at  the  hearing
    where the sponsor attended in person. I am satisfied that the FtT ought
    to have considered more fully the facts of the case in terms of whether
    the appellant should have been treated as a  de  facto  adopted  child,
    notwithstanding that it may well have  found  that  those  requirements
    were not met.  The significance is how those  facts  and  any  decision
    under  the  rules  would   have   impacted   on   the   assessment   of
    proportionality [24].  Therein lies the material error of law. There is
    a material error of law in the decision which shall be set  aside  save
    that the findings of fact are preserved.

11.  I heard submissions from both representatives and  oral  evidence  from
    the sponsor as to the period of time since the appellant had lived with
    the sponsor and his wife prior to the application.  The facts as  found
    by the FtT were preserved.  Ms Appiah sought to introduce new  evidence
    of the fact that the  sponsor  and  his  wife  were  now  working.  The
    relevant date for entry clearance cases is the date of decision.

12.  I find that the appellant is the child of the  sponsor  and  his  wife,
    and her application fell to be considered under paragraph 309A once  it
    was established that the father/sponsor was not her biological  father.
    On the facts as found by the FtT and the evidence from the  sponsor  in
    terms of  the  time  of  living  together,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    requirements of the Rules are not met. The appellant would have met the
    rules but for the fact  that  she  was  not  living  with  her  parents
    immediately before the application. The correct approach for a case  of
    this kind is outlined by the Supreme Court in AA (Somalia).   Accepting
    that this is an entry clearance case the FtT nevertheless did not fully
    consider all the relevant factors in the Article 8 assessment; that she
    was a child of a refugee who could not meet the Rules,  and  only  made
    limited findings in  terms  of  the  nature  of  family  life  and  the
    engagement of Article 8. The FtT did not in fact reach any  finding  as
    to where the best interests of the child lay, the starting point for an
    in country Article 8 proportionality assessment.  I am  satisfied  that
    the only conclusion that could have been  reached  was  that  the  best
    interests lie in joining her parents in the UK (Mundeba (s.55 and  para
    297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC)).  She is a child of 11  years  of  age
    living in Sudan with different people unrelated to her.  She  has  been
    separated from her parents since a very young age and maintains contact
    with her parents regularly by phone and other social  media.   The  FtT
    found that the decision amounted to an  interference  with  her  family
    life in terms that she would not be  able  to  join/  settle  with  her
    family in the UK [24].

13.  In considering proportionality the  FtT  must  have  regard  to  public
    interest factors in  section  117B,  however,  those  factors  are  not
    exhaustive and were treated as such by the FtT.  The FtT ought to  have
    considered if the  public  interest  was  capable  of  outweighing  the
    interests of the appellant and the interest of her parents in terms  of
    their family life.  The FtT approach to public interests factors  under
    section 117B was flawed as it failed to consider those factors from the
    perspective of a child which would have impacted  on  the  question  of
    weight. Undoubtedly there would be additional recourse of public  funds
    in terms of education and health. The FtT failed  to  place  sufficient
    weight on material factors  in  the  balancing  exercise  such  as  the
    appellant's age, vulnerability, living conditions, separation from  her
    parents, impact on the parents of the continued separation, the parents
    status as refugees and the degree to which the Immigration  rules  were
    not met.  All of which lead to me to conclude that the  decision  is  a
    disproportionate interference with the family life of the appellant.



Decision

There is a material error of law in the decision which shall be set aside.

I remake the decision under Article 8 and I allow the appeal.




                               Signed   Date 31.10.2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal








                               ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




                               NO FEE AWARD






                               Signed   Date 31.10 .2016


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


