
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/06375/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 March 2016                      |On 4 April 2016                 |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                               Mrs NAZMA AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr M Hossein (counsel) instructed directly by the
appellant
For the Respondent: Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.




2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Henderson promulgated on 28 August 2015, which dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The  Appellant  was  born  on  9  January  1992  and  is  a  national  of
Bangladesh.


4.  On  8  April  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for entry clearance as  a  partner  under  appendix  FM  of  the
Immigration Rules. The respondent focussed  on  paragraph  EC-P.1.1  of  the
rules.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Henderson ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the  Respondent's
decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and, on 28 January 2016, Judge  Astle  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      "3. It is apparent from the decision that the judge had  available  to
      her documents over and above those remaining on the Tribunals file. In
      the circumstances it is not possible  to  determine  whether  she  had
      regard to all of those submitted. On this basis it is arguable that an
      error of law was made and so permission is granted. The Appellant will
      however need to supply to the Upper Tribunal further copies  of  those
      previously submitted to have any prospect of succeeding."

The Hearing

7.  (a)  Mr  Hossein,  counsel  for  the  appellant,  referred  me  to   the
respondent's bundle, which  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  In  the
bundle there is a  letter  dated  24th  February  2014  from  the  sponsor's
employer. Mr Hossein invited me to read that letter and  told  me  that  the
letter contained all of the information required by appendix  FM-SE  of  the
immigration rules.  He told me that the  letter  of  24  February  2014  was
produced with the original application and that the error  which  the  Judge
had made is that the Judge failed to  take  account  of  the  letter  of  24
February 2014. Instead, the Judge dwells on  a  letter  from  the  sponsor's
accountants, dated 22 July 2015.


(b) Mr Hossein told me that [35] and  [36]  of  the  decision  places  undue
emphasis on letters from the sponsor's accountants, and that had  the  Judge
taken account of the letter of 24th February  2014,  the  Judge  would  have
found that the appellant fulfils the requirements of the immigration rules

8. Mr Staunton, for the respondent, conceded that he could see force in  the
submissions made by Mr Hossein, and confined himself to adopting  the  terms
of the respondent's rule 24 response as his submissions.

Analysis

9. There are two grounds for refusal of  the  appellant's  application.  The
first relates to an allegation of dishonesty. The Judges  findings  on  that
aspect of this case reach their conclusion at [33]  &  [34].  No  appeal  is
directed against the Judge's findings  in  relation  to  that  part  of  the
respondent's decision.

10. The focus in  this  appeal  is  the  second  part  of  the  respondent's
decision, which relates to the financial  requirements  of  the  immigration
rules. At [34] the Judge  finds  that  the  appellant's  sponsor  meets  the
income threshold, but at [35] and [36] the Judge finds  that  the  appellant
cannot satisfy the evidential requirements set  out  in  paragraph  2(b)  of
appendix FM-SE.


11. The  Judge's  findings  at  [35]  and  [36]  quite  clearly  proceed  on
consideration of two letters from the  sponsor's  accountant.  At  [21]  and
[22] the Judge dwells on the  sponsor's  contract  of  employment  and  HMRC
records. The Judge makes findings of fact on the basis  of  those  documents
at [24] & [25] of the decision.


12. Nowhere in the decision does the Judge makes  reference  to  the  letter
from the sponsor's employer dated 24th February 2014.  In  that  letter  the
sponsor's employer provides the sponsor's  national  insurance  number;  the
sponsor's tax code; the date of commencement of  the  sponsor's  employment;
the  sponsor's  job  title,  working  hours  and  degree  of  permanency  of
employment; and confirmation of the sponsor's basic salary.


13. It is not disputed that the letter dated 24th February 2014  was  before
the First-tier Tribunal Judge. It is not  disputed  that  that  same  letter
provides the information required  by  appendix  FM-SE  of  the  immigration
rules and fulfils the evidential requirements set out  there.  It  is  clear
from a straightforward reading of the Judge's decision that  the  Judge  did
not take account  of  the  letter  from  the  sponsor's  employer  dated  24
February 2014.


14. The Judge reached his decision on the  basis  of  a  material  error  of
fact. The Judge has made a material error of law because  he  did  not  take
account of relevant and competent evidence which goes to the  central  issue
to be decided by the First-tier Tribunal. Had the  Judge  taken  account  of
the sponsor's employers letter of 24th February 2014, then  the  conclusions
reached by the Judge would have been different. In the  simplest  terms  the
Judge's findings at [35] and [36] of the decision could not have  been  made
if the Judge had taken account of all of the documentary evidence which  was
before him.


15. I therefore find that the Judge's decision  is  tainted  by  a  material
error of law and must be set aside.


16. Although I  set  aside  the  Judge's  decision  I  find  that  there  is
sufficient material before me to substitute my own decision.


17. There  is  no  criticism  of  the  Judge's  findings  of  fact  and  his
conclusions up to and including [34] of the decision.  It  is  at  [35]  and
[36] that  the  Judge  goes  astray.  It  is  now  common  ground  that  the
documentary evidence placed before the Judge was sufficient  to  fulfil  the
requirements of appendix FM-SE of the immigration rules. I have  a  copy  of
the sponsor's employers letter dated 24th February  2014  and  I  find  that
that letter alone is sufficient to satisfy the requirements of appendix  FM-
SE so that the appellant  produces  sufficient  evidence  to  discharge  the
burden of proving  that  she  fulfils  the  financial  requirements  of  the
immigration rules.


18. The unchallenged finding of the First-tier is  that  the  sponsor  meets
the income threshold set out in the  immigration  rules.  I  find  that  the
appellant fulfils the evidential requirements of the  immigration  rules.  I
therefore find that the appellant discharges the burden of proving that  she
fulfils the requirements of  the  immigration  rules  and  that  the  appeal
should be allowed under the immigration rules.


19. There is no criticism of the Judge's findings in relation to  article  8
ECHR and no part of the appellant's appeal is directed  at  those  findings.
For the avoidance of doubt, I find that between  [37]  and  [43]  the  Judge
correctly directs himself in  law  before  concluding,  at  [43],  that  the
respondent's decision is not a disproportionate interference with the  right
to respect for family life within the meaning of article 8 ECHR.


20. No appeal is directed at the Judge's findings in relation  to  the  1950
convention. The Judge's decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  human  rights
grounds  therefore  stands;  however,  the  decision  in  relation  to   the
immigration rules is based on a material  error  of  law  and  must  be  set
aside.  I  substitute  my  own  decision  allowing  the  appeal  under   the
immigration rules.

Decision

21.   The determination of First Tier Tribunal Judge  Henderson  promulgated
on 28 August 2015 contains a material error  of  law.  I  set  the  decision
aside. I substitute the following decision.

22. The appeal is dismissed on article 8 ECHR grounds.




23. The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.


Signed                                                              Date 18
March 2016


                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


