
[pic]
ST

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/06586/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 25 August 2015                    |On 8 September 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                                     N A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Baruah, Counsel.
For the respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Majid ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 17 February  2015,  in
    which he allowed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  refusal  of  her
    application for entry clearance as an elderly dependent relative  under
    the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
    Rights.

 2. For ease of  reference  and  continuity,  throughout  this  decision  I
    maintain the descriptions of the parties as Appellant  and  Respondent,
    as set out in the FTTJ's decision, although it is  the  Respondent  who
    pursues this appeal.

 3. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  but,  given
    the  references  in  this  decision   to   the   Appellant's   personal
    circumstances, including her health, an anonymity order is appropriate.

Background

 4. The Appellant is the  mother  of  the  sponsor  who  is  British.   The
    Appellant's application was refused by the Respondent because  she  had
    not  provided  evidence,  as  specified  in  Appendix  FM-SE   of   the
    Immigration Rules, to demonstrate her medical  condition  or  that  the
    care she required was not  available  in  the  country  where  she  was
    living.  The Respondent's position was that the Appellant could  obtain
    the treatment she required in her own country and that her sister would
    be returning to Pakistan from Canada and could assist her; nor had  the
    Appellant demonstrated that she required, due to her  age,  illness  or
    disability, long-term personal care to  perform  everyday  tasks.   The
    application was refused under paragraph EC-DR.1.1(d) of Appendix FM  of
    the Immigration Rules, by reference to  paragraphs  E-ECDR.2.4  and  E-
    ECDR.2.5.

 5. For the hearing before the FTTJ the Appellant produced a report  by  Dr
    Moeen, an independent expert, on  the  availability  of  care  for  the
    Appellant in Pakistan.  No medical report on the Appellant's health was
    provided.

 6. The FTTJ allowed the appeal on the grounds that  the  decision  was  in
    breach of the Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights  grounds  (his
    paragraph 21).  The Respondent was granted permission to appeal to this
    Tribunal

Submissions

 7. Mr Wilding relied on the grounds which can be summarised as follows:

      a. the FTTJ had failed to take the  Immigration  Rules  properly  into
         account, particularly E-ECDR.2.4, E-ECDR.2.5 and FM-SE, the absence
         of specified evidence or the requirements of EC-ECDR.2.4 which  was
         a preliminary hurdle before consideration of EC-ECDR.2.5.

      b. the approach to Article 8 was flawed because the FTTJ had failed to
         take into account Appendix FM when considering proportionality, had
         failed to take into account the public interest factors both within
         and outside s117B of the 2002 Act, had failed to conduct a balanced
         assessment when  considering  proportionality  and  had  failed  to
         provide adequate  reasons  to  demonstrate  that  family  life  was
         engaged.

 8. Ms Baruah accepted that the Appellant was in some difficulties  insofar
    as the application of FM-SE and the Article 8 analysis  was  concerned;
    she was not however instructed to make any concessions.   She  accepted
    that medical evidence on the Appellant's condition was not  before  the
    FTTJ albeit he had the report of Dr Moeen.  She did not formally oppose
    the submissions of Mr Wilding but gave me some background to the effect
    that the Appellant's  circumstances  were  distressing;  the  sponsor's
    concern was that the Respondent should reconsider the  application  and
    particularly the updated medical evidence with a view to granting entry
    clearance. That said, she accepted that this Tribunal had no discretion
    in that regard and recognised that the issue before me was  limited  to
    whether or not  there  had  been  a  material  error  of  law  and  any
    subsequent steps. She submitted that the FTTJ had conducted a balancing
    exercise with regard to Article 8, having accepted the evidence of  the
    sponsor and her husband.

Discussion

 9. The Appellant did not provide the Respondent or the FTTJ with a medical
    report to demonstrate  she  fulfilled  the  criteria  in  paragraph  E-
    ECDR.2.4. This failure was a breach of Appendix  FM-SE,  paragraph  34,
    which required her to provide "evidence  that,  as  a  result  of  age,
    illness or disability, the applicant requires long-term  personal  care
    should take the form of: (a)  independent  medical  evidence  that  the
    applicant's physical or mental condition means that they cannot perform
    everyday tasks; and (b) this must be from a  doctor  or  other  medical
    professional."  The FTTJ failed to address the requirements of FM-SE in
    his decision and this omission is a material error of law.

10. Insofar as the FTTJ's consideration of the Appellant's human rights  is
    concerned, I find that he has failed to follow the stepped guidance  in
    Razgar  v  SSHD  [2004]  UKHL  27.  He  has  failed  to  identify   the
    consequences of the interference with the Appellant's right to  respect
    for her family and/or private life and whether those consequences  were
    of such gravity as potentially to engage Article  8.   It  is  relevant
    here that the  Appellant  and  her  daughter  and  son-in-law  live  in
    different countries and have done so  for  many  years.   He  has  also
    conducted his assessment on the basis that the  interference  with  the
    Appellant's protected rights is in accordance  with  the  law,  whereas
    that is not the case.  This undermines his assessment to such a  degree
    that  it  is   not  sustainable.   In  any  event,  his  assessment  of
    proportionality is fundamentally flawed, based as it is on the  premise
    that the Respondent's decision was in breach of the Immigration  Rules,
    whereas the opposite is the case.  Whilst the FTTJ's failure  to  refer
    to the public interest factors listed in s117B of the 2002 Act is  not,
    without more, an error of law (Dube (ss.117A-117D)  [2015]  UKUT  00090
    (IAC),  his  failure  to  undertake  any  assessment  of  the  parties'
    competing interests is a material error. For all these  reasons,  there
    are material errors of law  in  the  FTTJ's  decision  in  relation  to
    Article 8.

11. As a result, none of the FTTJ's findings are sustainable.   I set aside
    the decision of the FTTJ and remake it dismissing  the  appeal  on  the
    grounds that the  Appellant,  having  failed  to  provide  the  medical
    evidence required under paragraph 35 of FM-SE, had not demonstrated she
    fulfilled the criteria in that paragraph or E-ECDR.2.4 or E-ECDR.2.5.

12. As regards Article 8, I have noted the evidence before  the  FTTJ.  The
    Appellant lived in Pakistan at the date of decision whilst her  sponsor
    and her sponsor's husband, who are both British, lived in the UK.   The
    Appellant was in poor health and financially dependent on  her  sponsor
    and her son-in-law in the UK.  Their family  life  consisted  of  their
    living in different households, in  different  countries,  albeit  with
    financial support. The burden of proving  that  Article  8  is  engaged
    rests with the Appellant. Given her personal circumstances and that the
    decision merely maintains the status quo, I am unable to find that  she
    has demonstrated that the interference with her own  and  her  family's
    protected rights is such as to engage Article 8,  even  given  the  low
    threshold for such engagement.

Decision

13. The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
    errors of law, as set out above.

14. I set aside the decision.

15. I re-make the decision  in  the  appeal  by  dismissing  it  under  the
    Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.


Signed      Date 7 September 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award

The FTTJ made a fee award. I set that award  aside:  the  Appellant  is  not
entitled to a fee award, the appeal having been dismissed.


Signed      Date 7 September 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black
