
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA067572015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26th April 2017                        |On 5th May 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                    [T O]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Burrett, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Secretary of State on behalf of the Entry Clearance  Officer  ("the
    ECO") appeals with permission against  the  decision  of  a  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Wylie) promulgated on 19th August  2016,  allowing  the
    appeal of the Respondent against the ECO's refusal to grant  him  entry
    clearance as the dependent child of his aunt, [CI].

 2. For the purposes of this decision I shall refer to  the  Respondent  as
    "the claimant" and to his aunt [CI] as "the sponsor".

Background

 3. The claimant is  a  national  of  Nigeria  born  [  ]  2001.   He  made
    application to enter the United Kingdom in order to join the sponsor as
    her dependent relative.  The claimant's mother died  in  November  2014
    and on 18th December 2014 his father signed an affidavit consenting  to
    the sponsor being his legal guardian.  This was on the basis  that  the
    claimant's father has a drink problem is therefore unable to  care  for
    him.

 4. At the time of the application for entry, the claimant was being  cared
    for by a local pastor and his wife.  It was  his  case  that  this  was
    meant as a temporary measure only and by the time of the FtT hearing he
    was being cared for by an unrelated elderly woman who lives in the same
    family village.  His welfare is funded by money sent from  his  sponsor
    in the UK.

 5. The ECO refused the application under paragraph 297 of the  Immigration
    Rules because he was not satisfied on several issues:

       . First that the claimant and the sponsor are related as claimed.

       . There was no evidence of the current care  arrangements  concerning
         the claimant; nor any evidence of why the current care arrangements
         could not continue.

       . There was nothing to show that the sponsor  provided  the  claimant
         with all the emotional, financial and  other  needs  which  he  may
         have, nor whether the sponsor exercised full control over the major
         aspects of the claimant's life such as schooling, religion, medical
         care etc.

 6. Drawing all these threads together, the ECO noted the  lack  of  detail
    regarding the claimant's current living  circumstances  in  Nigeria,  a
    country where he had lived his whole life, the  majority  of  the  time
    without the sponsor.  The ECO was not satisfied  therefore  that  there
    were serious and compelling family or other considerations  making  the
    claimant's exclusion undesirable and  that  suitable  arrangements  had
    been made for his care.

 7. The claimant appealed that decision and  his  appeal  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The FtT took evidence from the sponsor  and  also
    noted the affidavit  which  had  been  submitted  from  the  claimant's
    father.

 8. After setting out the claimant's case [8 to  16]  the  judge  said  the
    following:

         "19. Although there was no evidence from anyone except the  sponsor
             and no documents apart from the affidavit from the appellant's
             father relating to the appellant's  current  circumstances  in
             Nigeria, I accept the sponsor's evidence that the  appellant's
             father cannot care for him and there are no family members  in
             Nigeria to take over his care.  In  the  circumstances,  where
             his grandmother, aunts and an uncle all reside in  the  United
             Kingdom, and the sponsor has been given  guardianship  by  the
             appellant's father, I consider  that  there  are  serious  and
             compelling considerations which make his  exclusion  from  the
             United Kingdom undesirable."

    Following that paragraph, the judge allowed the claimant's appeal.  The
    ECO sought permission to appeal.

Onward Appeal

 9. The grounds seeking permission are succinct and are set out  under  the
    heading "Failing to give reasons or any adequate reasons  for  findings
    on material matters." In summary  the  grounds  claim  that  the  judge
    failed to make findings that the sponsor was a credible witness or that
    the affidavit from the claimant's father is a  reliable  document.   In
    the absence of such findings, it is said that the judge has  failed  to
    give adequate reasons for allowing the appeal.

    Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

         "2.  It is arguable that  the  Judge  has  erred  in  law  and  has
             misdirected herself by failing to provide adequate reasons for
             her decision when it was noted by the Judge there was no  oral
             evidence except from the Sponsor and  an  Affidavit  from  the
             Appellant's father setting out his circumstances  in  Nigeria.
             The Judge has gone on to state that she accepts this  evidence
             without providing any reasoning why she prefers  this  account
             over the ECO's decision.  The Judge makes no findings that she
             accepts the Sponsor is a credible witness or  that  she  finds
             the affidavit to be a reliable document."

    Thus the matter comes before me to decide if the decision  of  the  FtT
    discloses material error requiring it to be set aside and re-made.

The UT Hearing

10. Before me Ms Fijiwala appeared  for  the  Secretary  of  State  and  Mr
    Burrett for the claimant.  Ms Fijiwala's submissions kept to the  lines
    of the grounds seeking permission.  She argued that the FtT had  failed
    to consider and make reasoned findings on a number of matters,  all  of
    which were central to the ECO's decision.

11. Firstly, there were no findings made on whether the  claimant  and  his
    sponsor are related as claimed. Secondly there was no finding  made  on
    what are the current care arrangements for the claimant, nor any on why
    those arrangements cannot continue.  There was only minimal evidence of
    contact shown between the claimant and the sponsor.

12. She drew my attention to Mundeba (S.55 and paragraph 297(i)(f))  [2013]
    UKUT 00088 (IAC), which she said was authority for saying that in cases
    such as the present one what is required is an  assessment  of  whether
    the  claimant  is  living  in  an  unacceptable  social  and   economic
    environment.  The focus should be on the circumstances of the child  in
    the light of his age, social background and developmental history.

13. She said that the evidence before the FtT was  that  the  claimant  was
    being cared for in a country where he had lived all his life  with  his
    father and it would seem his basic needs were being met.  She submitted
    that  the  lack  of  reasoning  by  the  FtT  rendered   the   decision
    unsustainable and it should therefore be set aside for material error.

14. Mr Burrett on behalf of the claimant submitted it was open to the judge
    to allow the appeal on the evidence before her.  On a  reading  of  the
    decision the judge had made a finding that the sponsor and claimant are
    related as claimed [7].  She had taken into account  the  affidavit  of
    the claimant's father.  The arrangement with the pastor to  look  after
    the claimant was a temporary  one  and  the  FtT  accepted  that.   The
    grounds seeking permission amount to no more than a  disagreement  with
    the FtT's decision and it should therefore stand.

Consideration

15. I find I am satisfied that the decision of the FtT  contains  error  of
    law and I now give my reasons for this finding.  I find that  there  is
    force in Ms Fijiwala's argument and there  is  a  conspicuous  lack  of
    evidence in this case which has led to a lack of reasoned  findings  on
    the part of the FtT.

16. The Entry Clearance Officer refused this  application  on  the  grounds
    that he was not satisfied that the claimant had demonstrated that there
    are serious and compelling family and other considerations  making  his
    exclusion undesirable.  Despite Mr Burrett urging me otherwise, I  find
    that it is not clear that the judge has made findings at [7]  to  [16].
    I find that those paragraphs read as the judge simply setting  out  the
    sponsor's evidence.  I find any findings as such are limited  to  those
    set out in [19] and amount to a conclusion that the sponsor's  evidence
    is to be taken on face value without any  consideration  given  to  the
    factors set out in the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal.  To  consider
    only one side of  an  argument  amounts  to  an  error,  requiring  the
    decision to be set aside.  I hereby set aside the decision for  a  lack
    of reasoning. The decision will need to be re-made.

17. Ms Fijiwala submitted that because this  case  centred  on  a  "reasons
    argument" and  because  the  judge  had  not  made  proper  credibility
    findings, then the matter should be remitted to the  FtT  for  a  fresh
    hearing.  Mr Burrett agreed to that course but asked  that  I  preserve
    the finding which, he said, the FtT had made at [7]  setting  out  that
    the claimant and his sponsor are related as claimed.

18. Having considered that request I find that as the  credibility  of  the
    sponsor will need to be evaluated at  the  fresh  hearing,  it  is  not
    appropriate for me to preserve that finding.  I therefore set aside the
    FtT's decision in its entirety.  The matter will be  remitted  to  that
    Tribunal for the decision to be re-made.  It follows therefore that the
    Secretary of State's appeal is allowed insofar as the matter is now  to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal of [TO]  against
the Entry Clearance Officer's refusal to grant him entry  clearance  to  the
UK is set aside.  The matter is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (not
Judge Wylie) for that Tribunal to re-make the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     04 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
