
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06381/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 22nd September, 2014                       |On 10th October 2014         |
|Given extempore                               |                             |
|Signed 10th October, 2014                     |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                   Between

                                MRS NAYA BIBI

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     M Kajue, instructed by Sandbrook. Solicitors,
Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




   1.   The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on 24th January, 1992.
       She is the wife of Mr Shahid Ali, the sponsor.  She made  application
      to the Entry Clearance Officer Islamabad  for  entry  clearance  as  a
      partner under Appendix FM of the Statement of Changes  in  Immigration
      Rules HC 396 as amended.


   2.    In a decision dated 5th January, 2013, the Entry Clearance  Officer
      refused the application because wage slips for the six months prior to
      the date of application of the sponsor had not been submitted together
      with a letter from the sponsor's employer  who  issued  the  payslips,
      confirming the sponsor's  employment  and  gross  annual  salary,  the
      length of employment and the period over which the  sponsor  had  been
      paid the level of salary stated in the visa application, and  personal
      bank statements corresponding to the same period as  the  wage  slips,
      showing that the salary has been paid into an account in the  name  of
      the sponsor or into the name of the sponsor and his  partner  jointly.
      The appellant appealed and her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Ransley on 15th October, 2014.

   3.   At paragraph 18 of her determination  the  judge  made  findings  of
   fact.  She said this:

         "On the evidence before me I make the following findings of  fact.
         I find  that  the  applicant  submitted  her  application  on  15th
         November, 2012.  At the time of the  application  the  sponsor  had
         provided to the applicant five months' bank  statement  the  latest
         bank statement in his possession at the time being the October 2012
         one.  The sponsor received his November 2012 bank statement on 15th
         November, 2012.  It took five or six days for the bank statement to
         arrive in Pakistan by post.  The appellant could not have  received
         the sponsor's November 2012 bank statement until the week after she
         had submitted her application.  As  the  appellant  submitted  only
         five months of the sponsor's bank statements 13th June, 2012,  13th
         July, 2012, 13th  August,  2012,  13th  September,  2012  and  13th
         October, 2012 she did not meet the requirements of  Appendix  FM-SE
         which requires six months of bank statements to correspond with the
         six months  of  payslips  in  respect  of  the  sponsor's  salaried
         employment."


   4.    When the matter came for hearing before me, it became apparent that
      it had previously been adjourned by me on 25th July in order that  the
      Home Office Presenting Officer  could  make  enquiries  of  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer.  Enquiries reveal that the missing  bank  statement
      may have been before the Entry Clearance Officer, but if it was it was
      only a copy.


   5.   Counsel explained that the  sponsor  had  sent  his  wife  his  bank
      statement on 16th November, 2012, on the  day  that  he  received  it.
      That bank statement could not, therefore, have been submitted with the
      application, but it was submitted she  said  after  the  date  of  the
      application by the appellant.  Unfortunately  there  was  no  evidence
      before Judge Ransley to show that the appellant did  actually  receive
      the bank statement from the sponsor, or that she had subsequently sent
      it to the Entry Clearance Officer.

   6.   Counsel pointed out that after  the  date  of  the  Entry  Clearance
      Officer's decision, a whole year's worth  of  bank  statements  and  a
      whole year's worth of payslips had been sent by those representing the
      appellant to the Entry Clearance Officer, so that the Entry  Clearance
      Officer  could  have  been  satisfied  that  the  appellant  met   the
      requirements of the Rules.  The difficulty  with  that  submission  is
      that the Rules, in the  form  of  Appendix  FM-SE,  require  that  the
      documents be submitted with the application itself.

   7.    It became apparent that Judge Ransley had not dealt  with  all  the
      grounds of refusal by the Entry Clearance Officer.

   8.   The second ground of refusal was that the letter from  the  employer
      who issued the payslips confirming the sponsor's employment, does  not
      actually confirm the gross annual salary.  The letter of 10th October,
      2012, merely confirms that the sponsor is a permanent security officer
      with Advanced Security UK Limited and that his employment began on 1st
      September, 2010.  There was, it appears,  evidence  submitted  in  the
      form of a statement of earnings  completed  by  a  payroll  assistant,
      setting out his gross pay to date up to 23rd October, 2012,  but  that
      does not meet the requirements of FM-SE either, because  it  does  not
      state the gross annual salary or the length of employment.

   9.   Counsel suggested that the spirit of  the  Rules  had  clearly  been
      complied with by the appellant, because the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
      has, subsequent to the Entry Clearance Officer's decision, had a  full
      one year's worth of payslips and bank statements.  The Entry Clearance
      Officer knows very well the gross annual salary  of  the  sponsor  and
      knows also that the sponsor has been employed as  a  security  officer
      since 1st September, 2010 by Advanced Security Limited.

  10. However Appendix FM-SE 2(d)  specifically  requires  an  employer  who
      issued the payslips confirming

         "1.      The person's employment and gross annual salary.


         2.   The length of their employment.


         3.   The period over which they have been or were paid the level of
             salary relied upon in the application; and


         4.   The type  of  employment  (permanent  fixed-term  contract  or
         agency)."

      For whatever reason presumably because  she  was  satisfied  that  the
      appeal could not succeed in any event the  judge  did  not  go  on  to
      consider  whether  sufficient  wage  slips  were  submitted  with  the
      application or whether the letter that was submitted complied with the
      requirements of the Rules.

  11. It is unclear whether all the wage slips were in fact  submitted  with
      the application, because the evidence the judge took is contradictory.
       The sponsor gave evidence at the hearing before her to say  that  the
      six months' wage slips were sent to his wife sometime between 20th and
      25th October, 2012.  However the six months' wage slips would  include
      two weekly wage slips for November.  If they were sent by the  sponsor
      to the appellant and there was no evidence before the judge that  they
      were the evidence sent by the sponsor to his wife, there is  still  no
      evidence that the appellant  actually  submitted  them  to  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer.


  12. However I believe that the reason the judge did not deal with the full
      grounds is because she was satisfied that the appeal could not succeed
      in any event, because the bank statement had not been submitted.  Even
      if she was wrong in that, and even if the bank statement was submitted
      and even if the payslips had been submitted and were before the  Entry
      Clearance Officer before the date of decision, it is quite clear  that
      the  letter  from  the  employer  simply  does  not  comply  with  the
      requirements set out in Appendix FM-SE.  Any error on the part of  the
      judge would therefore not be material because it would not be  capable
      of affecting the outcome of the appeal.  I uphold her decision.   This
      appeal is dismissed.

Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
