

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06019/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                         |              Decision and Reasons    |
|                                         |promulgated                           |
|On 24 November 2015                      |              On 8 December 2015      |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 NASIR MIAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DACCA
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Ndubuisi, of Drummond Miller, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Saddiq, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 6  April  1967.   His
    wife and  sponsor  is  a  UK  citizen,  born  on  10  March  1957.   By
    determination promulgated on 5 March  2015  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Clough dismissed his appeal against refusal of  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse.

 2. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is taken on the following grounds:

      ...

        2.  The  Tribunal  found  that  the  appellant's  marriage  is  not
           subsisting and refused the appeal.

        3. ... The judge relied primarily on findings  in  respect  of  the
           sponsor's credibility; previous findings of  Judge  Blair  in  a
           previous determination, and additional findings of fact  by  the
           judge.

        4. The judge erred in the approach she applied ... failed  to  take
           into account material considerations; failed to provide adequate
           reasons for rejecting the appellant's explanations/evidence; and
           made findings of fact not supported by evidence, and  which  are
           simply speculative.

        5. At paragraph 17 ... Judge Clough adopted the findings  of  Judge
           Blair without providing adequate reasoning ... the  only  reason
           ... for refusing to accept the  sponsor's  evidence,  addressing
           issues raised in the previous  determination,  was  simply  that
           "the judge was  not  satisfied  that  the  sponsor's  vague  and
           evasive evidence about  the  appellant's  circumstances  at  the
           previous hearing can be so easily dealt with  by  the  sponsor's
           comment about her evidence then."  The proper procedure would be
           for the judge  to  consider  the  explanation  provided  by  the
           appellant and not simply dismiss this in the way  she  did.   By
           failing to take into account the appellant's  [sponsor's]  clear
           explanations the judge ... erred in law.

        6. The judge made a finding that the  difficulty  the  sponsor  was
           having in explaining matters or remembering some details ... was
           not as a result of her bad memory simply because she was able to
           provide information about her financial circumstances.  This  is
           simply an  inadequate  reason  to  reject  medical  evidence  by
           medical professionals that the sponsor  has  significant  memory
           problems.  The fact that the sponsor could  provide  information
           on certain aspects and not others  does  not  detract  from  the
           medical evidence, and therefore the judge erred in law  in  that
           she did not  provide  adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  or  not
           considering  the  evidence  of  the  medical  professionals  who
           advised that the sponsor was  suffering  from  poor  memory  and
           other health problems.

        7. Specifically the judge  found  at  paragraph  14  and  again  at
           paragraph 22 that the 10 year disparity [in age] between sponsor
           and appellant is "unusual given the matrimonial customs  of  the
           Bangladeshi community ... and would also want an explanation why
           he married the sponsor when she was past child bearing  age,  an
           unusual situation in this community and  if  he  was  previously
           married in Bangladesh" ... The judge was speculating as  to  the
           matrimonial customs of the Bangladesh community, as there was no
           evidence whatsoever ... if the Tribunal was concerned about this
           matter [it] should have been put to  the  sponsor  and  evidence
           led.  By relying on a speculative factor the judge significantly
           erred in law.  This is very material as it  weighed  heavily  on
           the judge's mind on reaching the conclusions she did.

        8. The judge also failed to take into account  the  fact  that  the
           appellant has now made 5 applications in the past 8 years,  over
           which period there has been evidence of relationship between the
           appellant and sponsor ... the judge  failed  to  assess  a  very
           relevant consideration ie the couple's continued devotion to one
           another after all these years.

 3. Mr Ndubuisi submitted further as follows.  AA (Somalia) v  SSHD  [2007]
    EWCA Civ 1040 supports the proposition that a  judge  has  to  make  an
    independent decision on the evidence before her, and it  would  not  be
    right simply to rely slavishly on a  decision  by  someone  else.   The
    judge fell into that error.  At paragraph 15 the judge found  that  the
    sponsor's benefit claim as a single  woman  was  "conclusive  evidence"
    that she did not consider her second marriage to be anything other than
    a paper transaction for the appellant's convenience.   That  conclusion
    was not justified.  The sponsor had been claiming as  a  single  person
    before the marriage and the appellant was removed only  8  months  into
    the marriage.  The sponsor was illiterate and incapable of taking  care
    of her own day to day  affairs,  as  borne  out  by  medical  evidence.
    Although it was accepted that  the  sponsor  should  have  advised  the
    authorities of her married status and that what she did  was  unlawful,
    it was nothing out of the ordinary and did not imply that the  marriage
    was other than genuine and subsisting.  The evidence on which the judge
    relied for that conclusion simply did not support it.  There  had  been
    abundant  evidence  of  contact:  the  sponsor's   yearly   travel   to
    Bangladesh, photographs of both together, telephone communications, and
    money transfers.  The judge did  not  take  into  account  the  medical
    evidence which bore on the sponsor's ability to give oral explanations.
     The judge simply relied on previous adverse decisions  by  two  judges
    (Judge Blair and Judge Deans).  There had been clear  evidence  of  the
    couple living  together  in  2002  to  2003  in  Birmingham  after  the
    marriage.  There was a joint bank account.  The evidence had  not  been
    properly evaluated and  viewed  holistically.   A  decision  should  be
    substituted in favour of the appellant.

 4. Mrs Saddiq submitted that the grounds of appeal are  only  disagreement
    on the facts.  The judge found that there is some relationship  between
    appellant and sponsor,  as  is  obviously  so,  but  that  it  did  not
    constitute a  genuine  subsisting  marriage.   She  gave  several  good
    reasons for not being satisfied by  the  evidence  for  the  appellant.
    There had been no statement from him.  The grounds  were  contradictory
    as to whether the sponsor was to be taken as a hopeless witness, or  as
    one who gave clear and reliable explanations.  The medical evidence did
    not support the proposition that she has any difficulty in giving  oral
    evidence.  The fact that she is illiterate is beside  the  point.   The
    judge was entitled to find it highly significant that the sponsor was a
    clear witness on some matters,  in  particular  on  her  own  financial
    affairs,  but  inconsistent  and  evasive  on  others.    The   grounds
    criticised the judge for taking account  of  the  cultural  background,
    which ironically was a point more often levelled against  judges.   The
    grounds did not suggest that the judge went wrong in her  understanding
    of the cultural background.  She had not speculated, but  assessed  the
    background correctly, on a point well within her scope  from  knowledge
    of similar cases.

 5. (Mr Ndubuisi confirmed that ground 5  is  intended  to  refer  to  "the
    sponsor's clear explanations"  not  the  appellant's.   The  presenting
    officer was correct in saying that there  was  no  statement  from  the
    appellant before the Tribunal.)

 6. I indicated that the appeal to the Upper Tribunal would not succeed.

 7. The one point which seems to me to be  well  taken  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant is  that  the  expression  at  paragraph  15  of  "conclusive
    evidence" goes too far.  Mr Ndubuisi resisted my suggestion that if the
    judge had said, for example,  "strong  evidence",  that  could  not  be
    quarrelled with; but in my opinion a finding to that extent would  have
    been plainly justified.

 8. Although the word conclusive might be wrong, that is far from being the
    only significant matter counting against the appellant.  In that  light
    it is a fairly minor and rather semantic point.  Otherwise, the grounds
    and submissions for the appellant disclose no legal error.   The  judge
    did not slavishly follow previous determinations,  but  correctly  took
    them as her starting point and then examined the evidence  before  her.
    The medical evidence does not say that  the  sponsor  lacks  day-to-day
    comprehension of her own affairs.  The grounds try to  have  this  both
    ways, suggesting that the judge should  have  made  allowance  for  her
    being a mentally feeble witness, and at the same time  that  the  judge
    erred by failing to take into  account  her  clear  explanations.   The
    grounds are only extended disagreement on the facts.

 9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

10. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            30 November 2015
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




