
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA061552014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th April 2016                            |On 8th June 2016              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                         miss trisan renee williams
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Rene, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica  born  on  3rd  March  1997.  The
    Appellant sought entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom  as  a  child
    dependant.  The Appellant's application was refused under paragraph 297
    of the Immigration Rules by the Entry Clearance Officer.  The Appellant
    appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Watt sitting at Hatton Cross on 1st  September  2015.   In  a  decision
    promulgated on 15th September 2015 the Appellant's appeal was dismissed
    both under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 2. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  13th
    October 2015.  On 4th March  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Simpson  granted  permission  to  appeal.  The  judge  noted  that  the
    Appellant claimed that the First-tier Tribunal Judge:-

      a) had failed to give due weight to the neglect that the Appellant was
         suffering at the hands of her aunt;

      b) had failed to give sufficient weight to the  Appellant's  need  for
         emotional support and guidance from her mother;

      c) had failed to give adequate consideration as to whether there  were
         stable arrangements for the child's physical care in Jamaica.

 3. Judge Simpson noted that the application was also made under  paragraph
    297(i)(e) (sole responsibility) although paragraph 297(i)(f)  was  also
    considered.  As the Sponsor was not a settled  person  any  application
    under paragraph 297 must, she considered, fail but it was arguable that
    consideration ought to have been given to  paragraph  301  which  would
    apply where a Sponsor has limited leave to  remain  as  in  this  case.
    Judge Simpson considered it was arguable that the matter ought to  have
    been remitted for reconsideration on that  issue  alone.   Further  she
    noted that the decision was silent as to whether the Sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility even though it was  not  apparently  disputed  that  the
    Appellant's natural  father  had  deserted  her  mother  prior  to  the
    Appellant's birth.  Judge Simpson considered the points raised  in  the
    grounds that they were all issues to be considered within  the  context
    of Article 8 once a decision  had  been  made  as  to  whether  or  not
    paragraph 301 would apply.  Finally it was  noted  that  there  was  an
    indication in the decision that the judge may have erroneously assessed
    the Appellant's circumstances as at the date of the hearing rather than
    at the date of application.

 4. A very lengthy  and  detailed  Rule  24  response  was  served  by  the
    Secretary of State on 16th March 2016.   I  have  given  due  and  full
    consideration to the Rule 24 response.  It is on this  basis  that  the
    appeal comes before me to determine whether or not there is a  material
    error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The
    Appellant appears by her instructed  Counsel,  Mr  Rene.   Mr  Rene  is
    familiar with this matter.  He appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.
     He is also the author of the Grounds  of  Appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Walker.

Preliminary Issue

 5. Whilst acknowledging that the grounds are very specific Mr  Rene  seeks
    to amend the Grounds  of  Appeal  to  take  into  account  the  judge's
    approach  to  Article  8.   He  acknowledges  that  that  is  a   fresh
    application.  He is opposed by Mr Walker.  I  ruled  that  the  grounds
    having not been previously considered by a judge as to whether  or  not
    there was is in fact even a prospective error of law on  the  purported
    amended ground, that it was inappropriate to bring such an  application
    before me for consideration at  this  stage  and  the  application  was
    dismissed.

Submission/Discussion

 6. Mr Rene contends that there is an error of law at paragraph 26  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision in that she has  directed  herself
    having considered the basis upon which  Article  8  was  considered  in
    Mundeba (Section 55 paragraph 297) [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC) to then  go  on
    and find that there is no evidence of neglect or abuse produced  before
    her set out at paragraph 30 of the decision.  He submits  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  sets  out  that  the  factors  in
    Mundeba have been identified to be in this appeal and that the evidence
    before  the  judge  is  unchallenged  namely  that  the  Appellant  was
    suffering from neglect  in  the  aunt's  household  which  led  to  the
    Appellant not being fed by the aunt nor attending school.   He  submits
    that the judge's interpretation diluted the real situation  and  failed
    to give due weight to this and  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  take
    account of the  Appellant's  letter  where  she  outlined  the  neglect
    suffered at the hands of her aunt.  He contends this is material.

 7. It is his contention that that letter was produced to the judge and  he
    also refers me to the Sponsor's witness statement  which  reflects  the
    lack of discipline being exercised on the Appellant because the Sponsor
    is not  present.   He  further  reiterates  that  the  aunt  had  drawn
    attention herself to the situation within the household.   He  contends
    that the factual matrix  created  compelling  circumstances  which  the
    judge failed to address.

 8. So far as the grant of leave is concerned he submits that  this  should
    have been considered under paragraph 301 and that  paragraph  301(i)(b)
    addresses the issue of sole responsibility and the judge did  not  make
    findings with regard to sole responsibility.  He accepts that paragraph
    301 is not set out in the Notice of Refusal but had it  been  it  would
    have been open to the Appellant and her representatives  to  take  this
    into account before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 9. Finally he takes me to paragraph 12 of the Rule 24 response and submits
    that the  broad  brush  approach  expressed  therein  and  the  seeming
    reliance on SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387 dilutes the strength of  the
    sole responsibility argument.  He asked me to  find  that  there  is  a
    material error of law, to set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and to remit it for rehearing.

10. Mr Walker in response points out that at paragraph 9  of  the  decision
    all documents before the judge are listed including a letter  from  the
    Appellant and therefore this was considered.   He  further  points  out
    that the judge has made findings regarding  the  present  situation  in
    Jamaica and whilst may not have made specific reference to the  content
    of that letter, it was, he contends, an issue that was before the judge
    and that no material error of law is  disclosed  and  that  the  appeal
    should be dismissed.



The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Finding

13. The judge has, as Mr Walker has commented, set out at paragraphs 8  and
    9 copies of the documents that were before  him.   That  in  itself  of
    course does not mean that they have been considered  but  it  at  least
    indicates that the judge has addressed the issues  that  were  present.
    This includes the Appellant's letter.  The judge has thereafter gone on
    to consider all the relevant factors.  These  are  set  out  in  detail
    firstly in the evidence set out at paragraphs 12 and 13 and  thereafter
    at the conclusions reached specifically a paragraph 30.   Paragraph  30
    is important.  The judge has started by addressing  the  issue  of  the
    child's welfare.  Whilst acknowledging that  the  judge  has  not  made
    specific reference to the content of the letter, the judge has  therein
    gone into some detail in assessing the current  situation  in  Jamaica.
    The judge has made findings that he was entitled to.  He  has  accepted
    that the relationships are not good between the Appellant and her  aunt
    and her aunt's partner.  He has set out the extent of the evidence that
    was before him and has quite properly given  due  consideration  as  to
    whether there are compelling circumstances  which  would  lead  to  the
    conclusion that there has been an  interference  with  the  Appellant's
    Article 8 rights.  He has found that there was  not.   I  am  satisfied
    that whilst the  judge  has  not  set  out  in  any  great  detail  the
    individual evidence within paragraph 30 he has done sufficient and  has
    considered the general factors and made findings which he was  entitled
    to.

14. So far as the other issues are concerned,  whilst  suggestion  is  made
    that this matter should have been considered under paragraph  301,  the
    fact remains that it was not and it was not taken up previously.  It is
    not open at this stage which is an appeal against the analysis  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge to raise that issue and even the  raising  of
    it does not, I am satisfied, reflect that there is a material error  of
    law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  Further  I  note
    that this issue is in any event addressed at paragraphs 7 and 8 of  the
    Rule 24 response.

15. In addition I find the submissions made with regard  to  the  purported
    dilution to the strength of sole responsibility contended at  paragraph
    12 in the Rule 24 amounts to little more  than  mere  disagreement  and
    that paragraph 30 albeit succinct shows that the judge has analysed all
    issues  and  made  findings  which  he  was  entitled  to.    In   such
    circumstances the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  discloses
    no material error of law and the Appellant's appeal  is  dismissed  and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses no material error  of  law
and the Appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of  the  First-tier
Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 8th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.




Signed                              Date 8th June 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

