
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06502/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18 August 2016                    |On 23 August 2016                     |
|                                     |                                      |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, AMMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        Dr KADHIM QASIM ALI AL-RUBAYE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Nicholson, Counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant (the Secretary of State) appealed with  permission
         granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies on  29  June  2016
         against the decision  and  reasons  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Whitcombe  who  had  allowed  on  Article  8   ECHR   grounds   the
         Respondent's appeal against the Appellant's decision dated 31 March
         2015 to refuse to grant the Respondent leave to  enter  the  United
         Kingdom as a business visitor for 12 days. The decision and reasons
         was promulgated on 3 February 2016.

    2.     The Respondent is a national of Iraq, born there on 1 July 1947,
         hence 69 years of age.  Paragraphs 41 and 46G  of  the  Immigration
         Rules applied (since repealed and replaced  by  Appendix  V).   The
         application was  refused  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  under
         paragraphs 41 and paragraph 46G for failure to  provide  sufficient
         evidence, including original  supporting  documents.   It  was  not
         accepted that the Appellant intended to leave the United Kingdom at
         the conclusion of his visit nor that the purpose of his  visit  was
         business.  The Entry Clearance Officer invoked paragraph 320(7A) of
         the Immigration Rules, because the Respondent had replied  "No"  to
         question 77 of his VAF ("Do you have friends or family in the UK").
          Yet records showed that the Respondent's wife had  applied  for  a
         United  Kingdom  family  visit  visa  to  see   their   son.    The
         Respondent's answer was false.  That was treated as  a  failure  to
         disclose material facts, with the  result  that  any  future  entry
         clearance applications would be refused under paragraph 320(7B)  of
         the Immigration Rules resulting mandatory  refusal  of  any  future
         applications for a period of 10 years.

    3.     Judge Whitcombe recognised that because the visa application had
         been made after 25 June 2013, the right of appeal to the First-tier
         Tribunal was limited to  Equality  Act  2010  and  Article  8  ECHR
         issues: section 84(1)(b) and (c), the Nationality, Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002.   (No  Equality  Act  2010  issues  were  in  fact
         raised.)  Judge Whitcombe stated that the Article 8 ECHR appeal had
         to be approached by examining whether or not the Immigration  Rules
         had been met.  He found at [29] of his decision that the  Appellant
         had been genuinely unaware that he was  required  to  disclose  the
         presence of his son in the United Kingdom, i.e. there had  been  no
         dishonesty.  At [36](iii) the  judge  found  that  the  information
         regarding family members was  immaterial  in  any  event,  in  part
         because the Home Office Presenting Officer at the hearing had  been
         unable to justify how such information related to a business visit.
          The judge found that the Immigration Rules had been complied  with
         as  there  was  no  requirement  for  the  production  of  original
         documents to support  an  entry  clearance  application,  and  that
         weight was due to the copy documents produced and to the difficulty
         of producing originals from Iraq under  current  conditions  there.
         He went on to find  that  there  was  family  life  which  required
         respect for Article 8 ECHR purposes, that the refusal decision  was
         not in accordance with the law (see [40]) and was disproportionate.
          Importantly, the judge found that the potential 10 year ban  faced
         by the Appellant because of the application  of  paragraph  320(7A)
         was a component of disproportionality: see [39].  Hence the  appeal
         was allowed.

    4.     Permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  as  sought  by  the
         Appellant was granted by Judge Mark Davies  because  he  considered
         that it was arguable that the  judge  had  wrongly  concluded  that
         there was family life between the Appellant  and  his  son  in  the
         United Kingdom.   No  dependency  had  been  found,  simply  normal
         emotional ties.  That was an arguable material error of law.

    5.     Standard directions were made by the Upper Tribunal,  indicating
         that the appeal would be reheard  and  remade  immediately  in  the
         event that a material error of law were found.  There was  no  rule
         24 notice opposing the appeal, but the Appellant was  unrepresented
         until the day of the Upper Tribunal hearing.

    Submissions - error of law

    6.     Miss Ahmad for the Secretary of State submitted that this was  a
         clear case of legal error, as the grant of permission to appeal  by
         the First-tier Tribunal  indicated.   As  the  grounds  of  onwards
         appeal stated, the judge had not begun by  considering  whether  or
         not Article 8 ECHR was engaged at all: Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ  31
         applied.  There had been no examination of the nature of the family
         ties.  No evidence of dependency had been provided.  The impact  of
         a 10 year ban was a subsidiary issue for these purposes.  There was
         no jurisdiction in the First-tier Tribunal.  The  judge's  approach
         to the potential 10 year ban had in any  event  been  misconceived.
         Other remedies existed, such a fresh  application  explaining  what
         had happened, or an application for judicial review.

    7.     Moreover, the judge's reasons for allowing the appeal under  the
         Immigration Rules (as a preliminary to his Article 8 ECHR findings)
         were inadequately reasoned.  The Entry Clearance Officer's case had
         not been addressed at [29] or elsewhere in the decision.   Nor  had
         the judge found  compelling  circumstances  which  justified  going
         outside the Immigration Rules: SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387  had
         not been applied.  The decision was defective  and  should  be  set
         aside.  The appeal should be remade and dismissed, as there was  no
         jurisdiction.

    8.     Mr Nicholson for the Respondent relied on his skeleton argument.
          The first point taken by the Appellant was  the  adequacy  of  the
         judge's reasoning, with reference to [29]  of  the  decision.   But
         that had ignored the  judge's  further  reasoning  given  at  [36].
         There had been no irrationality or perversity by the judge.  He had
         applied the correct test as explained in AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010]
         EWCA Civ 773 and had found that there had been no dishonesty by the
         Respondent when making his entry clearance application.  The  judge
         had invited the Home Office Presenting Officer to explain what  was
         material about question 77 of the VAF and the judge had been  right
         to be dissatisfied about the explanation provided:  see  [36(iii)].
         He had addressed himself to the Respondent's  state  of  mind  when
         considering dishonesty, and reached a sustainable finding.

    9.     As to the existence of family life, the Secretary of  State  was
         in error by attempting to interpret Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 too
         restrictively.  A fact sensitive approach was needed, as  explained
         in PT (Sri Lanka) v Entry Clearance Officer,  Chennai  [2016]  EWCA
         Civ 612, approving Ghising v Secretary of  State  [2012]  UKUT  160
         (IAC).  The fact of the 10 year ban  consequent  on  the  paragraph
         320(7A)  decision  was  a  relevant  consideration,  because   that
         interfered with the  future  development  of  family  life,  indeed
         because of the age of the Respondent  might  effectively  end  that
         possibility.  The judge was right to find that the Entry  Clearance
         Officer's decision amounted to a disproportionate interference with
         the Appellant's family life.

    10.    In reply, Miss Ahmed briefly reiterated her earlier submissions.

    The error of law finding

    11.    The tribunal reserved  its  decision  which  now  follows.   The
         number of reported appeals concerning visit visas since  restricted
         appeal rights to the First-tier Tribunal were introduced,  and  the
         variations in approach and emphasis, indicates  the  conceptual  or
         philosophical  problems  which  arise.   Judge  Whitcombe  made   a
         conscientious effort to tackle those problems.  The Upper  Tribunal
         should not lightly interfere with decisions made by the  First-tier
         Tribunal, not least when positive credibility  findings  have  been
         made.  There is no scope for a mere difference of opinion in  areas
         where a range of reasonable opinions consistent  with  the  current
         law exists, of  which  Article  8  ECHR  appeals  provide  a  ready
         example.  Here, however, it is a question of the substance  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal's reasoning.   In  this  tribunal's  view,  the
         judge fell into a number of  material  errors.   His  decision  and
         reasons cannot stand and must be set aside and remade.

    12.    What is the correct starting point in visit  visa  appeals?  The
         restrictions  imposed  by  parliament  in   section   84   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 mean that  only  visit
         appeals raising Article 8 ECHR issues  can  be  argued  before  the
         First-tier Tribunal.  The only route of challenge to  the  decision
         under the Immigration Rules as  such  was  restricted  to  judicial
         review.  In Adjei (visit visas - Article 8) [2015] UKUT 0261 (IAC),
         it was held that the first question to be addressed in  visit  visa
         appeals was whether Article 8 ECHR was engaged  at  all.   In  Kaur
         (visit appeals; Article 8) [2015] UKUT 00487, the  headnote  states
         the starting point for deciding that a decision is  unlawful  under
         section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 must be  the  state  of  the
         evidence about the appellant's ability to meet the requirements  of
         paragraph 41 of the Immigration Rules.  The approach recommended in
         Adjei (above) was not stated to be wrong in Kaur.  It follows  that
         the first question is whether or not the appeal engages  Article  8
         ECHR at all.

    13.    Judge Whitcombe took  a  different  approach.   It  was  logical
         enough, in that it is now accepted that  Article  8  ECHR  must  be
         approached by the tribunal through  the  lens  of  the  Immigration
         Rules:  see,   e.g.,   MF   (Nigeria)   [2013]   EWCA   Civ   1192.
         Unfortunately,  however,  none  of  Mostafa  (Article  8  in  entry
         clearance) [2015] UKUT 112 (IAC), Adjei or Kaur was  cited  to  the
         judge, hence his omission to consider whether Article  8  ECHR  was
         engaged in the first place.   Mostafa  at  [24]  offered  a  useful
         warning: "We are, however, prepared to say that it will only be  in
         very unusual  circumstances  that  a  person  other  than  a  close
         relative will be able to show that the refusal of  entry  clearance
         comes within the scope of Article 8(1). In practical terms this  is
         likely to be limited to cases where the  relationship  is  that  of
         husband and wife or other close life partners or a parent and minor
         child and even then it will not necessarily be  extended  to  cases
         where, for example, the proposed visit is based on a whim  or  will
         not add significantly to the time that the  people  involved  spend
         together."  A similar point is made at [27] of Kaur, with reference
         to [54] to [56] of SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.

    14.    Now the Respondent was  seeking  a  business  visa  and  he  had
         expressly denied having any family  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The
         Article 8 ECHR dimension in such  circumstances  was  at  most  his
         private life.  Question 77 of the VAF asked about  friends  in  the
         United Kingdom as well as family.  The Respondent  stated  that  he
         had no friends in the United Kingdom.   That  answer  will  receive
         further attention below,  but  on  its  face  indicated  a  minimal
         Article 8  ECHR  dimension.   Family  life  was  mentioned  by  the
         Respondent for the first time in his Notice of Appeal.

    15.    In the tribunal's judgment, the correct starting  place,  having
         established that no Equality Act 2010 issues  arose,  was  for  the
         First-tier Tribunal to determine whether Article  8  ECHR  engaged.
         It seems to the tribunal that it was too late to raise family  life
         in the Notice of Appeal, although the point was responded to by the
         Entry Clearance Manager in his review, so the issue may be said  to
         be live in the present appeal.  (No private life issue were  raised
         in the Notice of Appeal.)  The family relationships  relied  on  by
         the Respondent which he had earlier failed to  disclose  were  with
         his son, daughter-in-law and their children.  What was  the  nature
         of the family relationship?

    16.    There was no dispute that  the  two  families  have  long  lived
         apart,  in  different  and  distant  countries.   The  son  is   an
         independent adult, successful in his  own  right.   No  ties  going
         beyond ordinary parental/grandparental  relationships  were  shown.
         There  was  nothing  unusual,  no  emotional  dependency   or   any
         circumstance of any kind capable of being seen as  compelling:  see
         SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  The current terms on which  family
         life and connections were maintained was not interfered with by the
         Entry Clearance Officer's decision to refuse the Respondent a short
         business visit visa.

    17.    In the tribunal's view it was an  error  of  law  to  treat  the
         potential future interference  with  the  Respondent's  ability  to
         visit  the   United   Kingdom   as   engaging   Article   8   ECHR,
         notwithstanding the scope of Article 8 ECHR which can extend to the
         development of family life.  In the tribunal's view,  the  form  of
         the family life between the relevant individuals had been fixed  by
         the Respondent's son decision to practice  his  profession  in  the
         United Kingdom and to make the United Kingdom his home and to raise
         his own family there.  The Respondent had the  separate  remedy  of
         judicial review available to challenge the refusal under  paragraph
         320(7A) of the Immigration Rules. If, for example,  the  Respondent
         applied for a visit visa in future under Appendix V,  he  could  in
         the first instance explain his "mistake"  to  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officer and invite a review of the application of paragraph 320(7A)
         to the previous business  visit  visa  application.   If  mandatory
         refusal still followed, he would have a  right  of  appeal  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal on Article 8  ECHR  grounds,  or  the  separate
         option of judicial review.   Thus  the  stage  of  Article  8  ECHR
         interference was not reached  when  the  business  visit  visa  was
         refused and the appeal failed at the first  hurdle.   That  is  the
         tribunal's judgment is the end of the  appeal.   Nevertheless,  the
         tribunal will consider the alternative argument which  was  put  on
         the Respondent's behalf.

    18.    Here it should be noted in passing that the judge at [40] of his
         decision and reasons indicated a faulty  appreciation  of  step  or
         question 3 of the familiar Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27  analysis.   The
         question is whether there was power in law  to  make  the  relevant
         decision, not whether the decision  was  correctly  made.   Plainly
         there was such power under the Immigration Rules.   It  is  obvious
         that the power is necessary  and  is  exercised  in  pursuit  of  a
         legitimate objective: see the discussion at [18ff]  of  Kaur.   The
         issue for the tribunal was proportionality if it  were  found  that
         the Immigration Rules had been complied with.

    19.    If the tribunal were mistaken to find that the judge  materially
         erred in finding that Article 8 ECHR  was  engaged  in  a  business
         visit visa application because of the potential  future  dimension,
         and that the tribunal was thus entitled to  entertain  the  appeal,
         the correct next step was (as the judge did) to examine whether the
         Respondent had complied with the Immigration Rules.  Here again the
         judge fell into material legal error.  He seems to have  considered
         that he was entitled to substitute his own views  of  a  number  of
         matters.

    20.    Paragraph 46G of the Immigration  Rules  was  lengthy.   It  can
         readily be consulted and so is not  reproduced  here.     Paragraph
         34A(i) of the Immigration Rules requires the use of  the  specified
         form where prescribed, and paragraph 34(iii) requires the mandatory
         completion  of  the  sections  so  designated.   Paragraph   39B(d)
         requires the production of originals where specified documents must
         be produced.  Paragraph 46G made no  express  stipulation  for  the
         provision of original documents, nor were any documents  specified,
         in contrast, for example, with Appendix FM-SE.  The VAF  which  the
         Respondent was required to complete commenced  with  a  declaration
         that the information provided was "complete and correct to the best
         of my knowledge and belief".  An express warning of a potential  10
         year ban was given of the consequences of using a  false  document,
         lie or withholding information. The  importance  of  answering  all
         questions and of answering them accurately was thus  stressed.   No
         particular documents were specified in the form.

    21.    The judge considered that the Entry Clearance Officer was  wrong
         not to give  the  scanned  documents  provided  by  the  Respondent
         weight.   The  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  however,   stated   that
         applicants were  advised  "through  notices  and  at  the  time  of
         application that original documents should be submitted in  support
         of a visa application".  The judge gave no reason for  disbelieving
         that statement by a public official and it is  difficult  to  think
         any reason for doubting it.  Yet the judge failed to explain why he
         refused to take that evidence  of  practice  into  account  in  his
         assessment.   The fact that the Respondent may have been  permitted
         to use scanned  or  copy  documents  in  previous  successful  visa
         applications is irrelevant, because conditions  change,  rules  are
         tightened and vigilance is increased.  The Entry Clearance  Officer
         was applying the current  procedures.   The  visa  application  was
         processed at the British Embassy in Amman, Jordan.  It  is  not  at
         all easy to see how the judge supposed  that  the  Entry  Clearance
         Officers in Amman would or could  be  unaware  of  current  country
         conditions in Iraq with which Jordan shares a border and  make  all
         proper allowances for them when considering applications from Iraqi
         nationals.

    22.    The further error was the judge's approach to  the  Respondent's
         incorrect answer to question 77 of the VAF,  where  the  Respondent
         denied both friends and family in the United Kingdom.   The  denial
         of friends was in itself  remarkable  in  a  distinguished  medical
         practitioner who  was  a  regular  attendee  on  the  international
         medical circuit, as the unchallenged  travel  history  he  provided
         showed.  He had been honoured as a Physician Fellow  of  the  Royal
         College of Physicians and Surgeons of Glasgow on 24  October  2012.
         He provided a long list of his  learned  articles,  which  included
         subjects such as "An  Overview  of  Health  Care  in  Basra  during
         British Occupation" (1992), "The Black Death and the  Great  Plague
         of London" (2002), which suggested a longstanding interest  in  the
         United Kingdom.  It would be surprising if a learned  and  sociable
         person of distinction had developed  no  personal  or  professional
         friendships in the United Kingdom.   That was not considered by the
         judge. It was so obvious that it should have been.

    23.    It was accepted by the Respondent that he had  failed  to  state
         the presence of his son, daughter-in-law and their children in  the
         United Kingdom.  The judge gave some reasons for finding  that  the
         Respondent was "genuinely unaware" and that  it  was  an  "innocent
         mistake".  Those reasons were in the  tribunal's  view  inadequate.
         They failed to take into account the clear text of the  declaration
         signed by an experienced, well educated English speaking man.  They
         failed to take into account the  fact  that  it  was  not  for  the
         Respondent to decide what was relevant or material, but  simply  to
         provide the information  demanded  from  him.   It  was  a  simple,
         straightforward  question  which  admitted  of  only  one  possible
         truthful answer.

    24.    Nor was it for the judge to determine  whether  the  information
         demanded on a prescribed UK Visas and Immigration form was material
         or immaterial:  see  [36(iii)]  of  the  determination.   The  only
         relevant fact was that it was  required.   The  reasons  which  the
         judge gave for finding that the information was  not  material  are
         both inadequate and  difficult  to  understand.   It  is  perfectly
         obvious that the question is both  relevant  and  highly  material.
         The presence of friends and relatives in the United  Kingdom  is  a
         factor to be assessed when the Entry Clearance Officer  weighs  the
         probability of departure from the United Kingdom at the  conclusion
         of the intended visit.  It is  a  frequently  publicised  and  well
         known fact that overstaying is a large problem for the Home Office,
         involving thousands of persons each year.  Possibly  the  Appellant
         was in a position to demonstrate ties to Iraq and a firm  intention
         to return but those ties could not  be  assessed  properly  by  the
         Entry Clearance Officer without  full  knowledge  of  all  material
         facts.  The failure to disclose family  (and  in  all  probability,
         friends) in the United Kingdom was material and was bound to excite
         justified  suspicion  of  dishonesty,  which  in  turn   reasonably
         affected the view taken of  the  copy  documents  supplied  by  the
         Respondent.  It might still have been possible  for  the  judge  to
         have found that the Appellant had not been  deliberately  dishonest
         but the reasons which the judge gave  were  singularly  inadequate.
         The fact that the judge stated that he considered that the question
         was immaterial suggests that his whole approach to the fact finding
         exercise required was not balanced. The  discussion  at  [18ff]  of
         Kaur should have guided him. His finding that the Immigration Rules
         had been complied with cannot stand.

    25.    Mr Nicholson argued that in the event that the tribunal  decided
         that it must set aside the  determination,  the  appeal  should  be
         reheard.    The   tribunal   has   given   that   request   careful
         consideration, but takes the view that the appeal can and should be
         determined without a rehearing.  Mr  Nicholson's  submissions  were
         all embracing.  In  any  event  the  tribunal  considers  that  the
         reality of this appeal is that Article 8 ECHR was  not  engaged  on
         the essential facts of the appeal.

    Discussion and fresh decision

    26.    Here the tribunal will refer to their parties  by  the  original
         designations.  The Appellant's application was for a business  visa
         to visit the United Kingdom for a medical conference for  12  days.
         He failed to disclose the presence of close family  in  the  United
         Kingdom.  That is not in dispute.  The purpose of his  journey  was
         not to see his family, he said.  It is impossible to  see  how  the
         decision to refuse  the  application  because  of  his  failure  to
         produce sufficient evidence coupled with his  failure  to  disclose
         the presence of close family in the United Kingdom engages  Article
         8  ECHR  at  all.   The  existing  form  of  family  life   between
         independent adults  is  not  subject  to  interference.   There  is
         nothing to stop the  family  from  reuniting  for  the  purpose  of
         visits, whether in Iraq or another country.  There are ample  funds
         available and the Appellant has been a regular traveller.

    27.    It was submitted on the Appellant's behalf that  the  imposition
         of a 10 year ban  on  the  Appellant  because  of  his  failure  to
         disclose material facts brought Article 8 ECHR into play, in  terms
         of the prospect of the development of family life  in  the  future.
         That seems to the tribunal to be an extravagant submission, for the
         reasons given above. This was a business visa application.  Article
         8 ECHR was not engaged and  so  consideration  of  the  Immigration
         Rules does not arise. It remains open to the Appellant  to  make  a
         fresh visit visa application based on a wish to see his  family  in
         the United Kingdom.  As noted above,  in  the  event  of  a  future
         refusal he will have the option of seeking judicial  review  or  of
         raising Article 8 ECHR on an appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.
          The present appeal is accordingly dismissed.

    28.    There was no application for  an  anonymity  direction  and  the
         tribunal sees no need for one.

    DECISION

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.  The tribunal allows the onwards appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, sets aside the original decision  and  remakes  the  original
    decision as follows:

    The appeal is dismissed




    Signed Dated 23rd August 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




    TO THE RESPONDENT
    FEE AWARD

    The appeal was dismissed.  There can be no fee award




    Signed Dated 23rd August 2016


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
