
[pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06814/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th December 2015                |On 13th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL


                                   Between

                               Mrs SADIF IQBAL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  to  refuse  her  entry
clearance as a spouse was dismissed by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lagunju
("the judge") in a decision promulgated  on  19th  March  2015.   The  Entry
Clearance Officer made an adverse  finding  in  relation  to  Section  E-ECP
(eligibility for entry clearance as a  partner)  of  the  Immigration  Rules
("the rules") in a decision made on 17th  April  2014.   Having  taken  into
account telephone bills, photographs of the wedding  day  on  27th  February
2011 and money transfer receipts, the Entry Clearance  Officer  ("the  ECO")
was  not  satisfied  that  the  evidence   showed   that   the   appellant's
relationship with her sponsor subsisted or that the couple intended to  live
together permanently in the United Kingdom.

2.   In dismissing the appeal against  that  decision,  the  judge  recorded
briefly and took into account evidence  given  by  the  appellant's  sponsor
here and documentary evidence which  included  telephone  cards.   She  took
into account an earlier decision  promulgated  in  May  2013,  in  which  an
appeal against earlier refusal of entry clearance was dismissed.  The  judge
found that there was a paucity  of  evidence  showing  contact  between  the
appellant and her sponsor between  August  2011  and  April  2014,  although
evidence did show contact after the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance.
Overall, the judge concluded that there was no reliable  evidence  that  the
appellant and her sponsor had an abiding interest in each other and went  on
to find that  the  couple  were  not  in  a  subsisting  relationship.   She
accepted that the sponsor visited Pakistan in January 2012 and May 2014  but
found in relation to the former  visit  that  the  sponsor's  oral  evidence
alone was insufficient to show that he spent  time  with  the  appellant  on
that occasion and, so far as the second is concerned, the judge  found  that
this amounted to an attempt to  create  the  appearance  of  a  genuine  and
subsisting relationship.

3.   In grounds seeking permission to appeal,  it  was  contended  that  the
judge erred in her approach to the earlier decision and failed  to  properly
apply the "Devaseelan"  guidelines.   There  were  not  adverse  credibility
findings in the earlier decision.  Secondly, the judge failed  to  give  any
weight to evidence given by the sponsor's brother, there  being  no  mention
of this evidence in the decision.  Thirdly, the judge  overlooked  important
parts of the evidence, including telephone bills, and  appeared  to  confine
her assessment of the evidence to telephone cards relied upon.

4.   Permission to appeal was refused initially but an Upper Tribunal  Judge
gave permission on 7th September 2015, the application having been  renewed.
 In a rule 24 response prepared on behalf of the Secretary of State  on  6th
October 2015, the appeal was opposed on the basis that the judge's  findings
were open to her.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Mr Aslam said  that  the  bundle  of  evidence  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal was substantial.  The  case  concerned  a  marriage  contracted  in
February 2011.  The judge only considered telephone cards,  in  relation  to
contact between the appellant and her sponsor, and not the mobile  telephone
bills that appeared in the bundle at pages 216 to  242.   These  were  bills
relating to June 2011.  The judge's error was shown in  the  description  of
this part of the evidence as being the telephone cards  "in  isolation".   A
related point concerned the evidence of remittances of  funds  between  2011
and 2014, at paragraph 19 of the decision.  Here the judge  speculated  that
the money transfers were for the benefit of  a  relative,  even  though  the
receipts showed the appellant's name.

6.   Similarly, the judge did  not  fully  engage  with  the  oral  evidence
before her.  The sponsor's brother gave evidence but there  was  no  mention
of this in the decision and no assessment.  This suggested  that  no  weight
was given to the evidence and if the judge  had  intended  to  make  such  a
finding, at the very least an explanation was required.

7.   So far as  the  Devaseelan  guidelines  were  concerned,  the  decision
showed that the judge took as a starting point the  earlier  2013  decision.
However, in issue in that appeal were adverse findings by the overseas  post
regarding accommodation and maintenance but there was  nothing  putting  the
subsistence of the relationship in issue.  The judge in the  present  appeal
made an adverse credibility finding but the earlier  decision  contained  no
such finding.  Instead, the judge on that occasion found that  the  evidence
was not sufficiently clear  but  this  was  far  from  a  finding  that  the
appellant and her sponsor were dishonest or not credible  witnesses.     The
judge made no findings regarding the marriage, this being hardly  surprising
as the subsistence of the relationship was not in issue.  The judge  in  the
present appeal misapplied the Devaseelan guidelines in finding  the  sponsor
not credible.  This error  infected  the  way  in  which  the  evidence  was
approached.

8.   Mr Nath said that the judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence  regarding
contact appeared at paragraphs 14 and 15 of the decision  and  the  findings
were open to her on the evidence.  She was entitled  to  find  that  contact
shown by WhatsApp messages were postdecision but not  reliable  evidence  of
contact between the parties to the marriage at any earlier stage.   Mr  Nath
said that he accepted that the subsistence of the marriage was not in  issue
in the 2013 appeal but, overall, the judge approached the  earlier  decision
correctly.  The assessment of the  visits  in  2012  and  2014  was,  again,
properly made and open to the judge.

9.   In a brief response, Mr Aslam said that the judge clearly took the  May
2014 visit into account, without giving the visit  the  weight  due  to  it.
The  speculation  about  the  money  transfers  was  not   sustainable   and
illustrated  the  judge's  approach  to  the  credibility  of  the  sponsor.
Overall, the second application for entry clearance showed that the  parties
to the marriage had not given up.  Nearly five years had  passed  since  the
marriage.  None of the findings of fact could be sustained.

10.  In a brief discussion about venue, should an error  of  law  be  found,
both representatives agreed that the appeal should be returned to the First-
tier Tribunal, in the light of paragraph 7.2  of  the  Senior  President  of
Tribunal's Practice Statement of 2012, taking into  account  the  extent  of
the fact-finding required.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11.  As noted by the Upper Tribunal Judge who gave permission to appeal,  it
is clear from the judge's Record  of  Proceedings  (at  page  12)  that  the
sponsor's brother gave oral evidence.  He adopted a witness statement  which
appeared in the appellant's bundle at  pages  88  and  89.   He  was  cross-
examined.  Nowhere in the judge's decision is  there  any  mention  of  this
evidence.  Paragraph 8 simply records that the sponsor adopted  his  witness
statement and was briefly examined and  cross-examined.   As  the  brother's
evidence clearly bears on the subsistence of the relationship,  and  whether
or not it is a genuine marriage, as is clear  from  his  witness  statement,
the omission of any mention of that evidence is important.   The  judge  may
have had good reason to give the brother's evidence little  weight  but,  at
the very least, it should have been mentioned and assessed.  Paragraphs  13,
15 and 16 record parts of the sponsor's evidence and lead to  a  conclusion,
at paragraph 17, that the  judge  does  not  accept  that  the  sponsor  had
contact with the appellant during a period of almost four years.   There  is
nothing to show that the evidence of the other live witness was  taken  into
account.

12.  So far as Devaseelan is concerned, the judge directed herself that  the
earlier decision failed to be taken into account as a starting point.   That
was probably correct, although the subsistence of the relationship  was  not
in issue in the earlier appeal because entry clearance had been  refused  on
the basis that the requirements of the  rules  regarding  accommodation  and
maintenance were not met.  If the judge did properly direct herself to  take
into account the earlier appeal, at least in relation  to  the  facts  found
about the marriage and the circumstances of the parties to it, paragraph  17
of  the  decision  in  the  present  appeal  reveals  a  problem.   In  that
paragraph, the judge said  that  she  kept  in  mind  the  findings  of  the
Tribunal in the earlier appeal and went  on:  "I  similarly  find  that  the
sponsor is not a credible or reliable witness."  Mr Aslam is correct in  his
submission that the earlier  decision  in  fact  contains  no  such  adverse
finding.  The judge in the earlier appeal found that the appellant  had  not
discharged  the  burden  of  proof  and  she  expressly  drew  attention  to
contradictory evidence regarding the sponsor's employment and  earnings  but
the extent of her adverse finding is shown at paragraph 18 of that  decision
where she found that she was not satisfied  that  the  sponsor's  employment
history was as claimed, which in  turn  raised  doubts  as  to  his  income.
There is an important difference between finding a case  not  shown  on  the
evidence,  because  that  evidence  is  contradictory  or  confusing  or  is
otherwise unclear, and, on the other hand, making a finding that  a  witness
is incredible or unreliable.

13.  So far as the evidence of contact is concerned,  it  is  again  correct
that the documentary evidence included mobile telephone  bills  as  well  as
telephone  cards.   The  judge's  finding  that  the  cards   appeared   "in
isolation" was inaccurate, albeit that the  telephone  bills  related  to  a
short period of time.

14.  Overall, I find in relation to the first two  grounds  set  out  above,
regarding the brother's  evidence  and  the  extent  to  which  the  earlier
decision formed any sound basis for  a  finding  that  the  sponsor  was  an
unreliable witness, are made out and show errors of law.  I am less  certain
that the omission of any mention of the telephone bills  for  the  month  of
June 2011 amounts to a material error but that is academic.

15.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside  and  must  be
remade.

16.  Both representatives agreed that the  appropriate  venue  for  remaking
the decision is the First-tier Tribunal, in  view  of  the  extensive  fact-
finding  that  will  be  required.   I  agree,  having  taken  into  account
paragraph 7.2 of the Senior  President's  Practice  Statement.   The  appeal
will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal, in  Birmingham,  before  a  judge
other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside; it shall be remade  in
the First-tier Tribunal at the Birmingham Hearing  Centre,  before  a  judge
other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Lagunju.

ANONYMITY

There  has  been  no  application  for  anonymity  at  any  stage  in  these
proceedings and I make no direction on this occasion.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

