
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06469/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th July 2015                    |On 24th July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                            DAINA KIMBOLYN MOWATT
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Kingston
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Fielden, counsel, instructed by Chase Legal
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. The appellant is a national of Jamaica, date of birth 17  May  1996.
        She sought settlement to join her mother, Marsha  Avadorn  Henry  in
        UK. At all material times the sponsor held Discretionary Leave  (DL)
        to remain in the UK, valid until 03 October  2016.  This  had  first
        been granted for a period of 3 years on 24  September  2009  on  the
        basis of the mother's relationship with her British  citizen  spouse
        and was renewed on 23 October 2016. The sponsor and  the  father  of
        the appellant, Mr Marcello Nakasha Mowatt, are  separated,  but  the
        father also lived in the UK. At the  date  of  the  entry  clearance
        application the father did not have Indefinite Leave to Remain (ILR)
        but, prior to the decision, on 05 March 2014, he  was  granted  ILR.
        This meant that he was a  settled  person  (he  was  free  from  any
        restriction on the period for which he may remain in the UK).

     2. The application  was  refused  on  01  April  2014.  The  respondent
        considered the application under paragraph 297  of  the  immigration
        rules. On the information before the respondent he or  she  was  not
        satisfied, inter alia, that the appellant's mother was settled, that
        she had sole responsibility for the appellant, or  that  there  were
        serious and compelling family or other considerations which made her
        exclusion undesirable.

The First-tier Tribunal hearing

     3. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  it  was  argued
        that the appellant complied with paragraph 301  of  the  immigration
        rules, which set out the requirements for limited leave to enter the
        UK with a view to settlement as a child of a parent or parents given
        limited leave to enter the UK with a  view  to  settlement.  It  was
        submitted on behalf of the appellant that, at the date of  decision,
        her father was settled and that her mother had  been  given  limited
        leave to remain with a view to settlement.

     4. The Judge had to consider whether the mother did have limited  leave
        to remain with  a  view  to  settlement.  It  was  accepted  by  the
        presenting officer at the hearing that there was  no  definition  of
        leave "with a view to settlement" under the immigration  rules,  and
        no authority was cited to the Judge as to the meaning of the phrase.
        The Judge noted that the phrase appeared frequently in part 8 of the
        immigration rules (relating to  family  members)  and  gave,  as  an
        example, paragraph 281, which sets out the requirements to be met by
        a person applying for entry clearance as a spouse. The  Judge  noted
        that these other rules prescribed certain requirements that must  be
        met for an application 'with a view to settlement'.

     5. The Judge concluded,

            "Given this close connection in the rules, it seems to me  that
            "with a view to settlement" in rule 301 must be taken  to  mean
            that the person in question has leave under one of the  earlier
            rules which specifically provide for  leave  "with  a  view  to
            settlement".  "With  a  view  to  settlement  is  not   to   be
            interpreted as a matter  of  whether  the  person  in  question
            intends to settle in the United Kingdom, or has leave which  is
            capable of resulting in settlement in the United  Kingdom,  but
            instead it must be taken to refer back [sic] the earlier  rules
            and the provisions "with a view to settlement" set out in them.
            The discretionary leave granted to the Appellant's mother  does
            not fall within this category."

     6. The Judge stated  that  his  analysis  was  in  accordance  with  an
        unreported upper tribunal decision on similar facts  (ECO  v  Ilunga
        (OA/13473/2012)).

     7. The Judge went on to consider section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship
        and Immigration Act 2009 but noted that it did not apply  to  minors
        outside the UK. The Judge dismissed the appeal.

Grounds of Appeal

     8. In seeking permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Grounds of
        Appeal restricted themselves to the  single  issue  of  whether  the
        Judge's construction of the paragraph 301 was  lawful.  The  Grounds
        argued that the contentious phrase included those granted DL on  the
        basis of their family life relationships such as the  mother.  After
        two grants of DL, each consisting  of  a  period  of  3  years,  and
        following the Secretary of State's policy in respect of grants of DL
        prior to 9 July 2012, baring any material  change  in  circumstances
        the sponsor could expect to  be  granted  ILR.  DL  granted  to  the
        sponsor in these circumstances was said to be  "nothing  other  than
        limited leave to remain 'with a view to settlement'".

Hearing before the Upper Tribunal

     9. Prior to the commencement of the error of  law  hearing  I  provided
        both parties with the authority of Acan, R (on the application of) v
        Immigration Appeal Tribunal [2004] EWHC  297  (Admin).  This  was  a
        decision of Mr Justice Gibbs which concerned the  interpretation  of
        paragraph 301 of the immigration rules. I ensured both  parties  had
        sufficient time to consider the authority. There was no  application
        to adjourn by either party.

    10. At the commencement of  her  submissions  Ms  Fielden  stated,  with
        reference to paragraph 54 of Acan, that the authority appeared to be
        'on all fours' with the present appeal and that the  same  arguments
        that were deployed by the appellant in  Acan,  which  dealt  with  a
        sponsor who had Exceptional Leave to Remain (ELR), could be deployed
        in the  present  appeal,  where  the  sponsor  had  DL.  Ms  Fielden
        submitted that Mr Justice Gibb had accepted in Acan  that  the  term
        'with a view to settlement', given  its  ordinary  natural  meaning,
        could cover the position of the sponsor in Acan, and that  the  same
        could be said of the sponsor  in  the  present  appeal.  Ms  Fielden
        adopted the arguments advanced on behalf of the claimant in Acan and
        drew my attention to the  fact  that  paragraph  301  did  not  make
        express reference back to an earlier immigration rule. She submitted
        that the status of being settled  could  be  achieved  not  only  by
        reference to specific provision within  the  immigration  rules  but
        also outside of the immigration rules. It  was  submitted  that  the
        sponsor had already received her 2nd tranche of DL and could  expect
        to achieve settlement when  it  expired.  It  was  argued  that  the
        changes to the immigration rules after 09 July  2012  could  make  a
        material difference to  the  interpretation  of  the  term.  It  was
        pointed out that there were some forms of Leave To Remain that  lead
        to settlement but in respect of which a person could not seek  leave
        to enter or remain 'with a view to settlement' and that there may be
        no rational justification for such a difference.

    11. Mr Melvin relied on the rule 24 response and noted that the decision
        of Acan had neither been appealed nor overturned. He submitted  that
        the  Judge  was  entitled  to  his  conclusion  in  respect  of  the
        interpretation of the contentious phrase.

Discussion

    12. The term  "with  a  view  to  settlement"  is  used  within  certain
        categories of the immigration rules where, from the  outset  of  the
        initial application, there is an expectation  that  compliance  with
        the rules will  lead  to  settlement.  Within  these  categories  an
        individual may be granted an initial temporary period of leave,  but
        the  grant  of  temporary  leave  is  along  a  planned  pathway  to
        settlement. Examples  of  these  categories  include  paragraph  281
        (dealing with entry clearance applications for  spouses),  paragraph
        295A  (unmarried  or   same-sex   partners),   and   paragraph   298
        (applications for indefinite leave to remain as the child of parents
        present and settled in the UK).

    13. These categories must be contrasted with other categories within the
        immigration rules that do not lead from  the  outset  along  a  path
        towards settlement (such as student/Tier  4  applicants),  and  with
        grants of leave outside the immigration rules such as DLR.

    14. A grant of DLR may lead to settlement (for  example,  in  compliance
        with the Respondent's policy on DLR in respect of applications prior
        to 09 July 2012) but the grants are not 'with a view to settlement'.
        DLR may be issued to individuals who  would  otherwise  qualify  for
        asylum or humanitarian protection, or where removal would lead to  a
        breach of Article 3 on medical grounds. DLR can also,  for  example,
        be granted in respect of victims of trafficking. In  each  case  the
        duration of the grant of DLR will be determined  by  the  particular
        facts of the case.

    15. I find considerable support for the above analysis in the  authority
        of Acan, and in particular, paragraphs 81 to 86. Acan also concerned
        paragraph 301 and involved  a  sponsor  with  Exceptional  Leave  to
        Remain (ELR), the precursor of DLR. The arguments advanced on behalf
        of the claimant in Acan are very similar to those advanced on behalf
        of the appellant in her Grounds of Appeal and by Ms Fielden  at  the
        hearing. It was argued in Acan that a grant of limited leave with  a
        view to settlement included a grant of ELR.

    16. While Mr Justice Gibbs accepted that the words "limited leave with a
        view to settlement"  were  capable  within  their  ordinary  natural
        meaning of covering the status of some  issued  ELR  (para  81),  he
        accepted the submissions on behalf of the defendant  concerning  the
        structure of the immigration rules and the evident purpose  of  rule
        301  within  that  structure.  Mr  Justice  Gibbs  found  that   the
        requirement of paragraph 301 were intended to refer back to previous
        rules in which the use of the expression "limited leave with a  view
        to settlement" occurred. "It had a purpose intended to be  secondary
        to those earlier rules so as to permit a child of  a  person  within
        the categories earlier referred to to have limited leave to enter or
        remain" (para 83). Mr Justice Gibbs concluded, "...  the  provisions
        in rule 301 and following, relating to leave, constitute part  of  a
        carefully constructed scheme intended, in my judgment, to flow  from
        the particular situations contemplated by the earlier rules, 281 and
        282, 295A and 295B" (para 85).

    17. I further note the view of the authors of McDonalds Immigration  Law
        and Practice (9th ed, 12.204, footnote 4)  that  the  dependants  of
        those with DLR may not seek entry as dependants of those in  the  UK
        with a view to settlement under Appendix FM or paragraph 301 of  the
        rules, and that 'settled' in the context of the rules means 'settled
        under the rules'.

    18. Having regard to the  above  authorities  I  am  satisfied  that  an
        individual who only has DLR does not hold limited leave 'with a view
        to settlement'. I consequently find that the Judge made no  material
        error of law.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]    23 July 2015
Signed   Date

Judge Blum
Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


[pic]    23 July 2015
Signed   Date

Judge Blum
Upper Tribunal
