
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06972/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8 October 2015                    |On 9 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                            PAPA ABDOULAYE GUEYE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Gueye, the Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant appeals against a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Place dated 25 September 2014  in  which  she  dismissed  the
         appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse him entry clearance
         as a spouse under the Immigration Rules.

      2. Judge Place accepted that the position of  the  appellant's  spouse
         (the sponsor) aroused considerable sympathy.  This was a  reference
         to the sponsor having  contracted  a  serious  infection  when  she
         visited the sponsor in Senegal, which has required surgery and  on-
         going medical treatment.  Having considered the evidence before her
         the judge accepted that the  marriage  between  the  appellant  and
         sponsor is genuine and subsisting.  There is considerable  detailed
         cogent evidence available  to  support  this  finding.   The  judge
         however noted that the financial requirements were not met and  the
         appellant did not have a certificate to show that he had passed the
         relevant English language test.  The judge also found that the SSHD
         was correct to make the decision she did under paragraph 320(11) of
         the  Immigration  Rules.   The  judge  dismissed  the  appeal,  and
         although she did not say so, it appears clear that the  appeal  was
         dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

Error of law

      3. At the hearing before me the sponsor  agreed  that  the  judge  was
         entitled to dismiss  the  appeal  under  the  Rules.   The  sponsor
         however relied upon the observations  made  by  Judge  Zucker  when
         granting permission to appeal.  He said: "the issues raised in  the
         grounds are capable of going to Art  8  ECHR,  which  arguably  the
         Judge did not adequately address".

      4. Mr McVeety agreed with me that the Judge did not address Art  8  in
         her decision at all.  This is curious because the  Judge  expressly
         said at [7] that there was an argument based upon Art 8 before her.
          The sponsor prepared the  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.  These went into considerable detail as to why the appeal
         should be allowed outside of the Rules in  light  of  compassionate
         factors.  Whilst Art 8 was not expressly raised I am satisfied that
         the issue was clearly before the  judge  and  she  was  obliged  to
         address it.  First, the judge herself noted the argument based upon
         Art 8  had  been  made.   Second,  given  that  the  appellant  was
         unrepresented, the grounds of appeal prepared by the sponsor  could
         properly be interpreted as a submission that the  appellant  relied
         upon Art 8 outside the Rules.  The Court of Appeal recognised in  R
         (Zenovics) v SSHD  [2002]  EWCA  Civ  273,  [2002]  INLR  219  that
         elementary fairness requires the Tribunal to give more latitude  to
         grounds that have been drafted without legal representation.

      5. It follows that in failing to address Art 8 the judge has committed
         an error of law.

Re-making the decision

      6. Both Mr McVeety and the sponsor were content for me to  remake  the
         decision on Art 8.  By  paragraph  7.2  of  the  relevant  practice
         statement for appeals on or after 25  September  2012,  I  must  be
         satisfied that:

             "the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made
             is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule
             2 it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier
             Tribunal."

      7. I was satisfied that any further fact  finding  was  likely  to  be
         minimal and  decided  that  it  was  proportionate  to  remake  the
         decision myself. Both Mr McVeety and the sponsor also  agreed  that
         the judge's findings in relation to the Rules should be preserved.

      8. As the appellant  was  not  legally  represented  I  explained  the
         relevant legal framework to the sponsor  and  heard  evidence  from
         her.  Mr McVeety accepted the credibility of the evidence  and  did
         not wish to cross-examine the sponsor.  After hearing from both  Mr
         McVeety and the sponsor I indicated that I would be dismissing  the
         appeal on Art 8 grounds.

Legal framework

      9. Section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002
         provides that where, as here, the appeal is against  a  refusal  of
         entry clearance the Tribunal may consider  only  the  circumstances
         appertaining at the time of the decision (albeit this can  be  done
         by way of post-decision evidence).   This  is  important  for  this
         appeal.  The decision to refuse entry clearance was taken some time
         ago and is dated 29 April 2014.  The sponsor  sought  to  emphasise
         that her medical condition has significantly  worsened  since  then
         such that it will be very difficult for her to return to Senegal to
         live there, although she has visited and intends to visit again.  I
         can only consider post-decision evidence to the extent that  it  is
         relevant to circumstances appertaining to 29 April 2015.

     10. The correct approach to whether or not entry  clearance  should  be
         granted outside the Rules is set out  in  SSHD  v  SS  (Congo)  and
         others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 and I have  approached  this  case  with
         that guidance in mind.  The appellant could not meet the  Rules  as
         at the date of decision for the reasons set out by Judge Place.  It
         is still necessary to give individualised consideration of the case
         to determine whether the interests of  the  individuals  (both  the
         appellant and sponsor) are of a particularly pressing  nature.  The
         appropriate general formulation for  this  category  is  that  such
         cases will arise where an applicant for entry  clearance  can  show
         that compelling circumstances exist  (which  are  not  sufficiently
         recognised under the new  Rules)  to  require  such  a  grant  (see
         Richards LJ at [40 and 53]  of  SS  (Congo)).   This  is  a  fairly
         demanding test (see Richards LJ at [41]).

     11. I have considered all the  relevant  considerations  including  the
         factors set out at section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
         Asylum Act 2002.  I acknowledge that it is in the  public  interest
         that persons who seek to enter the UK are financially  independent.
         I accept that  on  the  judge's  findings  the  relevant  financial
         threshold may not have been met but it is likely as at the date  of
         decision that the couple would be  financially  independent.  I  am
         prepared to assume in the appellant's  favour  that  he  can  speak
         English although he did not have the relevant  certificate  at  the
         date of decision.  However as pointed out in  AM  (S  117B)  Malawi
         [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) an applicant can obtain no positive right to
         remain or enter from sections 117B (2) or (3), whatever the  degree
         of his  fluency  in  English  or  the  strength  of  her  financial
         resources.  Little weight should be given to a relationship  formed
         that is established when the person  is  in  the  UK  unlawfully  -
         section 117B(4)).  All the relevant circumstances must be viewed in
         the  round  -  Dube  (ss117A-D)  [2015]  UKUT  90  (IAC).    Having
         considered all the relevant evidence I make the  findings  set  out
         below.

     12. The appellant  and  the  sponsor  have  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship that began in June 2012 in  the  UK.   They  cohabited
         until the appellant returned to Senegal in early 2014,  where  they
         got married.  They have a family life together and wish to  develop
         that family life in the UK.  The UK must act in a manner  to  allow
         ties between close family members to develop normally.

     13. The relevant family life was established with  knowledge  that  the
         appellant was unlawfully  in  the  UK  as  an  overstayer  and  was
         therefore precarious.  Whilst section 117B(4) makes it  clear  that
         little weight should be given to such a relationship, it is to  the
         appellant's credit that rather than make an in-country  application
         he returned to Senegal to make an application for entry  clearance.



     14. Judge Place considered the respondent's decision under  320(11)  to
         be correct.  The appellant was granted a work permit  in  2007  but
         overstayed his leave.  He was 'encountered' by the  authorities  on
         two occasions regarding his immigration status. He was required  to
         leave in November 2011 but did not comply and  absconded.   He  was
         again encountered in October 2012 but only chose to leave the UK in
         early 2014.  It has been explained that the appellant stayed in the
         UK because he had met the sponsor and they wished to  be  together.
         This does not properly address why he absconded  in  November  2011
         before he met the sponsor and why, after meeting the sponsor he did
         not seek to regularise his immigration status without delay.  Judge
         Place found that the appellant contrived in a  significant  way  to
         frustrate the intentions of the Immigration Rules by accepting  the
         respondent's reliance on 320(11) as appropriate.  Whilst  I  accept
         that the appellant left  the  UK  in  2014  in  order  to  seek  to
         regularise his  immigration  status  and  respect  the  Immigration
         Rules, he spent a lengthy period of  time  before  this  acting  in
         complete disregard of the Immigration Rules.

     15. The sponsor's illness as at the date of decision is a compassionate
         factor that evokes sympathy for her (as  noted  by  both  the  duty
         judge who ordered expedition and Judge Place [8]).  The sponsor has
         explained with great passion and clarity  how  much  she  would  be
         assisted by having her husband to help and support her through that
         illness.  Unfortunately there  is  little  clear  medical  evidence
         regarding the appellant's illness at the relevant  time  but  I  am
         prepared to accept that she contracted a parasitical  infection  in
         Senegal in early 2014,  which  necessitated  surgery  and  on-going
         medical treatment.  I note that the sponsor has loving  family  and
         friends in the UK to turn to  for  support.   There  is  no  cogent
         evidence to establish that at the relevant time family  life  could
         not be developed in Senegal.   The  sponsor  has  been  content  to
         travel to Senegal.  Whilst she would miss her  family  and  friends
         and would need time to recover from her illness, as at the date  of
         decision the couple could reasonably reside  in  Senegal  once  the
         sponsor had recovered from her illness.  As at the date of decision
         it was not foreseeable that the sponsor could not reside in Senegal
         (beyond a period of recovery) because of any medical  condition  or
         otherwise.

     16. Having  considered  all  relevant  factors  I  do  not  accept  the
         compassionate circumstances are sufficiently compelling to outweigh
         the public interest in this case.  As at the date of  decision  the
         appellant could not meet the requirements of the Rules in a  number
         of important  respects.   Importantly  320(11)  applied  (which  of
         course  does  not  require  mandatory  refusal).    The   appellant
         contrived in a significant way to frustrate the intentions  of  the
         Rules over a lengthy period.  He met the sponsor  when  he  was  an
         overstayer.  They cohabited and developed family life in the UK  in
         the knowledge that he was an overstayer.  I accept that at the date
         of  decision  the  sponsor  was  ill  and  as   such   there   were
         compassionate circumstances.  I am however not satisfied  that  the
         circumstances are compelling when viewed in the round and  together
         with the public interest.

     17. The situation might be different now as the  circumstances  may  be
         more compelling but it is not for me to speculate and as Mr McVeety
         indicated, any change of circumstances said to support a  grant  of
         entry clearance outside of the Rules can be  set  out  in  a  fresh
         application with accompanying medical evidence.

     18. I have carried  out  the  relevant  balancing  exercise  and  I  am
         satisfied  that  the  public  interest  in  maintaining   effective
         immigration control and the economic well-being of the UK  and  are
         not outweighed by all the relevant factors in this case,  where  as
         here there is an absence of sufficiently  compelling  circumstances
         as at the date of decision.  I do not accept that the  respondent's
         decision will breach Article 8 for the reasons set out above.

Decision

     19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law in relation to Art 8 only.

     20. I have remade the decision and I dismiss the appeal under Art 8  of
         the ECHR.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
9 October 2015
