
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06001/2014
                                                               OA/06012/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 October 2015                    |On 26 November 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           MR REVAZ MTVRALASHVILI
                             MRS MARIAM KILADZE
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr B Halligan of Counsel instructed by Southfields
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1) This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by Judge
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Sullivan  allowing  an  appeal  by   the
    respondents (hereinafter referred to as "the applicants").

 2) The appeal was allowed under the Immigration (European  Economic  Area)
    Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations").  The applicants are  citizens
    of Georgia.   They  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a
    refusal by the Entry Clearance Officer to grant  entry  clearances,  or
    more properly family permits, to enter the UK as  dependants  of  their
    daughter-in-law, who is an EEA national exercising Treaty rights in the
    UK.

 3) The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal stated, at  paragraph  25  of  the
    decision, that the essential question was whether  the  applicants  had
    the resources to meet the costs of their essential expenditure  without
    relying on funds provided by their son and daughter-in-law in  the  UK.
    The judge accepted that the applicant's  son  and  daughter-in-law  had
    sent sums of money to the applicants in the period April 2013 to  March
    2014.  These amounts varied between  US  Dollars  100  and  1900.   The
    second applicant was employed as a teacher with a basic monthly  salary
    of GEL 120.  The first applicant was not in employment.  The judge  had
    regard to the applicants' living costs.  The judge found  that  between
    December 2012 and December 2013 the applicants spent GEL 670 on gas and
    between December 2011 and  September  2012  the  applicants  spent  GEL
    505.48 on electricity.   The  sums  were  found  by  the  judge  to  be
    consistent with  data  relating  to  the  cost  of  living  in  Georgia
    contained in the country information.  In addition the second applicant
    was repaying a bank loan at a rate of GEL 65.20  per  month,  with  the
    final payment due in November 2015.  The judge found  that  the  amount
    spent by  the  applicants  on  gas,  electricity  and  loan  repayments
    exceeded their monthly  income.   In  order  to  meet  their  essential
    expenditure, such as food and clothing,  they  were  relying  on  funds
    provided by their son and daughter-in-law in the UK and were  therefore
    financially dependent upon them.  Accordingly the applicants were to be
    regarded as family members of an EEA national and were entitled to  the
    permits sought.

 4) Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the finding by the judge that the applicants were  dependent  on  their
    son and daughter-in-law was not supported by sufficient analysis of the
    evidence.  It was further arguable that the judge did  not  make  clear
    findings in relation to the loan  taken  out  by  the  applicants,  the
    effect of which was apparently to render them reliant on funds from the
    UK.  It was arguable that the "focus strayed away  from  the  protected
    rights of EEA nationals and family members."

Submissions

 5) At the hearing before me Mr Melvin submitted that the  applicants'  son
    relied on benefits in the UK.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had
    relied on the case of Lim (EEA Dependency) Malaysia [2013]  UKUT437  in
    relation to whether home ownership should be taken  into  account.   Mr
    Melvin pointed out that the decision in Lim had been overturned by  the
    Court of Appeal in terms of an order dated 29 July 2015.  Not only  was
    the applicants' son not working at the date  of  the  hearing  but  the
    applicants' daughter-in-law was working only part-time.

 6) Mr Halligan intervened to contradict Mr  Melvin's  assertion  that  the
    applicants' son was not working.  Mr Halligan said  that  according  to
    the evidence it was the first applicant who was not working and had not
    been working.

 7) Reference was made to paragraph 6 of the grounds of the application for
    permission to appeal, in which it was stated that the appeal should  be
    dismissed in the interests of justice and fairness, immigration control
    and the economic well-being of the country.   It  was  accepted  by  Mr
    Melvin that this ground had no relevance in an  appeal  under  the  EEA
    Regulations.  Mr Melvin sought, however, to found upon paragraphs 3 and
    4 of the grounds of the application for permission to appeal.  In terms
    of Ground 3 the  judge  erred  at  paragraph  33  of  the  decision  by
    speculating that the  applicants  had  limited  income  and  "must"  be
    relying on funds provided by the son and daughter-in-law.  At Ground  4
    it was submitted that the issue of  dependency  goes  beyond  financial
    matters and the judge had failed to look at dependency as a whole.  The
    applicants had not discharged the onus upon them to show that they were
    dependent on the sponsors.  Mr Melvin continued that the  judge  should
    have looked further into the issue of dependency  before  finding  that
    the income of the applicants was not sufficient to meet their expenses.
     This was on the basis, in particular, that the loan taken out  by  the
    second applicant was not for the purpose of essential needs.

 8) Mr Melvin further submitted that the applicants' son  and  daughter-in-
    law in the UK were in receipt of child tax  credits.   The  applicant's
    daughter-in-law was working only part-time.  These factors should  have
    been taken into account.  The judge had failed to look at  all  matters
    in relation to dependency.  Although funds were  being  transferred  to
    the applicants, these were based on benefit payments made in the UK and
    the son and daughter-in-law were overdrawn.

 9) For the applicants, Mr Halligan submitted that the grounds relied  upon
    by Mr Melvin amounted to no more than disagreements with  the  decision
    of the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  in  an  attempt  to  get  the
    decision overturned.

Discussion

10) The meaning of dependency in European law was considered by  the  Court
    of Justice in the case of Reyes v Migrationsverket (Case C-423/12) CJEU
    (Fourth Chamber), 16 January 2014.   That case concerned the dependency
    of a relative in the descending line, rather than in the ascending line
    as in the present case, but the principles remain the same.   Dependent
    status was found to be the result of a factual situation  characterised
    by the fact that a Union citizen  exercising  a  right  of  freedom  of
    movement, or her spouse, provided material  support  for  the  relevant
    family member.  It was necessary to assess whether,  having  regard  to
    financial and social conditions, the dependant was  in  a  position  to
    support himself or herself, but there was  no  need  to  determine  the
    reasons for the dependence  or  for  the  recourse  to  support.   This
    interpretation was in accordance with  the  principle  that  provisions
    establishing the free movement of  Union  citizens  must  be  construed
    broadly.  The fact that a Union citizen regularly and for a significant
    period paid a sum of money to the dependant in order to support him  or
    her in the country of origin was enough to prove that there was a  real
    situation of dependence.  The dependant was not required to  show  that
    he or she had tried without success to find work or obtain  subsistence
    from the authorities of the country  of  origin  or  otherwise  support
    himself or herself.

11) These conclusions are similar to those expressed by the Upper  Tribunal
    in an earlier decision in respect of a different individual of the same
    name, reported as Reyes (EEA Regs: dependency) [2013] UKUT  00314.   In
    that case it was said that whether a person qualified  as  a  dependant
    under the EEA Regulations was to be determined at the date of  decision
    on the basis of evidence produced or, on appeal, at  the  date  of  the
    hearing on  the  evidence  produced  to  the  Tribunal.   The  test  of
    dependency was a purely factual test.  As submitted on  behalf  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer in this appeal, it should be construed  broadly
    to involve  a  holistic  examination  of  a  number  of  factors.   The
    dependency must  be  in  the  present,  not  in  the  past.   The  term
    dependency must not be interpreted so as to deprive  the  provision  of
    its effectiveness.

12) In this  appeal  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  made  clear
    findings, supported by the evidence, to the effect that the  applicants
    were dependent upon funds being sent to them by their son and daughter-
    in-law in the UK.  The judge's findings were based in part on  evidence
    of funds transmitted to the applicants by their son and daughter-in-law
    in the period from April 2013 to March 2014.  As was pointed out by the
    Court of Justice in Reyes, the fact that a Union citizen regularly  and
    for a significant period  has  been  paying  a  sum  of  money  to  the
    dependant in order to support him or her in the country  of  origin  is
    sufficient to prove a real situation of  dependence.   Accordingly,  in
    this appeal the finding by the judge that these payments had been  made
    was a significant factor in establishing dependency.

13) Mr Melvin argued that the judge erred by taking into account  the  loan
    repayments in relation to the applicants' needs.  I note that the judge
    had some evidence relating to the loan.  According to  the  applicants'
    daughter-in-law  the  loan  was  taken  out  for  her   sister-in-law's
    education, but the applicants' son in his evidence was not sure of  the
    purpose  of  the  loan.   The  judge  noted,  however,  that  the  loan
    repayments amounted to more than half of the second  applicant's  basic
    monthly salary.  In terms of the decision of the Court  of  Justice  in
    Reyes, it was not necessary to determine the reasons for the dependence
    or for recourse to support.  It was sufficient for the  judge  to  note
    that the applicants had this  loan  to  pay  as  well  as  their  other
    expenses such as utility bills, food and  clothing.   Accordingly,  the
    judge was  entitled  to  take  the  loan  repayments  into  account  in
    considering the question of dependence.

14) Furthermore, the judge had regard to country information about the cost
    of living in Georgia and the amounts which would normally be  paid  for
    utilities.  It cannot be said that the judge carried out anything other
    than a careful analysis of the evidence of the applicants'  expenditure
    in considering the issue of dependency.

15) A further issue raised by Mr Melvin was whether the judge  should  have
    taken into account that the first applicant is a home owner in Georgia.
     The judge stated, at paragraph 3 of the decision, that  in  accordance
    with the case of Lim, cited above, it was not necessary to have  regard
    to home ownership.  Although Mr Melvin informed me that the decision in
    Lim had been overturned by the Court of Appeal, he did not  put  before
    me any judgment to show that the judge was wrong to put on one side the
    first applicant's home ownership.

16) In any event, I do not see how this issue would have been material.  If
    the applicants were not living in a home owned by  one  of  them,  they
    would have to pay rent.  This would have increased even  further  their
    monthly expenditure  and  therefore  increased  their  dependency.   Mr
    Melvin did not seek to argue that any savings realised by the  sale  of
    the house would have been available to avoid the  need  for  dependency
    and, given that any such savings realised would be finite in nature and
    would have to be set against the costs of renting  accommodation,  such
    an argument would not seem to be material.   The  essential  issue  was
    whether the applicants had shown that they were in fact dependent  upon
    their son and  daughter-in-law.   The  judge  was  satisfied  upon  the
    evidence that this was so and gave adequate and sustainable reasons for
    these findings.  The Entry Clearance Officer has not been able to  show
    any error of law by the judge in so doing and accordingly the  decision
    shall stand.

Conclusions

17) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

18) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

19) No order for anonymity was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  I have not
    been asked to make such an order and I see no reason of  substance  for
    making one.

Fee Award   Note: This is not part of the decision

20) I have not been asked to alter the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    in relation to making a fee award and I see no reason to do so.


Signed      Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
