
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06042/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 11 April 2013                              |On 1 May 2014                |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN



                                   Between

                            RAJWINDER KAUR MANDER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NEW DELHI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G S Mander, Sponsor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India, born  on  3  February  1984.   She
    appeals with leave against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Elek dismissing her appeal against the ECO's refusal to grant her entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as an adult  dependent  relative  under
    Appendix FM  of the Immigration Rules.

2.   The appellant has throughout these proceedings been represented  by  Mr
    G S Mander, who is her sponsor and great-uncle.  He is the  brother  of
    the appellant's grandfather.

3.   When the appellant made her application on 16 November  2012,  she  was
    living with her grandfather. She had a sister who was married and lived
    with her in-laws in Punjab about  twenty  miles  away  from  her.   Her
    brother and his wife lived in Italy.

4.   She had lived in India with her mother, father  and  grandfather  until
    her mother died  in  July  2004.   She  obtained  a  two  year  working
    holidaymaker visa in 2007 to gain experience in the UK and during  this
    time  she  had  resided  with  her  sponsor's  daughter,  who  accepted
    financial responsibility for her and had sponsored her.  The  appellant
    returned to India as her father had become ill and she looked after him
    until he passed away in September 2010.  Following her father's  death,
    the appellant remained in the family home with her grandfather who  had
    suffered drug addiction for many years and was unpredictable in nature.
     The appellant feared for her safety.   Then she obtained  a  two  year
    study visa and returned to the UK. Her sponsor and  his  wife  accepted
    full financial responsibility for her.

5.   While in the UK the college she attended, Greenwich  Community  College
    had its highly trusted  status  suspended.  Because  of  this  and  the
    anxiety of returning to India the appellant become ill and discontinued
    her studies. Her sponsor urged her to go back to India at the time.  He
    said in evidence that save for her grandfather  the  appellant  has  no
    family  remaining  in  India  to  seek  support  from.   She  is   both
    financially and emotionality dependent on him and his wife and this  is
    a responsibility they are happy to accept without  recourse  to  public
    funds.

6.   The psychiatric report from Dr Katambari who had examined  her  in  the
    UK on 20 September 2012 reported one incident  of  self-harm  when  the
    appellant took an overdose  of  analgesics  on  20  May  2012,  in  her
    sponsor's home, where she was examined and reassured by paramedics. The
    appellant said she felt depressed and often had thoughts of ending  her
    life.  She was also upset about  her  studies  in  the  UK.  The  judge
    accepted respondent's finding that the  depression  that  Dr  Katambari
    diagnosed is treatable in India.  She based her conclusion on the India
    Country of Information Report dated 30 March 2012.

7.   Mr  Mander  said  in  evidence  that  the  appellant's  grandfather  is
    suffering from drug addiction and  had  made  sexual  advances  to  the
    appellant which, understandably,  she  found  distressing.   The  judge
    found that there was no evidence adduced of  a  medical  assessment  of
    this man, or of appropriate action being taken to curb these  advances.
    In any event, Mr Mander had arranged for a female person in the village
    to come and stay at their house.  Thus the appellant was not alone  and
    the situation in which she found  herself  has  been  ameliorated.   Mr
    Mander informed the court, as did the appellant  in  her  statement  of
    October 2013, that this young woman was  about  to  get  married.   The
    judge found that there was no indication that, having found one  person
    to live at the appellant's home, Mr Mander would not be  able  to  find
    another person to do the same.

8.   It transpired in the course  of  oral  evidence  that  because  of  her
    grandfather's situation, her own brother had taken over  her  house  in
    which they live. The judge did not believe that the appellant would  be
    without a home because of this.  She found that  the  appellant  has  a
    home in India. She has a  sister living in the Punjab. She  found  that
    the appellant has not adduced evidence that she is living alone in  the
    most exceptional compassionate circumstances.  The judge did  not  find
    from the information given that the appellant is unable, even with  the
    help of the sponsor to obtain the required level of care in the country
    in which she is living.   The appellant is clearly  able  to  undertake
    the tasks of daily living and has a home.

9.   As far as the relationship requirements are concerned, the  ECO  stated
    that the sponsor, as her grandfather's brother,  is  not  a  recognised
    family member for settlement.  The judge found that the appellant  does
    not  come  into  any  of  the  dependent  relative  categories  in  the
    Immigration Rules.

10.  In light of the financial  information  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant's sponsor Mr Mander is able to maintain and support her  were
    she to be allowed to settle in the UK.

11.  The judge considered the appellant's  Article  8  appeal  in  light  of
    Kugathas [2003] EWCA Civ 31 and came to the conclusion that she did not
    believe  that  more  than  normal  emotional  ties  exist  between  the
    appellant and her great-uncle and great-aunt and second cousin  in  the
    UK.  She found that this relationship does not engage the  family  life
    limb of Article 8. Even if it were engaged, any interference  would  be
    in accordance with the  law  because  this  appeal  cannot  succeed  on
    immigration grounds. The interference would  be  proportionate  to  the
    need for immigration control.

12.  At the hearing before me the sponsor sought to  rely  on  a  bundle  of
    documents he had submitted to the Tribunal with a covering letter dated
    28 March 2014.  This bundle had been detached from the file but it  was
    subsequently linked to it.  I therefore had that bundle as well as  the
    bundle that had been submitted for the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I have read the bundle and they add nothing further  to  the
    appellant's case.

13.  The sponsor's main complaint was that,  as  the  appellant's  nominated
    representative, the judge had denied him the opportunity to  act  as  a
    representative and was  denied  the  right  to  ask  questions  of  the
    Presenting Officer or to cross-examine witnesses.  He referred  to  the
    previously adjourned hearing on 11 October 2013 where the judge and the
    HOPO had no objection to him sitting in the representative's chair.  He
    said that he had duly completed the representative's form, which  would
    have been the Section 85 form, at reception on  arrival  in  court  and
    that had been  placed  on  the  bench  as  soon  as  they  entered  the
    courtroom.  He complained that he was made to sit in the witness  chair
    and was treated as a  sponsor  only.   Whilst  I  appreciate  that  the
    sponsor felt aggrieved by having to sit in the witness  chair,  I  find
    that no procedural error was committed by  the  judge.   Regardless  of
    where the sponsor was made to sit, as  stated  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Parkes who granted permission, a representative, whether legal or
    not, would not be expected to ask questions of the Presenting  Officer.



15.  I agree with Judge Parkes that the representative  should  be  able  to
    ask questions of the witnesses and make submissions. However, in a case
    like this, where the witnesses were the sponsor's  own  relatives  i.e.
    his wife and their daughter, unless Mr Mander treated them  as  hostile
    witnesses, I could not see on what basis he would have wanted to cross-
    examine these witnesses.  His wife had relied on her statement  as  did
    his daughter and they  had  both  given  evidence  in  support  of  the
    appellant.  Mr Mander could have sought clarification of their evidence
    if he felt the need to but there was no evidence that he  did.   Indeed
    he has not complained about the evidence they gave in court  which  was
    accepted  by  the  judge.  In  my  opinion,  therefore,  there  was  no
    procedural error in what occurred in court.

16.  Mr Mander also complained that the judge got it wrong when she said  at
    paragraph 12 that the appellant was interviewed over the telephone.  Mr
    Whitwell accepted that the appellant was interviewed in person  in  New
    Delhi.  He produced a copy of  the  Interview  Template  which,  as  it
    happens, was in the appellant's bundle.  Indeed the judge had relied on
    it in making her findings at paragraph 12.

17.  Mr Mander conceded that he was not within the category of  persons  the
    appellant could apply to join as a  dependant  relative.   However,  he
    complained, firstly, that he had specifically asked for advice  at  the
    British High Commission and was initially told to  fill  a  form  which
    happened  to  the  wrong  form,  for  which  he  paid  a  fee  and  was
    subsequently given the correct form, for which he again had  to  pay  a
    fee.  I sympathise with his complaint, but it should really be made  to
    the British High Commission who gave him confusing advice as  to  which
    form the appellant needed to complete.


18.  Mr Mander also asked why the appellant was given a right of appeal  if,
    in view of their relationship, he was not recognised as a family member
    for settlement.  I informed Mr Mander that the appellant had a right of
    appeal  under  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum   Act   2002
    Immigration Act and she chose to exercise it. The respondent's decision
    was an Immigration decision under section  82(2)(b)  of  the  2002  Act
    which attracted a right of appeal.

19.  I agree with Mr Whitwell that the only remaining ground was in  respect
    of the Article 8 appeal.   Mr.  Mander  took  issue  with  the  judge's
    finding that the interference was necessary in a democratic society and
    proportionate to the need for immigration control.  He  drew  attention
    to his statement dated 30 September 2013, paragraph 13,  regarding  his
    complaint about immigration control.  He said  he  felt  very  strongly
    that hundreds and thousands of people who came to the UK  illegally  or
    overstayed, have been given indefinite leave to remain in  the  UK  and
    benefitted from their breach of immigration control, thus circumventing
    the need for entry clearance.

20.  I find that these comments have no bearing on  the  appellant's  appeal
    or the judge's findings.  Each case is judged on its own  merits.   The
    appellant presented the judge with a set  of  circumstances  which  she
    fully considered and the findings the judge  made  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's human rights appeal were sustainable and open to  her.  The
    comments made by Mr Mander do not arguably disclose an error of law  on
    the part of the judge.

21.  I find that the judge's decision does not disclose  an  error  of  law.
    The judge's decision dismissing the appellant's appeal shall stand.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

