

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

Immigration and Asylum Chamber                   Appeal Number:
OA/06290/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Promulgated on:           |
|On 21 March 2014                            |On 26 March 2014          |
|                                            |                          |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

                                   Between

                         Okyabrina Ivanovna Markova
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                   Moscow
                                                           Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms V Sharkey, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          Determination and Reasons

Background

   1.       This appeal comes before me following the grant of permission by
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly in respect  of  the  determination  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Glossop who dismissed the appeal by way of a
      determination dated 27 January 2014.
   2.       The appellant is a citizen of the Russian Federation born on  22
      October 1931. She appeals the respondent's  decision  of  20  December
      2012 to refuse to grant her entry clearance as a  dependent  relative.
      On review,  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  (ECM)  accepted  that  she
      required "long term care as required under Appendix FM" but was of the
      view that this care could be provided in Russia  where  she  had  some
      relatives and with the financial assistance of her UK  based  daughter
      and son-in-law (the sponsors).

   3.       The judge found that the appellant did not  need  constant  care
      and that whatever was required could be obtained in Russia.

   4.       At the hearing I  heard  submissions  from  the  parties  as  to
      whether or not the judge erred  in  law.  At  the  conclusion  of  the
      proceedings, I concluded that he had, and I now give my reasons for so
      finding.

Findings and Conclusions

   5.       The rules require the appellant to show, inter alia, that:
    . as a result of age, illness or  disability,  she  requires  long  term
      personal care to perform everyday tasks,
    . she must be unable, even with the practical and financial help of  the
      sponsor, be unable to obtain the required level of care in the country
      where she is living because
         o it is not available and
         o there is no person who can reasonably provide it or
         o it is not affordable.

   6.       The ECM in his review accepted that the  first  requirement  had
      been met. That is plain from his statement of 31 July 2013. It  is  my
      view that no further concession is made about the nature of  the  care
      that is required. Although it is argued that long  term  care  equates
      with constant care, that argument is not made out and indeed the ECM's
      observations on the costs for 8 hour care make it clear  that  he  did
      not accept the claim for and by the appellant that 24  hour  care  was
      required.

   7.       In his submissions, Mr Deller very fairly acknowledged that  the
      judge's repeated references to a lack of medical evidence  in  respect
      of the appellant's numerous conditions was in direct contradiction  to
      the Entry Clearance Manager's acceptance that the medical evidence had
      confirmed the claimed conditions. Plainly, the judge erred in  finding
      that there was no evidence when not  only  was  it  contained  in  the
      evidence before him, but it was expressly accepted by the ECM.

   8.       The judge appears to have accepted the  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer's submission, which itself seems to  emanate  from  the  ECM's
      statement, that 6-8 hours of care would be required.  However,  it  is
      plain that the judge's assessment in this respect is inadequate. Given
      that the judge does not appear  to  have  taken  any  of  the  medical
      evidence into account, and has not given adequate reasons for  why  he
      rejected the evidence of  the  sponsors  as  to  the  nature  of  care
      required, his findings on how much care is needed by the appellant are
      flawed. That assessment can only be undertaken in  the  context  of  a
      consideration of all the evidence and that has not been done  in  this
      case. This is a further error of law.

   9.       It is only once  all  the  evidence  has  been  assessed  and  a
      sustainable finding is made in respect of the  nature  and  amount  of
      care that is required, that an assessment can be made  of  whether  it
      can be provided by a relative in Russia  or,  if  not,  of  the  costs
      involved to pay for it.  The judge found that  the  sponsor's  savings
      would meet the costs but as his findings on the nature and  amount  of
      care required were flawed, it follows  that  his  conclusions  on  the
      affordability of the care are unsustainable.

  10.       The determination is, therefore, set aside in its entirety  save
      as a  record  of  proceedings,  and  remitted  to  another  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge for re-hearing afresh. Although  I  have  expressed  my
      view on the ECM's rather clumsily  put  concession  (see  paragraph  6
      above), I do not seek to tie the hands of the judge who  will  re-hear
      this appeal and re-make the decision. It is for that judge  to  decide
      the extent of the ECM's concession.

Decision

  11.       The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  errors  of  law  and  his
      decision is set aside.  The  matter  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal for re-hearing afresh and for the decision to be re-made.

Directions

  12.       A paginated and indexed bundle of all the  documentary  evidence
      relied on by the appellant is to be served on  the  Tribunal  and  the
      Secretary of State no later  than  five  working  days  prior  to  the
      hearing.  Statements  of  evidence  from  the  two  sponsors  must  be
      included and are to stand as evidence in chief.

      Signed:


      Dr R Keki?
      Judge           of            the            Upper            Tribunal




      21 March 2014
