
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06473/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |             Decision & Reasons     |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 13 July 2015                        |             On 14 July 2015        |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                    The ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER Abu Dhabi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                Muhammad Amin
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the claimant: Not represented
For the appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The claimant, Muhammad Amin, date of birth  1.1.73,  is  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan.

 2. This is the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer against the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Anthony promulgated 9.1.15,  allowing  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision  of  the  respondent  to  refuse
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a business visitor pursuant to
    paragraph 46G of the Immigration Rules.  The Judge heard the appeal  on
    2.1.15.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Cruthers  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    18.2.15.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 13.7.15 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons set out below I find that there was an error of law  in
    the making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  such  that  the
    determination of Judge Anthony should be set aside and remade.

 6. As explained in the refusal decision of 2.4.14, by section 88A  of  the
    2002 Act, the claimant had only a limited right of appeal  against  the
    decision, limited to the grounds referred to in 84(b) & (c),  referring
    to human rights or race discrimination.

 7. Judge Anthony appears to have overlooked the limited  right  of  appeal
    and proceeded to address  the  merits  of  the  application  under  the
    Immigration Rules, which is not permitted.

 8. The email response of the claimant's representatives  in  Pakistan  has
    been taken into account. However, they do not raise  any  grounds  that
    would enable the Tribunal to entertain the appeal.

 9. In the circumstances the decision must be set aside and remade.

10. In remaking the decision in the appeal, I find for the reasons set  out
    above, that the the claimant has  failed  to  identify  any  admissible
    ground of all. It follows that there is  no  valid  appeal  before  the
    Tribunal.

Conclusions:

11. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I re-make the decision in the  appeal  by  finding  that
                    there is no valid appeal before the Tribunal.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup




Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the  Asylum  and
Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.




Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
(rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
2005 and section 12(4)(a) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007).

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: There is no valid appeal before the Tribunal.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



