
[pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06584/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19th November 2015                |On 21st December 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A M MURRAY


                                   Between

                                    m m u
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No-one
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 25th March  1991.   He
    appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated 22nd  April  2014
    refusing to grant him entry clearance to  the  United  Kingdom  as  the
    partner of [RB] under  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    application was considered under paragraph EC-P.1.1 of Appendix  FM  of
    the United Kingdom Immigration Rules.  His appeal was heard by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal David C Clapham on 29th April 2015.  The appeal
    was  dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules   in   a   determination
    promulgated on 18th May 2015.

 2. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Parkes on 14th August 2015.
     The Appellant's application to enter the UK was refused over  concerns
    raised about his English language  test.   The  appeal  was  dismissed,
    because although the Appellant had re-sat the test and passed  it,  the
    facts had to be determined at the date of the decision and the evidence
    showed that at that time the requirements of the  Rules  had  not  been
    met.  The English language test certificate which  was  submitted  with
    the application was not acceptable to the Home Office and  the  results
    of the second test sat by the Appellant were  not  submitted  with  the
    application.  The grounds state that there is no evidence to  show  why
    the original certificates were not acceptable so it  is  arguable  that
    the judge  erred  in  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  not  met  the
    requirements relating to the English language test.

 3. There is a Rule 24 response from the Respondent.  This states that  the
    thrust of the grounds appears to be that there was no evidence that the
    original test results produced by  the  Appellant  were  not  reliable.
    This was not in dispute at the hearing.  The evidence strongly suggests
    that the Appellant accepted  that  the  first  test  results  were  not
    reliable, which is presumably why he retook  the  test.   The  response
    states that it seems unlikely that City &  Guilds  would  have  offered
    free re-sits unless they, as the issuers of the test certificates, were
    satisfied that the procedures of the previous college, where the  first
    test was sat, were unsatisfactory.

The Hearing

 4. The Appellant did not attend this error of law hearing.  Neither did  a
    representative on his behalf.

 5. The Presenting Officer submitted that he is  relying  on  the  Rule  24
    response.  He submitted that based on the evidence on file  it  is  not
    clear whether the point  raised  in  the  grounds  was  raised  at  the
    hearing.  He submitted that the Appellant received a letter asking  him
    to take a new English  test  because  of  the  inconsistencies  in  the
    testing relating to his original certificate, as  there  were  problems
    with the previous college.  The Appellant accepted that  that  was  the
    case and took the test.  The Presenting Officer submitted that  at  the
    First-tier hearing there was nothing to indicate that  the  first  test
    taken by the Appellant was satisfactory.  He submitted that the grounds
    of application for permission to appeal state that the  judge  did  not
    consider the evidence that  was  before  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    properly and the original certificates may have been wrongly  rejected.
    They state that the judge failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  the
    original  certificates  not  being  accepted,  however  the  Presenting
    Officer submitted that if it was not in  dispute  that  these  original
    test certificates were not acceptable, the judge made no error of  law.
    He submitted that the case was dealt with solely on the  basis  of  the
    new test sat by the Appellant.

 6. I was asked to find that there is no material error of law in the First-
    tier Judge's determination.

Decision

 7. At paragraph 3 of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision,  the  judge
    states that the certificates which the Appellant provided in respect of
    his  English  language  proficiency  were  not  satisfactory   to   the
    Respondent and did not reliably  demonstrate  that  the  Appellant  had
    achieved the necessary qualification.  This was accepted and it was  on
    this basis that the First-tier hearing went ahead.  At paragraph 4  the
    First-tier Judge refers to the Presenting Officer explaining  that  the
    documents  that  had  been  provided  with  the  application  were  not
    acceptable.   The  Appellant  re-sat  the   test   and   received   new
    certificates and the Respondent stated that had these certificates been
    provided with the application it  would  have  been  considered  to  be
    satisfactory.

 8. Nothing was raised to suggest that the original test certificates might
    be acceptable.  From the evidence it is clear that there were  problems
    with the previous college where the English testing was carried out and
    that is why the original certificates were not satisfactory and  it  is
    also clear that the Appellant accepted the  situation  and  retook  the
    test and that City & Guilds, who issued the new and the  original  test
    certificates, asked the Appellant to re-sit the test at no cost.   City
    & Guilds were satisfied that the procedures  at  the  previous  college
    were not satisfactory.

 9. The matter raised in the grounds of application was not in dispute when
    the case was dealt with by the First-tier Judge.  There is therefore no
    error of law in the First-tier Judge's decision.  The claim  was  dealt
    with based on the new test sat by the appellant.

Notice of Decision

10. There is no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and
    the decision must stand.

11. This appeal is dismissed.

12. Anonymity has been directed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A M Murray

