
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06557/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 August 2016                     |On 27 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                               Bibi Mina Azizi
                            (no anonymity order)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Miah, Counsel instructed by Immigration Law
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1) I see no need for, and do not make, any order restricting  publication
      of the details of this appeal.

   2) This is an appeal by a citizen of Afghanistan against  a  decision  of
      the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against  a  decision  of
      the Entry Clearance Officer at Islamabad refusing her entry  clearance
      as the wife of a Mr Noorali Azizi.  The Entry  Clearance  Officer  was
      not satisfied about several aspects of the application and refused it.
       There was a measure of success before the First-tier Tribunal because
      it was accepted that the appellant is  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship with her purported  husband  but  the  evidence  was  not
      sufficient to satisfy the financial requirements of the Rules.

   3) The First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 12 of his decision  decided
      unequivocally that the sponsor does not engage in genuine  employment.
      This finding was based on a difficulty the Judge thought was  apparent
      from looking at the payslips and was to do with  the  consistent  sums
      paid by way of National Insurance.

   4) There are two things wrong with that finding.   Firstly,  it  was  not
      raised with the parties at all, so the appellant had  no  notice  that
      this was going through the Judge's mind until  the  decision  arrived.
      This is the wrong approach.  Secondly it is not at  all  clear  to  me
      that the judge in fact was entitled to reach the decision at  all  for
      the reasons given.  It is a very dangerous to transfer experience that
      you think you have learnt from one case into another  and  really  the
      judge should not have done it.  That finding is not sustainable.  I am
      assisted in reaching this conclusion by Mr Norton for the Secretary of
      State, who admitted that the decision would not do.  I  therefore  set
      aside the decision.

   5) It follows that there is a finding that there is a subsisting marriage
      and nothing else.

   6) I have to ask myself what to do with the appeal now. Although there is
      a mass of evidence before me in a somewhat shambolic  form  about  the
      income of the sponsor there has been no  attempt  to  go  through  the
      requirements of the Rules and show the necessary  documentation  about
      self-assessment and registration and income and so on.

   7) Mr Miah had to accept, when pressed, that although I  cannot  conclude
      responsibly that the appellant  cannot  be  maintained  and  that  her
      husband cannot earn enough money, it has not been proved that he does.
      I therefore have to dismiss the appeal in front of me, making it plain
      that the finding of dishonesty at paragraph 12 of the Decision is  set
      aside.

   8) I must also make it clear that it is not a finding  that  the  sponsor
      has been honest.  That is something that can be  looked  at  again  if
      there is a further application but the existing finding just will  not
      do and is set aside.

   9) It follows therefore that although I set aside the existing decision I
      remake it and dismiss the appeal for the reasons given.

Notice of Decision

  10) Although the First-tier Tribunal did err in law and I  set  aside  its
      decision I substitute a fresh decision dismissing the appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 26 September 2016              |





