
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06549/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th November 2016                         |On 1st December 2016          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Bloomer, of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  Pursuant to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (SI  2008/269)  I  have
    decided to make an anonymity order based on the  circumstances  of  the
    Sponsor.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court  directs  otherwise,  no
    report of these proceedings or any form of  publication  thereof  shall
    directly or indirectly identity the Appellant  or  the  Sponsor.   This
    direction applies to, amongst others,  all  parties.   Any  failure  to
    comply  with  this  direct  could  give  rise  to  contempt  of   court
    proceedings.

 2.  The Secretary of State, with permission, appeals against the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Williams)  who  in  a  determination
    promulgated on 25th April 2016 allowed the Appellant's  appeal  against
    the decision of the Respondent to refuse  leave  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom under Appendix FM, the partner route.  Whilst the Appellant  is
    the Secretary of State, I propose to refer to the parties as they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. On 3rd January  2015  the  Appellant  made  an  application  for  entry
    clearance under Appendix FM as the spouse of his wife and Sponsor,  the
    parties having married on 3rd February 2012.  An application for  entry
    clearance was not made earlier than the present application as a result
    of  the  English  language  requirements  (see  witness  statement   at
    paragraph 15).

 4. The application was  refused  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  a
    decision made on 23rd March 2015.  The decision letter makes  reference
    to the requirements under Appendix FM-SE that the  required  income  of
    �18,600 could not be shown in the documentation because  the  Sponsor's
    income from her  employment  was  paid  in  cash  thus  there  were  no
    transactions on the bank statement to show the amount paid for  salary.
    Following the provision of further material and grounds,  the  decision
    was reviewed by the ECM on 17th June 2015.  However,  the  decision  to
    refuse leave to enter was upheld with the ECM observing that  the  bank
    statements  showed  only  a  proportion  of  the  post-tax  income  and
    therefore the amount shown on the bank statements could not be  counted
    towards meeting the financial requirements under the Rules.

 5. The Appellant appealed that decision and the  matter  came  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge O R Williams) on 8th April  2016.   At  that
    hearing the judge heard oral evidence from the Sponsor  and  considered
    the arguments from each of the advocates.  In his  determination  which
    was promulgated on 25th April 2016 he found that  the  Appellant  could
    not meet the Immigration Rules for the reasons set  out  at  paragraphs
    [18]-[14] but however found at [15] that he was satisfied that  if  the
    salary had been paid directly into her bank account by her employer, as
    opposed to the method used by cash, she would have received full credit
    for the tax paid in accordance with Appendix FM and thus would have met
    the Rules once the savings  were  taken  into  account.   He  was  also
    satisfied that the salary was now paid directly by her employer and had
    increased which had led the Presenting Officer  to  concede  that  "the
    likelihood of  a  future  application  would  be  successful"  thus  he
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 6.  At paragraphs [17]-[29] the judge considered whether  there  were  any
    "compelling circumstances" to justify a grant of leave to enter outside
    of the Rules (applying the decision in SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ  387.
    In this paragraph, he set out the reasons for reaching  the  view  that
    there were  such  compelling  reasons  and  that  when  taken  together
    demonstrated that it would be a disproportionate interference with  the
    positive obligation under Article 8 to refuse leave to enter.  Reaching
    that conclusion, the judge took into account the weight attached to the
    Immigration Rules at [29], that the Sponsor's circumstances  were  such
    that  her  previous  history  of  domestic  violence  in   a   previous
    relationship was contrary to their interests  and  that  the  delay  in
    separating the couple  further  would  be  disproportionate  given  the
    inevitable disruption to family life and the stress that  would  entail
    to the Sponsor, whom he was satisfied had already endured  considerable
    stress due to the domestic violence and was in recovery.  He found that
    the delay would serve no "logical purpose" in a case in  which  he  had
    identified that the Rules  would  be  satisfied  [27].   He  took  into
    account the Section  117  factors  at  [28]  and  when  conducting  the
    balancing exercise, found  that  the  balance  was  in  favour  of  the
    Appellant.

 7. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal  the  decision  and
    permission was granted on 13th September 2016.

 8. The matter came before the Upper  Tribunal.   Mr  McVeety  appeared  on
    behalf of The Secretary of State and Mr Bloomer appeared on  behalf  of
    the Appellant.  I heard submissions from each of the parties and at the
    conclusion of those submissions reserved my decision which I now give.

 9.  I shall set out the submissions made when considering whether an error
    of law has been made out.  The Secretary of State's grounds argued that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in  his  assessment  of  Article  8
    outside of the Rules.  Whilst the written grounds  makes  reference  to
    the decisions of MF (Nigeria) and Gulshan, they make  no  reference  to
    the later Court of Appeal decision in SSHD  v  SS  (Congo)  and  others
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  As identified by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    there is no  requirement  for  exceptionality  but  whether  there  are
    "compelling circumstances" that exist to warrant a grant  of  leave  to
    enter outside of the Rules (see SS (Congo) at paragraphs  [35]-[42]  of
    the decision).

10. It is submitted on behalf of the Secretary of State  that  in  reaching
    the balance on whether there are "compelling circumstances," the  judge
    failed to properly consider the issue of  delay  and  that  whilst  the
    judge  made  reference  to  delay  at  paragraphs  [26]  and  [27],  as
    disproportionate, the judge failed to consider the question of delay in
    the context of the case and in particular,  that  the  application  was
    made on 3rd January 2015 and the decision was made on 23rd March  2015.
    He submits in essence that the delay in appealing the decision was  far
    greater than the delay there would have been by simply making  a  fresh
    application.  He further  submits  that  whilst  the  judge  quoted  SS
    (Congo) he did not apply it when reaching his decision.  It is  further
    submitted that there was no such thing as a "technical failure" to meet
    the Rules and that either the Appellant met the Rules or he did not.

11. By way of reply Mr Bloomer submitted that whilst  the  Appellant  could
    not meet the Rules, it was not the case of an "near miss" but one of  a
    "technical failure" and that the judge was  entitled  to  consider  the
    issue alongside the other identifiable factors weighing on the side  of
    the Appellant, including the issue of delay that there  would  be.   He
    submitted that the Sponsor could not have returned to Pakistan  due  to
    her limited income and finances and that to do so would have prejudiced
    her financial circumstances.  Furthermore as the judge  identified,  he
    was  entitled  to  place  weight  on  the  fact  that  delay   in   the
    circumstances of this  case  would  serve  no  "logical  purpose".   Mr
    Bloomer accepted that the judge could have expressed his decision  more
    fully but he submitted that he had carried out an appropriate balancing
    exercise which was justified in the exercise of his discretion.

Decision on the error of law:

12. There is no dispute that the Appellant could  not  meet  the  leave  to
    enter Rules in Appendix FM which set  out  the  substantive  conditions
    which  have  to  be  satisfied  in  relation  to  the  minimum   income
    requirements for a Sponsor and also the Rules in Appendix  FM-SE  which
    set out the form of evidence required to demonstrate that the financial
    requirements have been met.  The determination at paragraphs  [18]-[16]
    sets out why the Appellant could not meet the requirements of  Appendix
    FM by reference to the figures and that the Sponsor was  paid  in  cash
    and thus there was a shortfall identifiable (see paragraphs [10]-[14]).
     However at [15] the judge reached a finding that  if  the  salary  had
    been paid directly into the bank account by her employer as opposed  to
    the method used for cash-in-hand the Sponsor would have  received  full
    credit for the tax paid in accordance with  Appendix  FM-SE  and  would
    have met the Rules  once  the  savings  are  taken  into  account  (see
    calculation at [12]).  The judge was satisfied that a  salary  was  now
    paid directly by her employer and had increased  and  he  recorded  the
    concession made by the Presenting Officer that the "likelihood was that
    a future application would be successful".

13. As the Sponsor could not meet the Immigration Rules, the judge went  on
    to consider whether there was a case for a  grant  of  leave  to  enter
    outside the Rules (see paragraph  [17]  of  the  determination).   That
    paragraph requires further consideration.  He stated as follows:-

         "17. I am satisfied that the Sponsor, a British  citizen,  have  an
             unhappy  history  of   domestic   violence   in   a   previous
             relationship, and in such a context delay in  entry  clearance
             thereby  separating  the  couple  will  only  serve  to  be  a
             disproportionate interference."

    At paragraphs [25]-[28]  he  provides  his  reasons  for  reaching  the
    conclusion that the balance lay in favour of the Appellant by  granting
    leave to enter outside  of  the  Rules.   They  can  be  summarised  as
    follows.  The Appellant's case did not turn on how close the  Appellant
    had come to compliance with the Rules and as such it was  not  a  "near
    miss case" but that the judge had  applied  "the  family  values"  that
    underlie the Rule and are at the heart  of  Article  8  (see  paragraph
    [25]).  The judge attached weight to the Sponsor's history of  domestic
    violence in a previous relationship reaching a  finding  on  the  facts
    that it was only now that she had "reached a measure of happiness as  a
    consequence of developing the relationship with the Appellant" and that
    "delay in entry clearance and thereby separating the couple would  only
    serve to be a disproportionate interference".   At  paragraph  [26]  he
    identified that this was the  "compelling  circumstance"  when  coupled
    with the analysis set out in the earlier part of the  determination  in
    the way that the Sponsor's salary was treated which had resulted in  an
    artificial/technical shortfall, that the fact  that  her  employer  now
    paid the salary directly into the account and that the concession  made
    by  the  Presenting  Officer  was  that  the  likelihood  of  a  future
    application would be successful.

      He found that those factors taken together "tips  the  balance  under
    Article 8 in their favour."  At [27] the judge made  reference  to  the
    issue of delay in the circumstances in which an application was  likely
    to be successful.  He placed weight on the fact  that  there  would  be
    disruption to family life and took into account the stress  that  would
    entail to the Sponsor who he found  had  already  endured  considerable
    stress due to domestic violence and was in  recovery.   He  found  that
    such delay would not  serve  any  "logical  purpose"  and  thus  was  a
    disproportionate interference.

     He went on to apply SS (Congo) and that he found this was not  a  case
    where the applicant should wait and then make a further application nor
    did he find that the Entry Clearance  Officer  would  be  in  the  best
    position to evaluate the  finances  (see  [27]).   He  also  took  into
    account the Section 117 factors (not the subject of  challenge  by  the
    Secretary of State) at paragraph  [28]  and  at  [29]  weighed  in  the
    balance that the Appellant had not met the Immigration Rules which  set
    out the Article 8 balance and the public interest.

      Having weighed up the competing interests, at  [30]  he  reached  the
    overall conclusion that the balance was in favour of the Appellant  and
    allowed the appeal under Article 8.

14. It is submitted that the  judge  in  striking  the  balance  failed  to
    properly apply the decision of SS  (Congo)  as  cited.   The  Court  of
    Appeal's decision in SS (Congo) made  it  clear  that  the  Immigration
    Rules are the main point of assessment under Article 8 and it  is  only
    where they do  not  sufficiently  cover  the  particular  circumstances
    relating to an individual applicant that one  might  turn  to  consider
    whether there are any circumstances that would justify a grant of leave
    outside  of  the  Rules.   The   decision   compared   and   contrasted
    applications for leave to remain (LTR) and applications  for  leave  to
    enter (LTE).  This case was one concerning leave to enter.   The  Court
    of Appeal identified at paragraph [39] the range of factors and at [40]
    set out that whilst  the  LTE  Rules  in  general  terms  maintained  a
    reasonable relationship with  the  requirement  of  Article  8  in  the
    ordinary run of cases, however it remained possible  to  imagine  cases
    where the  individuals  interests  at  stake  are  of  a  "particularly
    pressing nature so that  a  good  claim  for  leave  to  enter  can  be
    established outside of the Rules" and that  "compelling  circumstances"
    exist.

15. Contrary to the oral grounds, this is what the judge  directed  himself
    to at paragraph [17] of the determination.  He stated as follows:-

         "17. I have considered whether the Appellant can  show  that  there
              are individual interest at stake covered by Article 8  'of  a
              particularly pressing nature' so as to give rise to a 'strong
              claim that compelling circumstances may exist to justify  the
              grant of leave to enter outside of the Rules' (see SS (Congo)
              [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at [40] and [56]'."

    Therefore he properly applied the decision of SS (Congo).

16. The judge went on to identify that there were "individual interests  at
    stake" covered by Article 8 of a "particularly pressing nature" to give
    rise to the compelling  circumstances  to  justify  a  grant  of  leave
    outside of the Rules.  He had identified at [17] that on  the  evidence
    before him that the British citizen Sponsor had had an unhappy  history
    of domestic violence in  a  previous  relationship  and  that  in  such
    context delay  in  entry  clearance  separating  the  couple  would  be
    disproportionate.  He made a further finding on the evidence and on the
    specific circumstances of the Sponsor in this respect at [26] referring
    to the history of domestic violence  and  that  the  Sponsor  had  only
    reached a "measure of happiness" as a  consequence  of  developing  the
    relationship with the Appellant and also at 27] considered  it  in  the
    context of delay.

17. It is plain from the witness statement that the Sponsor had entered the
    UK as a spouse and had been granted entry clearance in  this  category.
    However she had experienced domestic violence and as a consequence  had
    been granted indefinite leave to remain on  this  basis.   The  witness
    statement at paragraph [6] made reference to the hardship that she  had
    endured during the marriage.  I agree with Mr  Bloomer  that  it  would
    have been preferable for the judge to have given greater detail in  the
    determination of the circumstances arising from this, but I  take  into
    account that the judge had the advantage of hearing the  oral  evidence
    of the Sponsor and for this to be tested in cross-examination and it is
    plain that he found her account to be a compelling one  concerning  her
    past experiences which led to the overall conclusion at [26]  that  she
    had only just reached a measure of happiness in the  relationship  with
    the Appellant and at [27] that she had "endured considerable stress due
    to domestic violence and was in recovery".

18. It seems to me that those findings made by the judge were open  to  him
    on the evidence.  It is submitted that the  judge  however,  failed  to
    consider the  issue  of  delay  in  context.   It  is  right  that  the
    application for entry clearance  was  made  in  January  2015  and  the
    decision thereafter on 23rd March 2015 and  that  there  was  a  longer
    delay following the decision  to  appeal  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer rather than making  a  fresh  application.   However,
    whilst the judge did not directly refer to the delay in that context, I
    am satisfied that overall he was entitled  to  take  into  account  the
    issue of any further delay and that in consequence of the time that had
    already elapsed, that any further  delay  in  entry  clearance  thereby
    separating the couple further would be disproportionate  when  seen  in
    the light of the  particular  circumstances  of  the  Sponsor  and  the
    Appellant.  The weight to be attached to  the  issue  of  delay  was  a
    matter for the judge.

19. It was further submitted that  the  judge  did  not  apply  SS  (Congo)
    correctly when considering the issue  of  compliance  with  the  Rules.
    However I do not find that that ground is made out.  The decision in SS
    (Congo) at [50]-[53] sets out that "compelling circumstances" would  be
    required.  The decision also makes reference to why enforcement of  the
    evidential Rules is important (see  paragraphs  [52]  and  [53]).   The
    judge had regard to this at [27] and [29] of  the  decision.   However,
    whilst it was submitted that this was contrary to the  decision  of  SS
    (Congo) and it was wrong of the judge to take into  account  that  here
    had been a "technical failure" to meet the Rules, that is not  what  is
    set out at paragraph [56] of SS (Congo) in which it is said:-

         "56. However, it cannot be said that the fact that a case  involves
             a 'near miss' in relation to the requirement set  out  in  the
             Rules it  is  wholly  irrelevant  to  the  balancing  exercise
             required under Article 8.  If an applicant can show that there
             are individual interests at stake covered by Article  8  which
             give rise to a strong claim that compelling circumstances  may
             exist to justify the grant of LTE outside the Rules, the  fact
             that their case is also a 'near miss' case may be  a  relevant
             consideration which tips the balance under Article 8 in  their
             favour.  In such a case, the Appellant will  be  able  to  say
             that the detrimental impact on the public interest in issue if
             LTE is granted in their favour will be somewhat less than in a
             case where the gap between the applicant's  decision  and  the
             requirements of the Rules is great, and the risk that they may
             end up having  recourse  to  public  funds  and  resources  is
             therefore greater."

20. Furthermore this was a  case  in  which  the  judge  was  justified  in
    considering it as one which  did  not  fall  within  the  circumstances
    referred to in the decision of  SS  (Congo)  at  paragraph  [57].   The
    appeal before the Court of Appeal involved Sponsors whose position were
    likely to improve and that such improvements  were  "on  the  horizon".
    However it could be said that the judge, on the  specific  findings  of
    fact that he made, could have distinguished the Sponsor's circumstances
    on the basis that the changes  were  not  "on  the  horizon"  but  were
    actually in place and however applying the decision of  SS  (Congo)  at
    paragraph [56], it cannot be arguably said that the judge was wrong  to
    attach weight to the "technical failure" on the particular  facts  when
    set against and alongside the other factors identified.  The judge used
    the phrase "has tipped the balance" in favour of the Appellant.  He was
    entitled to place weight on the factors that  he  identified  and  that
    there would be less detrimental impact on the public interest where the
    Sponsor in this case could meet the  financial  requirements  and  that
    there would be no recourse  to  public  funds  (paragraph  [56]  of  SS
    (Congo)) and the pressure which admission would  place  on  the  public
    resources.

21.  The judge also did take into account that the weight to be attached to
    the public interest at [29] and also the Section 117 factors  to  which
    there has been no challenge by the Secretary of State at [28].

22. As to the issue of insurmountable obstacles, Mr McVeety did  not  press
    this point.  However,  whilst  the  judge  did  not  make  any  express
    reference to family life in Pakistan, I do not  consider  that  it  has
    been demonstrated that on the particular facts of this case that family
    life could reasonably be expected  to  take  place  there.   The  whole
    thrust of the case was that the Sponsor, if she had  to  leave  the  UK
    would not be able to continue with  her  employment  and  therefore  in
    circumstances where she could meet the financial requirements,  such  a
    course would undermine the other findings made  by  the  judge.   I  am
    therefore not persuaded on the particular facts of this case and  given
    the judge's explicit findings about the Sponsor's circumstances in  the
    UK, that it has been demonstrated that family life could reasonably  be
    expected to be pursued outside of the UK. Therefore the submissions  of
    the Secretary of State do not justify the setting aside the decision. I
    am satisfied  that  the  outcome  would  have  been  the  same  on  the
    particular facts of this appeal.

23. I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to reach the conclusion that
    he did having made an analysis of the  competing  interests  but  found
    that the balance was struck in favour of  the  Appellant.   The  weight
    attached to the particular factors was a matter for the judge  and  the
    submissions made on behalf of the Secretary of State do not demonstrate
    that the judge was wrong in attributing weight in the way that he did.

24. As set out in the decision in Mukarkar v  SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1045
    which concerned the assessment of Article 8 claims, Carnwath LJ made it
    clear that factual judgments of this  kind  are  often  not  easy.   He
    stated as follows:-

         "Factual judgments of this kind are often not easy,  but  they  are
         not  made  easier  or  better  by  excessive  legal  or  linguistic
         analysis.  It is of the nature of  such  judgments  that  different
         Tribunals, without illegality or irrationality, may reach different
         conclusions on the same  case  (as  is  indeed  illustrated  by  Mr
         Fountain's decision after the second hearing).  The mere fact  that
         one Tribunal has reached what may seem an unusually  generous  view
         of the facts of a particular case does not mean that it has made an
         error of law, so as to justify an appeal under the old  system,  or
         an order for reconsideration under the new.  Nor does it create any
         precedent, so as to limit the Secretary of State's right  to  argue
         for a more restrictive approach on a similar case  in  the  future.
         However, on the facts of the particular case, the decision  of  the
         specialist Tribunal should be respected."

25. This was a case in which the judge was able to assess the evidence  and
    in particular that of the Sponsor and the findings of fact made on  the
    specific circumstances of this case were ones that were open to him and
    he was entitled to reach the conclusion that the balance was struck  in
    favour of the Appellant.

Decision:

26. The grounds do not demonstrate any arguable error of law to  set  aside
    the decision. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 20/11/2016

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
