
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06136/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Bennett House,     |Determination Promulgated            |
|Stoke on Trent                       |On 7th October 2015                  |
|On 5th October 2015                  |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - Paris
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                MUSLIM ASUEV
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Johnstone, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Elliot-Kelly instructed by Paragon Law.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) was granted permission to  appeal
         a decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing  Mr  Asuev's  appeal
         against a decision of the ECO refusing him  entry  clearance  as  a
         returning resident.

      2. The grounds relied upon by the ECO are that the FtT judge failed to
         resolve what is said to be a conflict, namely:

             "..whereby the appellant was refused asylum in Belgium and has
             failed to give reasons why the appellant was issued with a new
             Russian  passport,  given  his   claimed   fear   of   return.
             Additionally no  evidence  has  been  produced  regarding  his
             father."

      3. The relevant immigration Rules are as follows:

             Returning Residents

             18. A person seeking leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as  a
             returning resident may be admitted for settlement provided the
             Immigration Officer is satisfied that the person concerned:

             (i) had indefinite leave to enter  or  remain  in  the  United
             Kingdom when he last left; and

             (ii) has not been away from the United Kingdom for more than 2
             years; and

             (iii) did not receive assistance from public funds towards the
             cost of leaving the United Kingdom; and

             (iv) now seeks admission for the purpose of settlement.

             18A. Those who qualify for admission to the United Kingdom  as
             returning residents in accordance with  paragraph  18  do  not
             need a visa to enter the UK.

             19. A person who does not benefit from the preceding paragraph
             by reason only of having been away from the United Kingdom too
             long may nevertheless be admitted as a returning resident  if,
             for example, he has lived here for most of his life.

      4. As background the ECO relies upon the following:

             "The appellant was issued with ILR in October  2006.  He  then
             returned to Russia and live with  his  father.  The  appellant
             then returned to  the  UK  in  2010  upon  re-entry  told  the
             Immigration Officer his absence was outside  of  his  control.
             One week later he went to Belgium and lost  his  passport.  He
             claimed asylum there which was refused.  The  applicant  found
             his passport in 2012, however it had expired. The  appellant's
             mother went to  Russia  to  obtain  a  new  Russian  passport.
             Another 14 months passed to make the current application"

      5. The FtT judge set out the material relied upon by the ECO and by Mr
         Asuev. There has been no challenge to the evidence as  set  out  by
         the judge. The summary of that evidence as relied upon by  the  ECO
         in the grounds seeking permission to appeal is incorrect - Mr Asuev
         did not return to Russia to live with his father and that  was  not
         relied upon by the respondent in the hearing before the  First-tier
         Tribunal. The judge heard oral evidence from Mr Asuev's mother. The
         judge was aware that there were two protracted periods  of  absence
         to be considered. The judge considered the evidence both  oral  and
         documentary before him and accepted as credible the  reasons  given
         for the delay in submitting the application after  receipt  of  the
         new passport. He accepted as plausible the reasons  given  for  the
         length of stay outside the  UK  and  that  the  duration  of  those
         periods were outside Mr Asuev's control.

      6. In so  far  as  the  grounds  are  concerned  it  is  difficult  to
         understand what relevance the failed asylum claim in Belgium has on
         whether Mr Asuev should be treated  as  a  returning  resident.  Ms
         Johnstone said that for the judge to accept that  the  explanations
         given by Mr Asuev for the lengthy delay in applying to return as  a
         returning resident included a failed asylum claim required detailed
         rasons which had not been given. That claim had been on  the  basis
         of military service and his father's activities  and  that  he  had
         failed to give adequate reasons for  his  claim  for  asylum.  That
         however is not the case. Mr Asuev gave as  a  reason  for  claiming
         asylum, the need to regularise his stay in Belgium because  he  did
         not have a passport to return to the UK - see paragraph 5(h) of the
         First-tier Tribunal decision. That record of the evidence  has  not
         been challenged. The fact  that  a  person  makes  an  unsuccessful
         application for asylum, whether based upon  a  subjective  fear  of
         return to country of origin or not,  does  not  render  the  reason
         given for the making of that claim  not  credible.  The  First-tier
         Tribunal judge was not determining Mr Asuev's asylum claim but  was
         determining the reason he gave  for  claiming  asylum  before  him,
         namely an attempt to regularise his stay in Belgium. The First-tier
         Tribunal judge accepted that. The judge further accepted the reason
         given for the application  not  being  made  as  soon  as  the  new
         passport was obtained (set out in paragraph 6g) - see paragraphs 10
         to 12.

      7. Ms Johnstone did not submit that the  findings  were  perverse  but
         relied upon a 'reasons' challenge. The findings by the  judge  were
         open to him on the evidence before him- another judge may not  have
         reached the same finding but this was one that was  plainly  within
         the range of reasonable conclusions to draw. It was not perverse or
         unreasonable or inadequately reasoned.

      8. The second limb of Ms Johnstone's submissions was that if the judge
         had not erred in law in making his findings of fact, he  had  erred
         in law in failing to simply allow the appeal as not  in  accordance
         with the law and thus enabling the  respondent  to  take  a  lawful
         decision. She submitted that the judge had purported to exercise  a
         discretion that it was not open to him to exercise;  she  submitted
         there was no discretion in the Rules and that  any  discretion  was
         not justiciable in this appeal. Ms Elliot- Kelly  relied  upon  the
         wording of the Rule itself and Ukus [2012]  UKUT  00307  (IAC)  the
         headnote of which reads as follows:

             1. If  a  decision  maker  in  the  purported  exercise  of  a
             discretion vested in him  noted  his  function  and  what  was
             required to be done when fulfilling it and then  proceeded  to
             reach a decision on that basis, the decision is a  lawful  one
             and  the  Tribunal  cannot  intervene  in  the  absence  of  a
             statutory power to decide that the discretion should have been
             exercised differently (see  s  86(3)(b)  of  the  Nationality,
             Immigration and Asylum Act 2002).

             2.  Where  the  decision  maker  has  failed  to  exercise   a
             discretion vested  in  him,  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  on
             appeal is limited to a decision that the failure  renders  the
             decision 'not  in  accordance  with  the  law'  (s  86(3)(a)).
             Because  the  discretion  is  vested  in  the  Executive,  the
             appropriate course will be for the  Tribunal  to  require  the
             decision maker to complete  his  task  by  reaching  a  lawful
             decision on the outstanding application, along the  lines  set
             out in SSHD v Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148. In such a case, it makes
             no difference whether there is such a statutory  power  as  is
             mentioned in paragraph 1 above.

             3. If the decision maker has lawfully exercised his discretion
             and the Tribunal has such a statutory power, the Tribunal must
             either (i)  uphold  the  decision  maker's  decision  (if  the
             Tribunal is unpersuaded that the decision  maker's  discretion
             should have been  exercised  differently);  or  (ii)  reach  a
             different decision in the exercise of its own discretion.

      9.  The  Entry  Clearance  Officer  in  the  decision  states   (where
         relevant):

                . I have considered your application under paragraphs 18 and
                  19 of the United Kingdom Immigration Rules

                . I have taken account of

                  *    the financial and employment information

                  *    passport and travel history

                  *    family circumstances

                  *    supporting documents provided

                . I have assessed your  application  against  the  Returning
                  resident Paragraphs of the Immigration Rules

                . I am not satisfied that you have not been  away  from  the
                  United Kingdom for more than two years Paragraph 18(ii) of
                  HC395

                . I am not satisfied that you qualify under paragraph 19  as
                  a person who does not benefit from Paragraph 18 by  reason
                  only of having been away from the United Kingdom too long.
                  Paragraph 19 of HC395.

     10. From these extracts it is plain that the ECO recognised  the  Rules
         he was considering in deciding the application;  acknowledged  that
         he was exercising  a  discretion  vested  in  him;  identified  the
         factors he was required to take into account and took his  decision
         taking account of all the factors before him. Thus he exercised the
         discretion in the Rules and the decision he reached is  susceptible
         to appeal in the statutory scheme.

     11. It was open  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  to  decide  that
         discretion should have been exercised differently.

     12. There is no  error  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal.

         Conclusions:

         The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not
         involve the making of an error on a point of law.

         I do not set aside the decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.

[pic]
     Date 6th October 2015
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
