
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/ 06428/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16th October 2015                 |On 23rd November 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer, ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MS SANA NADEEM
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Claimant: Mr S Canter, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard  allowing  the  Claimant's  appeal  on
    human rights grounds with reference to Article 8.

 2. In a Refusal Letter dated 24 April 2014, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    (ECO) refused the Claimant's application for  entry  clearance  as  the
    child of a person  present  and  accorded  refugee  status  in  the  UK
    pursuant to paragraph 352D of the  Immigration  Rules.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal  promulgated  its  decision  allowing  the  Claimant's  appeal
    against that decision on 27 May 2015.

 3. The Appellant appealed against that decision. The  grounds  upon  which
    permission to appeal was granted may be summarised as follows:

      i) It is arguable that the judge erred in miscalculating  the  age  of
         the Claimant; and

     ii) It is arguable that the judge erred in his consideration of Article
         8 in the 'overall circumstances'.

 4. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hollingworth. I made clear to the parties that my view  was  that
    the grant of permission was limited to the AM (S.117B) [2015] UKUT  260
    (IAC) point raised in ground 2, given that there was no overall Article
    8 point taken in the grounds.

 5. I was provided with a Rule 24 response  from  the  Claimant's  previous
    counsel and with a Skeleton Argument in supplementation by her  present
    counsel, Mr Canter.

    No Error of Law

 6. At the close of submissions,  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give. I do not find that there was an error
    of law in the decision such that it should be set aside. My reasons for
    so finding are as follows.

 7. In relation to the first ground, I find that the Secretary  of  State's
    appeal must fail given the immateriality of the error that is revealed.
    The Claimant accepts there was a mistake of fact  in  relation  to  her
    age. Her date of birth is 25 January 1995. She was 18 years of  age  at
    the date of application on 16 January 2014, whereas the  judge  thought
    she was 17 years of age. She was  19  years  of  age  at  the  date  of
    decision, and the judge thought she was 19 years of  age  as  is  clear
    from paragraph 25(5) of the determination.

 8. The error in ground 1 therefore comes down to a misapprehension of fact
    by the judge in mistakenly thinking that the Claimant was 17  years  of
    age at the date of application whereas she was 18  years  of  age.  The
    Claimant accepts that her age may  have  affected  the  proportionality
    assessment however as is pointed out, the appeal succeeded outwith  the
    Immigration Rules based upon the judge's evaluation of Article 8. It is
    true that the judge considered the rules for entry clearance applicable
    to minors (namely paragraph 297) which must have affected his  decision
    however; such consideration would not have made any difference  to  the
    outcome of the appeal because the remainder  of  the  judge's  findings
    were clearly in favour of  the  Claimant.  This  is  obvious  from  the
    subparagraphs of  paragraph  25  that  discuss  the  family's  history,
    cultural background and religious and other circumstances.

 9. In dealing with  the  questions  gauging  proportionality  pursuant  to
    Razgar, the judge notes at paragraph 25(1)  that  the  Claimant  enjoys
    family life with her parents notwithstanding that she is over 18  years
    of age. Then, in considering the second question at paragraph 25(2) the
    judge notes the Claimant's age is  19  years  of  age.  In  short,  the
    Claimant's age as an adult is clearly at the forefront of  the  judge's
    mind when the Article 8 consideration is approached.

10. The judge then further notes that the Claimant is a  young  adult,  and
    has not established an independent life. It  is  also  noted  that  the
    Claimant's father was a refugee and so could not visit his daughter  in
    Pakistan.

11. The Claimant's ability in English was not challenged at the  First-tier
    hearing but at any rate the judge was satisfied that she would  quickly
    become proficient in English. It is also noted that she is  financially
    supported by her father and in particular that there was no  reason  to
    consider that the Claimant would  become  a  burden  on  UK  taxpayers.
    Further still, it is crucial to the outcome  of  the  appeal  that  the
    Claimant's family life and inability to continue that family  life  was
    properly balanced against the statutory form of  the  public  interest,
    given shape by section 117B(1)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.

12. It is clear given that the father is a recognised refugee  that  family
    life  could  not  be  pursued  in  Pakistan   and   consequently,   the
    proportionality of the interference in  family  life  is  placed  under
    greater strain.

13. By the fifth paragraph of that consideration  and  the  proportionality
    question, it is clear that the balancing exercise performed  beforehand
    results in the scales tipping in favour of the Claimant overall.

14. The conclusion the judge reaches is furthermore  in  keeping  with  the
    recent Court of Appeal authority of Singh & Anor v Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 630 at  [24]  where  the  Court
    confirmed that adult children do not lose their family life  ties  once
    achieving the age of majority, particularly where they have not  formed
    an independent family unit  of  their  own.  This  echoes  the  Court's
    findings previously made at [45] of AP (India) v Secretary of State for
    the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ 89.

15. Therefore, with the misapprehension of fact removed from that balancing
    exercise, is it likely that the judge would have come  to  a  different
    conclusion? In light of the above analysis of the judge's consideration
    and the binding authorities, I think not.

16. Turning to the remaining ground concerning the section 117B  point,  in
    my view, the fact that the judge considered the  English  language  and
    financial independence factors in favour of the  Claimant  were  merely
    two reasons given amongst many others for  finding  in  favour  of  the
    Claimant. Those factors were balanced against the public  interest  (as
    already noted above) and  the  determination  does  not  contradict  AM
    (S.117B) as there is no  independent  entitlement  to  entry  that  the
    Claimant has accrued from consideration of these factors alone. Indeed,
    by reverse analogy, those factors  would  not  result  in  a  different
    outcome were they to be removed from the judge's consideration.

17. Consequently, the grounds do not reveal an error of law such  that  the
    decision should be set aside.

    Decision

18. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is affirmed.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini

