

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06726/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke         |Decision & Reasons         |
|                                      |Promulgated                |
|On 7 June 2017                        |On 8 June 2017             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                SHERAZ AHMED
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr D Akhtar, Kenneth Jones Solicitors
For the respondent:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

       1.  In  a  decision  dated  20  July  2016  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  a  decision  dated  10
          March 2015 refusing his application for entry  clearance  to  join
          his spouse, Mrs Akhtar ('the sponsor').  This decision  was  based
          upon two reasons: (i) 'suitability' -  the  SSHD  considered  that
          the appellant had  falsely  placed  reliance  upon  the  sponsor's
          employment, in relation to which it  was  alleged  the  HMRC  said
          there  were  no  tax  records  for   the   relevant   year;   (ii)
          'eligibility' - the evidence regarding  the  sponsor's  employment
          did not meet the 'specified evidence' requirements.


       2. The First-tier Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal,  and  upheld  the
          SSHD's decision on both 'suitability' and 'eligibility' grounds.


       3. The appellant's current  solicitors  lodged  wide-ranging  grounds
          against this decision.  This  included  the  submission  that  the
          hearing before the First-tier Tribunal was tainted  by  procedural
          unfairness.  It was explained in the grounds  that  the  appellant
          and the sponsor had been defrauded into paying a  person  claiming
          to be able to provide legal representation  at  the  hearing,  and
          that on the day of the hearing that person persuaded  the  sponsor
          to hand over more money and proceed with the hearing  without  any
          legal representation.


       4. Although permission to appeal was  at  first  granted  on  limited
          grounds, in a decision dated 5 January 2017 Upper  Tribunal  Judge
          Perkins granted permission on all grounds.


       5. Both parties have complied with  directions  that  I  gave  on  11
          January 2017.   The  appellant  relied  upon  a  detailed  witness
          statement provided by the sponsor, explaining the  events  leading
          to  being  left  without  representation  before  the   First-tier
          Tribunal.  This witness statement is  supported  by  corroborating
          evidence from a variety of sources.  A complaint has been made  to
          the police and I understand that  investigations  are  continuing.
          At the beginning of the hearing before me, Ms Abone accepted  that
          she did not wish to cross-examine the sponsor on the  contents  of
          her witness  statement  and  the  events  described  were  not  in
          dispute.


       6. Although Ms Aboni argued in a letter dated 26  January  2017  that
          there was no procedural unfairness, at the hearing before  me  she
          accepted that there was.  I read the first lines from  the  record
          of  proceedings   taken   by   the   First-tier   Tribunal.   This
          demonstrates that the First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  clarify  the
          lack of representation at  any  point.   Previous  solicitors  had
          written a letter confirming they were no longer instructed  on  13
          July 2016, some two days before the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.
          This does not mean that the First-tier Tribunal was  at  fault  in
          any way.  It just lends support to the sponsor's  claim  that  she
          did not know what to do and was not presented  by  the  First-tier
          Tribunal Judge with  a  clear  opportunity  to  explain  what  had
          recently happened.

       7. Ms Aboni accepted that the sponsor had  been  duped  by  a  person
          claiming to be a legal representative.  He falsely told  her  that
          he had arranged for a barrister, the barrister was  in  the  court
          room, but in any event the Judge should not be  told  about  this.
          There was no barrister in the court room.   Understandably,  given
          the timing  and  circumstances  of  the  events  the  sponsor  was
          bewildered and confused and did not explain matters to the  Judge.
           The appellant then proceeded to answer questions from  the  Judge
          at a time when she was very  confused  indeed.   In  my  judgment,
          there has been a procedural irregularity and this has  caused  the
          appellant  procedural  unfairness,  such   that   the   First-tier
          Tribunal decision must be set aside.


       8. Had the sponsor been  assisted  by  a  legal  representative,  the
          First-tier Tribunal may well have been taken  to  cogent  evidence
          from HMRC confirming the income  she  claimed  to  have  received.
          Indeed, Ms Abone submitted a witness statement from HMRC dated  26
          January 2017, which she said made  it  clear  that  the  HMRC  now
          accepted that the sponsor declared  the  income  claimed  for  the
          relevant years at the relevant time, and  as  such  there  was  no
          deception.  If I am wrong  about  the  hearing  being  tainted  by
          procedural unfairness, in the alternative the First-tier  Tribunal
          has made a mistake of fact regarding the HMRC  evidence  that  has
          caused the appellant unfairness.

   9. Both representatives agreed that the decision should be remade by  the
      First-tier Tribunal.  I have had regard to para 7.2  of  the  relevant
      Senior President's Practice Statement and the nature and extent of the
      factual findings required in remaking the decision, and I have decided
      that this is an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier  Tribunal.



  10. Given the HMRC witness  statement,  Ms  Abone  formally  withdrew  the
      allegations in the decision relevant to 'suitability'  and  deception.
      She confirmed that the SSHD now only  relied  upon  the  'eligibility'
      concerns set out in the decision letter relevant  to  the  failure  to
      provide the requisite specified evidence.



Decision

      11. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  procedural
          unfairness constituting an error  of  law.   Its  decision  cannot
          stand and is set aside.

      12. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.



Directions

        1) The appeal shall be reheard de novo by the  First-tier  Tribunal
           sitting at Stoke (TE: 1.5 hrs)  on  the  first  date  available.
           There has been delay in relisting the matter  before  the  Upper
           Tribunal and given the circumstances of this case  it  would  be
           helpful if a hearing could be listed as soon as possible.


Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
7 June 2017


