

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
OA/06793/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Determination Promulgated |
|On 28 March 2018                       |        On 25 April 2018          |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                               MR DANIEL OLOWE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFO
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Harris, Counsel, instructed by Mansouri & Son
                    solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

   1. By a decision promulgated on 9 February 2018, I found an error of  law
      in the  decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lucas promulgated on  18
      May 2017 dismissing the Appellant's appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      decision dated  9  March  2015  refusing  his  application  for  entry
      clearance as a partner under Appendix FM to the Immigration Rules.   I
      therefore set aside that decision and gave directions  for  a  resumed
      hearing before me to re-make the decision.  My error of  law  decision
      is annexed hereto for ease of reference.

   2. Pursuant to the directions made, on 21 February 2018, the  Appellant's
      solicitor filed a copy of the determination and reasons of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge C H Bennett promulgated on 22 January  2013  in  appeal
      number OA/0693/2012 ("the  2013  decision").   The  2013  decision  is
      relevant to the issue which arises in  this  appeal  relating  to  the
      application of  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
      Rules").

   3. Under separate cover, on 1 March 2018, the Appellant's solicitor filed
      a further witness statement from the  Appellant  dated  1  March  2018
      which, I assume, was  intended  to  comply  with  [2]  of  my  earlier
      directions.  Counsel for the Appellant had not been provided with that
      statement.   Exhibited  to  that  statement  are  refusals  of   entry
      clearance dated 28 September 2009 and 19 October 2009 and a number  of
      documents which relate to the Appellant's family life  with  his  wife
      and daughter.

   4. I also have before me the statements and other documents filed at  the
      time of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

   5. The Appellant is resident in Nigeria.  There was  no  application  for
      him to give evidence by video-link.  Although his wife was present  at
      the hearing, Mr Harris did not ask that she be  called  to  give  oral
      evidence.  I accept that it was unnecessary for her to do  so  because
      the Appellant's family circumstances are not  in  dispute.   The  only
      factual matters which remain in dispute relate to the Appellant's past
      immigration history and applications for entry clearance and those are
      matters about which the Appellant's wife has no direct knowledge.

   Limitations on the appeal

   6. I begin by noting that, although at [1] of my error of law decision, I
      indicated that both parties accepted that  this  is  an  appeal  which
      proceeds under the provisions  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") prior to amendment by the Immigration
      Act 2014 ("the  2014  Act"),  Mr  Harris  at  this  hearing  initially
      appeared to resile from that position.  The question of  which  appeal
      provisions apply has a significant bearing in this case on  the  facts
      which I can consider and it is therefore necessary to set out  why  Mr
      Harris's submission is wrong.

   7. The amendments to the appeal provisions in the 2002 Act were  made  by
      the 2014 Act over a period of time and by a sequence  of  commencement
      orders.  The relevant commencement order for  these  purposes  is  The
      Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement  No.  4,  Transitional  and  Saving
      Provisions and Amendment)  Order  2015  (SI  2015/371)  ("Commencement
      Order No 4").

   8. Since Commencement Order No 4 is the last in the  sequence  of  orders
      implementing the amendments to the appeal provisions in the 2002  Act,
      it is necessary  to  explain  how  those  amendments  were  introduced
      previously.  They operated by preserving "the saved provisions"  (that
      is to say the appeal provisions which existed prior to the  amendments
      by the 2014 Act) in certain respects and introducing the  commencement
      of "the relevant provisions" (that is to say the provisions as amended
      by the 2014 Act) by further amendments to  article  9  of  an  earlier
      commencement order (The Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No.  3,
      Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2014).

   9. Article 8 of Commencement Order No 4 provides as follows  (so  far  as
      relevant):-

           "8(1) The Commencement Order is amended as follows.

           (2)   For article 9 substitute -

                 "9. - (1) Notwithstanding the commencement of the  relevant
                 provisions, the saved provisions continue  to  have  effect
                 and the relevant provisions do not have effect  so  far  as
                 they relate to the following decisions of the Secretary  of
                 State -

                 ...

                 (d)   a decision made before 6th April 2015 in relation  to
                 which, immediately before 6th April 2015, an  appeal  could
                 be brought or was pending under the saved provisions."

        In this case, the Respondent's decision under  appeal  is  dated  9
        March 2015.

  10. Those provisions have the following consequences.  First,  the  appeal
      is against the refusal of entry clearance under  section  82(2)(b)  of
      the 2002 Act prior to amendment by the 2014  Act  and  not  against  a
      refusal of a human  rights  claim  under  section  82  post-amendment.
      Second, the grounds available to the Appellant include not  only  that
      the refusal of entry clearance is unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
      Human Rights Act 1998 as being incompatible with his Convention rights
      but also that the decision is not in  accordance  with  the  Rules  or
      otherwise not in accordance with the law.  Third, however,  (and  most
      importantly), sections 85 and 85A of the 2002 Act prior  to  amendment
      by the 2014 Act limit the matters which the Tribunal can  consider  as
      follows (so far as relevant):-


           "85. Matters to be considered
           ...
           (4)   On an appeal under section 82(1)...against a decision  the
                 Tribunal may consider evidence about any  matter  which  it
                 thinks relevant to the substance of the decision, including
                 evidence which concerns a matter arising after the date  of
                 decision.
           (5)   But subsection (4) is subject to the exceptions in section
           85A.
           85A   Matters to be considered: new evidence: exceptions
   1) This section sets out the exceptions mentioned in section 85(5)
   2) Exception 1 is that in relation  to  an  appeal  under  section  82(1)
      against an  immigration  decision  of  a  kind  specified  in  section
      82(2)(b)...the  Tribunal   may   consider   only   the   circumstances
      appertaining at the time of the decision.
           ..."

  11. The Appellant's daughter was born on 22 September 2016.  As  such,  at
      the date of the Respondent's decision, she  was  not  even  conceived.
      Accordingly, that is a circumstance arising  after  the  date  of  the
      Respondent's decision which, by reason of section 85A, I  cannot  take
      into account.  The Appellant would need to make a further  application
      for entry clearance based on his  relationship  as  the  parent  of  a
      British citizen child. As Ms  Everett  accepted  in  discussions,  the
      Appellant's position is  probably  strengthened  (at  least  in  human
      rights terms) by that relationship but  it  is  not  something  I  can
      consider in this appeal.

  12. That brings me on to a further point raised at the error of law  stage
      which is noted at [30] of my earlier decision.  As I there  noted,  Mr
      Harris was not prepared to concede that section 85A applies equally to
      the human rights ground.  As I  there  noted,  however,  the  decision
      under appeal is not a separate one to refuse a human rights claim  but
      a decision to refuse entry clearance  which  is  appealed  on  various
      grounds including that the decision  breaches  the  Appellant's  human
      rights. As such, there is no distinction to be drawn based on  section
      85A.

  13. I also drew Mr Harris'  attention  to  the  case  of  AS  (Somalia)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 32.  That  case
      was concerned only with whether section 85(5) (now section 85A(2))  is
      compatible with Article 8 ECHR.  As such,  the  distinction  which  Mr
      Harris sought to draw based on what is said at  [9]  of  the  judgment
      about whether the entry clearance officer is best placed  to  evaluate
      the effect of the change in circumstances has no merit.  It is evident
      from the judgment that it was accepted by  the  House  of  Lords  that
      section 85(5) (and therefore now section 85A (2)) operated equally  to
      limit consideration  of  the  facts  when  applying  Article  8  ECHR.
      Indeed, were that not so, there would have  been  no  reason  for  the
      appellants in those cases to appeal  on  the  interpretation  of  that
      section at all.

   Paragraph 320(11) of the Rules

  14. It is necessary to begin my consideration of the Appellant's case with
      the Respondent's refusal of his application under the Rules.  If he is
      able to meet the Rules then he has no need to fall back on  his  human
      rights claim.

  15. I have set out at [14] of my earlier decision  what  I  understood  at
      that time to be the factual background  to  the  Appellant's  previous
      immigration history and particularly the  earlier  applications  which
      were said by the Respondent to be "frivolous".   As I noted at [15] to
      [20] of my earlier decision, I could not be sure that I had been given
      the entire factual background because neither I nor either  party  had
      before us the 2013 decision on which Judge Lucas placed some reliance.



  16. As already noted, I have now been provided with a  copy  of  the  2013
      decision.  I have also received a further witness statement  from  the
      Appellant dated 1 March 2018.  That statement is highly unsatisfactory
      as it deals only with the applications for entry clearance made  on  4
      September 2009 refused on 28 September  2009  and  another  which  was
      refused on 19 October 2009.

  17. In terms of his  immigration  history,  the  Appellant  says  that  he
      entered the UK in 1988 and in 1999 as a visitor with  his  mother  and
      that his father arranged for solicitors to make a visa application for
      him in 1999 before the Appellant's leave expired, said to be supported
      by a letter from those solicitors which is  exhibited  to  an  earlier
      statement from his father dated  5  May  2017  and  which  appears  at
      [AB/34] in the bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.   However,  even
      the  briefest  of  references  to  that  letter  do  not  support  the
      Appellant's case.

  18. In the first place, the letter is dated 18 March 2003 and,  whilst  it
      might be the case that the solicitors  did  not  immediately  make  an
      application when instructed to do so, there is no evidence to  support
      those instructions having been given, as the Appellant's  father  says
      is the case, before the Appellant's visa expired. He puts the fact  of
      the solicitors having not made the application for three years down to
      their professional  negligence  but  there  is  no  evidence  that  he
      reported them for such negligence.  Furthermore, even on the  case  as
      put in the Appellant's father's statement,  the  Appellant  overstayed
      for a period at that time because the application was not in fact made
      until March 2003.

  19. The letter is also somewhat inconsistent with the position as set  out
      in the statement of the Appellant and his father about his immigration
      history.  The solicitor's letter states that  "[t]he  applicant  first
      entered the United Kingdom on the 22/12/97 and  has  subsequently  had
      occasions to re-visit the United Kingdom thereafter until lately  when
      he decided to stay with the father on the last occasion.  He had to be
      assisted to enter  by  a  relative  in  view  of  certain  threatening
      circumstances back home." Those assertions are inconsistent  with  the
      Appellant's statement that he entered the UK in 1988 and 1999 with his
      mother. They are slightly more consistent with what  is  said  by  his
      father that he sponsored the Appellant to enter in 1997, 1998 and 1999
      but, again, inconsistent with the Appellant  having  arrived  last  in
      1999 with his mother as a visitor.

  20. The documents exhibited by the Appellant's father said to confirm that
      the Appellant entered with his mother as a visitor also do not confirm
      this.  They confirm the visits by the Appellant's mother in the period
      but there is no mention of a child being included on that passport.

  21. That brings me on  to  the  2013  decision  which  casts  a  different
      complexion on the  factual  circumstances  at  that  time.   In  short
      summary, the Judge noted that  the  Respondent's  records  showed  the
      Appellant having entered the UK unlawfully and that no attempt  having
      been made to regularise his stay until 20 March 2003.   I observe that
      the reference  to  20  March  2003  ties  in  with  the  date  of  the
      solicitor's letter under cover of which an application  was  submitted
      on 18 March 2003 to which I refer at [18] above.  That application  is
      said to have been refused on 29 April 2003  because  no  passport  was
      submitted.

  22. The 2013 decision then recites details of the immigration history  and
      further applications after 2003. Further applications  were  made  for
      indefinite leave to remain as a dependent child on 2 June 2003  and  3
      December 2003.  By those dates, the Appellant was no  longer  a  child
      (his date of birth is 24  March  1985).   The  first  application  was
      rejected for failure to submit a passport.  The  second  was  rejected
      because no fee was paid.

  23. A further application made on the same basis on  2  January  2004  was
      refused on 18 October 2008 on the basis that the Appellant was  not  a
      child at the date of application, only copies  of  the  passports  had
      been submitted, the Secretary  of  State  was  not  satisfied  of  the
      Appellant claimed relationship with his father and the  Appellant  had
      no leave to remain.

  24. The Appellant was served with notice of removal on 22 October 2008 (as
      an illegal entrant).  He made a voluntary departure.

  25. In light of that much fuller immigration history, it appears that  the
      Appellant and indeed his father have been less than candid  about  the
      Appellant's past.  No explanation is offered by either (except so  far
      as I have noted) for the actions of the Appellant and  his  father  at
      the relevant time.  The Appellant's father says in his statement  that
      he  believes  that  the  immigration  history  record  is   incorrect.
      However, he supplies no  documentary  proof  of  having  obtained  the
      necessary clearances when  he  asserts  that  such  were  sought.   He
      supports what he says at [8] of his statement only with a copy of  the
      degree certificate obtained by the Appellant which says nothing  about
      the Appellant's immigration status at the  relevant  time  (in  2008).
      There has been no successful appeal against the 2013 decision and,  in
      the absence of supporting evidence about the  facts  asserted  by  the
      Appellant and his father, I accept the factual history as found in the
      2013 decision.

  26. I then turn to the applications  to  which  the  Appellant  does  make
      reference in his statement namely those made in September and  October
      2009 which were refused on 28  September  2009  and  19  October  2009
      respectively.

  27. The Appellant made an application to enter as a student on 8 September
      2009.  That was refused initially on the basis that the Appellant  did
      not meet financial requirements.  The Appellant sought  administrative
      review of that decision but at the same time made a fresh  application
      on 7 October 2009.  It was in consideration of that second application
      that the Entry Clearance Officer became  aware  of  the  deception  of
      which the Appellant stands accused.  As a result,  not  only  was  the
      second application refused but also, on review, the first  application
      was refused  for  deception.   Paragraph  320(7A)  of  the  Rules  was
      applied.

  28. The deception on which reliance was placed and as  set  out  by  Judge
      Bennett  in  the  2013  decision  is  as  follows.   In   the   second
      application, the Appellant was asked at Q6.3 whether he had ever  been
      refused a visa for any country including the UK.  He replied  that  he
      had not which was incorrect because, on any view, he had been  refused
      a visa in response to the first application.  Judge Bennett also noted
      that, even if it was the case that earlier applications had been  made
      on the Appellant's behalf by his father, he had been refused leave  to
      remain on 18 October 2008.  As such, the  Appellant's  declaration  in
      response to this question in both the first  and  second  applications
      was inaccurate.

  29. The Appellant also said that he had been granted a visa to the UK on 2
      August 1999 and had travelled to the UK on 20 December 1999.  That  is
      consistent with his case that he entered as a visitor with his mother.
       As I have already observed though, there is no evidence of his lawful
      entry at that time and as the Judge noted,  the  Respondent's  records
      were that his entry at that time was unlawful. Judge Bennett  accepted
      the Respondent's case on this issue.

  30. Further, in answer to Q6.6, when asked if he had  been  in  breach  of
      immigration conditions at any time, the Appellant said he had not.  He
      had on any view overstayed his leave even if his case as to entry as a
      visitor is accepted.  In answer to Q6.7 in both the first  and  second
      applications, the Appellant said that  he  had  never  been  deported,
      removed or otherwise required to leave any country including  the  UK.
      Even if his case as to having made a voluntary departure is  accepted,
      as Judge Bennett noted at [26] of the 2013 decision, the Appellant was
      served with notice that he was required to leave the UK.

  31. In answer to Q6.8 about previous applications, the Appellant  gave  no
      information in the first application and declared only the application
      made on 18 March 2003 in the second application.  There is no  mention
      of the subsequent applications.

  32. The 2013 Decision itself relates to a later refusal dated 5 March 2012
      in response to an application made on 22 December 2011.   That refusal
      was, as in the present case, based on paragraph 320(11) of the  Rules.
      The text of that paragraph of the Rules as it was at the date  of  the
      Respondent's refusal is set out at [8] of the 2013 Decision.  However,
      the Judge also set  out  at  [11]  (and  applied)  the  text  of  that
      paragraph as amended prior to the date of  the  hearing  which  is  in
      precisely the same terms as the rule applied by Judge Lucas.

  33. Furthermore, the Judge set out at [9] of the  2013  Decision  and  had
      regard to the case of PS (paragraph 320(11) discretion:  care  needed)
      India [2010] UKUT 440.

  34. Those factors are relevant because, as noted at  [20]  of  my  earlier
      decision, Mr Harris had submitted that there was a distinction  to  be
      drawn between the First-tier Tribunal's decision in  this  appeal  and
      the 2013 Decision because the wording of the rule had changed  as  had
      the guidance.  That is in turn relevant  to  the  application  of  the
      Devaseelan principle (arising from the case of Secretary of State  for
      the Home Department v D (Tamil) [2002] UKIAT 00702).   That  principle
      relates to second appeals involving the same parties  and  applies  as
      follows (taken from [39] to [41] of the judgment in that case):-

   1) The first Judge's determination should always be the starting-point.

   2) Facts happening since the first Judge's determination  can  always  be
      taken into account by the second Judge.

   3) Facts happening before the first Judge's determination but  having  no
      relevance to the issues before him can always be taken into account by
      the second Judge.

   4) Facts personal to the Appellant that were not brought to the attention
      of the first Judge, although they were relevant to the  issues  before
      him,  should  be  treated  by  the  second  Judge  with  the  greatest
      circumspection.

   5) Evidence of other facts may not suffer from the same  concerns  as  to
      credibility, but should be treated with caution.

   6) If before the second Judge, the Appellant relies on facts that are not
      materially different from those put to  the  first  Judge  the  second
      Judge should regard  the  issues  as  settled  by  the  first  Judge's
      determination and make his findings in line with that determination.

   7) The force of the  reasoning  underlying  guidelines  (4)  and  (6)  is
      greatly reduced if there is some very good reason why the  Appellant's
      failure to adduce relevant evidence before the first Judge should  not
      be held against him.

        The Tribunal in Devaseelan made clear that those guidelines are not
        intended to cover every eventuality.

  35. My starting point is therefore the findings made by the previous Judge
      in the 2013 Decision.  The text of paragraph 320(11) of the  Rules  is
      now as it was at the time of the 2013 Decision as follows:-


           "(11)  where  the  applicant  has  previously  contrived  in   a
           significant way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by:
   i) Overstaying; or
  ii) Breaching a condition attached to his leave; or
 iii) Being an illegal entrant; or
  iv) Using deception in an application for entry clearance, leave to  enter
      or remain in order to obtain documents from the Secretary of State  or
      a  third  party  required  in  support  of  the  application  (whether
      successful or not); and
           There are other aggravating circumstances, such  as  absconding,
           not meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions  or  bail
           conditions, using an assumed identity  or  multiple  identities,
           switching nationality,  making  frivolous  applications  or  not
           complying with the re-documentation process."

  36. Having dealt with the evidence before him at [25] to [30] of the  2013
      Decision, the Judge went on to make the following findings of fact and
      to draw the following conclusions based on those findings:-

           "[33]  I  am  satisfied  that  Mr  O  had,  before  making   the
           application he made on 22 December 2011 and/or  before  2  March
           2012, contrived in a significant way to frustrate the  intention
           of the Immigration Rules.   I  reach  that  conclusion  for  the
           following reasons.

   a) I am satisfied that he has been an immigration offender and/or was  in
      breach of the United Kingdom law during the course of his stay in  the
      period up to his departure on 12 June 2009.  Whether  or  not  he  had
      leave to enter at any time is not of relevance in this connection.  If
      he did, on the basis of  his  own  statement,  his  leave  expired  in
      2007/8.  If he did not, he was an illegal entrant at all times.  If it
      is necessary to reach a conclusion as to whether or not he had  leave,
      I prefer the Entry Clearance Officer's statement, on the basis of  the
      information which he had.  Mr  O  has  not  provided  any  documentary
      evidence to demonstrate that he had leave to remain until c.2007/8  or
      at any time whilst he was in the United Kingdom.  The Entry  Clearance
      Officers  who  have  had  responsibility  for  dealing  with  Mr   O's
      applications, both in 2009 and 2011/2, were  public  officials  having
      public duties to perform.  They made their statements relating  to  Mr
      O's past immigration history on the basis of records available to them
      and in the course of their duties.  They had no motive to misrepresent
      that which they had seen or the content of the documents.

   b) Although, on  the  footing  that  Mr  O  entered  the  United  Kingdom
      unlawfully that  unlawful  entry  (in  c.1999)  and/or  his  remaining
      thereafter (up to 24 March 2003) would have been effected  at  a  time
      when he was a minor, the  applications  which  he  made  in  June  and
      December 2003, as well as that made on 2 January 2004  (for  leave  to
      remain as a dependent child) were all made after he had  attained  the
      age of 18 years. He was therefore not a minor when those  applications
      were made.  Additionally, he remained in the United Kingdom, following
      the  making  of  those  applications  and  after  the  last  of  those
      applications had been refused (on 18 October 2008) and  after  he  had
      been served with the forms IS151A and IS151B (on, respectively, 22 and
      27 October 2008) when he was at all times an adult and knew (or  ought
      to have known) that he had no leave to be in the  United  Kingdom  and
      had no right under the Immigration Act or the Immigration Rules to  be
      or to remain.  Lest there be any doubt on that point,  it  cannot  but
      have been apparent  to  him  that,  following  the  rejection  of  the
      application which had been made on his behalf on 20 March  2003,  (c.4
      days before his 18th birthday), he was no longer a minor or  dependent
      child and that each of his subsequent applications, based as they were
      on his being a dependent child, were doomed to failure.

   c) Mr O has not asserted, there is no basis for believing, and I  do  not
      accept, that any of those applications were made on  any  basis  other
      than that he was a dependent child (under the age of 18 years).

   d) Although there is no explanation from the Entry Clearance Officer  (or
      the Secretary of State) for the apparently  surprising  delay  between
      the day of the last application made by Mr O for leave to remain as  a
      dependent child (2 January 2004, by which time he was 18 years  and  9
      months old) and its rejection on 18 October  2008,  c.4  years  and  9
      months later, there is likewise no explanation from Mr O.  If  he  had
      genuinely thought that he was entitled to leave  to  remain  and  had,
      during that c.4 years and 9 month period, been pressing the  Secretary
      of State for a decision, it is to be expected that he  would,  at  the
      very least, have said so and explained the basis for  his  belief  and
      have provided documentary evidence in support.   But he did not do  so
      - and has offered no explanation  at  all.  Nor  has  he  offered  any
      explanation for his having remained, after service of the  IS151A  and
      IS151B form from October 2008 until his (albeit  voluntary)  departure
      in June 2009.  Whatever the position  may  have  been  in  the  period
      before the service of those forms, he  cannot  but  have  known  after
      those forms had been served, that he was not entitled to remain in the
      United Kingdom.  I do not accept that he did not know that he was  not
      entitled to remain.  I am satisfied that  he  knew  that  he  was  not
      entitled to remain - and that he did so in  that  knowledge.   He  has
      given no explanation for  his  having  remained  until  June  2009,  a
      further c.8 months.

   e) For the reasons which I have given in  paragraphs  25  and  30,  I  am
      satisfied that the answers to the questions in  the  Visa  Application
      Form which Mr O submitted on 8  September  and  7  October  2009  were
      inaccurate in the respects which I have identified in those paragraphs
      and that, if the Entry Clearance Officer's  information  is  incorrect
      and that Mr O had entered  the  United  Kingdom  lawfully,  his  leave
      expired (as he asserts that it did) in c.2007/8, his answers  to  Q6.6
      in  the  September  and  October  2009  visa  application  forms  were
      inaccurate.  I am satisfied therefore, not only were the above answers
      inaccurate, they were deliberately false and that Mr O  answered  them
      falsely with the intention of concealing his past history and  with  a
      view to procuring entry clearance, and when he knew or believed  that,
      if he had told the full truth the Entry  Clearance  Officer  [in  each
      case] would have been significantly less likely  to  grant  him  entry
      clearance than if he had told the truth and his whole history had been
      disclosed.  Precisely the same applies, if (and this is the version of
      events which, for the reasons I have given above) the Entry  Clearance
      Officer's information is correct and Mr O entered the  United  Kingdom
      unlawfully and had never had leave to remain.  On that version of  the
      facts, I am satisfied that Mr O failed to declare that  material  fact
      and the further material fact that he had remained without leave.   In
      relation to the matters which he omitted to disclose, what I have said
      above applies mutatis mutandis.  I do not accept Mr  O's  explanation,
      given in his written statement, that, when completing the October 2009
      application, he believed that he had disclosed his immigration history
      and  that  there  had  been  a  genuine  error.   I  reach  the  above
      conclusions for the following reasons.

              (1)      It is apparent from looking at  the  September  2009
              application that Mr O had not, as he stated  in  his  written
              statement, given a full and  accurate  account  of  his  past
              immigration history.  The  account  which  he  gave  in  that
              (September 2009) application was, for  the  reasons  which  I
              have given above, inaccurate.  His statement (December  2012)
              that he thought he had disclosed his immigration  history  in
              the September 2009 application - so that there was no need to
              repeat it in the October 2009 application, makes no sense  at
              all.  Over and above that, if he had genuinely believed  that
              he had, in September 2009, fully and accurately disclosed his
              past immigration history, it is to be expected that he  would
              have written in that October 2009 application, words  to  the
              effect "see application made on 8  September  2009"  or  have
              referred to that application.  But he did not do so.  On  the
              contrary, in the October 2009  application,  he  denied  ever
              being refused a visa for any country (see Q6.3).

              (2)      It is inconceivable that,  in  October  2009,  Mr  O
              could have forgotten that he had made the earlier application
              in  September  2009  and  that  it  had  been  refused.   The
              explanation  which  he  gave  for  having  made  that  second
              application (at a time when his  solicitors  were  making  an
              application for Administrative Review) was that he  had  been
              told that application (for Administrative Review) "could take
              time".  The October 2009 application was made only c.10  days
              after the refusal of the  September  2009  application.   And
              yet, in answer to the question 6.3 (as to whether he had been
              refused a visa), he placed an X in the box marked "no".

              (3)      It is equally inconceivable that, at the  time  when
              Mr  O  completed  both  the  September   and   October   2009
              applications, he can have forgotten that

                 (i)   he had been refused leave to remain  on  18  October
              2008, or

                 (ii)  on 27 October 2008, he had been served with the form
                 IS151B, giving him notice of the decision that he was to be
                 removed and which informed him that, if he did  not  appeal
                 or if any appeal he made was unsuccessful, he was to leave.

   1) What I have said in (a) - (d)  above  applies.   Mr  O  has  given  no
      explanation of those matters.

   f) Mr O has given no explanation for either the  failure  to  submit  the
      passport in support of the various applications made in 2003 and  2004
      or to pay the fee for the application on 3 December 2003.  Nor has  he
      provided any explanation for having remained in  the  United  Kingdom,
      after service of the IS151A and B form  in  October  2008,  until  his
      departure on 12 June 2009.

   g) The inaccuracy of the answers, given in  the  circumstances  in  which
      they were given, speaks for itself.

   h)  Although  the  conduct  identified  as  amounting   to   "aggravating
      circumstances" identified positively in the Entry  Clearance  Guidance
      is directed primarily  to  activity  within  the  United  Kingdom,  as
      opposed to other deception outside the United Kingdom, it is  apparent
      from  the  explanation  given  in  PS  that  the  Guidance  is   "non-
      exhaustive".   I  can  see  no  reason  to  limit   the   "aggravating
      circumstances" to conduct within the  United  Kingdom  or  to  exclude
      further attempts at deception and/or  non-disclosure  in  relation  to
      (past) applications for entry clearance.  Nor can I see any reason why
      persistence in immigration offending, ie remaining  in  breach  of  UK
      Immigration   Law   should   not   itself   amount   to    aggravating
      circumstances."

  37.  Those  findings  and  conclusions  are  the  starting  point  for  my
      consideration.  I have already noted that the Appellant and his father
      who have  provided  witness  statements  about  the  Appellant's  past
      immigration history have been less than  candid  about  that  history.
      The Appellant was given the opportunity in my directions to provide  a
      witness statement to plug the gaps in the evidence and to explain what
      had happened in relation to the past applications.  He  did  not  take
      that opportunity, preferring instead  to  ignore  any  of  the  events
      between the application in 2003 and the application in 2009.   He  has
      glossed over his previous deception.  He even asserts that he did  not
      make the same mistake  as  he  had  in  the  second  application  when
      completing the first application about whether he had been required to
      leave the UK previously and yet Judge Bennett had already  found  that
      the information he gave was inaccurate because he had been  told  that
      he was required to leave and liable to be removed (see [30(d)] of  the
      2013 decision).

  38. The Appellant continues to say that he made an honest mistake  in  his
      2009 applications but this is not  simply  a  case  of  the  Appellant
      having answered "no" when he should have answered "yes" because he has
      misunderstood one question.  There are a number of inaccuracies relied
      upon in the 2013 decision all of which point to the  Appellant  having
      sought to cover up his past immigration history.   The  Appellant  has
      not troubled to set out what those "mistakes" were nor how it is  that
      he misunderstood the questions and therefore how it is said  that  the
      "mistakes" were "honest" ones.  There is simply  no  explanation  from
      the Appellant which in any way  excuses  or  mitigates  the  deception
      which was found in the 2013 decision.

  39. The fact of the Appellant's past exercise of deception is made out for
      the reasons set out in the 2013 decision.  There is no reason  for  me
      to go  behind  those  findings,  particularly  given  the  Appellant's
      failure to explain himself in that regard.

  40. The "aggravating circumstances" relied upon by the Respondent  in  the
      decision currently  under  appeal  is  that  the  Appellant  has  made
      "frivolous applications".  In  that  regard,  as  noted  in  the  2013
      decision, a number of applications were made either by  the  Appellant
      or on his behalf after the application made with the letter  dated  18
      March 2003.  Not only were those hopeless for failure to  comply  with
      basic procedural requirements, such as submitting a passport or paying
      a fee, they were also made based on a requirement of the  Rules  which
      the Appellant could not, on any view, meet because he was no longer  a
      child.

  41. Furthermore, the examples of "aggravating circumstances" in  paragraph
      320(11)  are  just  that.   The  list  is  not  exhaustive.   In  this
      particular case, the Appellant's deception on which reliance is placed
      is aggravated by the continuing attempts at deception, particularly to
      cover  up  his  past  immigration  history  and  the  facts  of   that
      immigration history itself.  He exercised deception himself in not one
      but two applications in very close succession.  The applications  made
      either by him or on his behalf are a blatant attempt at disguising the
      true factual position.

  42. For those reasons, I am satisfied that the Respondent's case that  the
      Appellant has exercised deception and that  aggravating  circumstances
      exist is made out.

  43. I also take into account that paragraph 320(11) of the Rules is one of
      the provisions in the general grounds where leave should  normally  be
      refused.  It is not a mandatory ground of refusal.  I consider whether
      it can be said that  leave  should  not  have  been  refused  on  this
      occasion on this ground.  I consider  that  also  in  the  context  of
      whether I should depart from the findings of Judge Bennett in the 2013
      decision upholding the  Respondent's  decision  that  the  Appellant's
      application should be refused under paragraph 320(11).

  44. Mr Harris urged me to take into account  circumstances  arising  since
      the date of the 2013 decision.  Although he was, I think,  constrained
      to accept that he could not maintain the points made at error  of  law
      stage regarding the changed wording of paragraph 320(11) or a  failure
      to take into account what was said in PS because  those  matters  were
      all taken into account by Judge  Bennett  in  the  2013  decision,  he
      submitted that it is now relevant that some  five  years  have  passed
      since the 2013 decision and some eight years  have  passed  since  the
      deception which the Appellant is found to have perpetrated.

  45. I take into account when considering this  submission  that  paragraph
      320(7B) of the Rules could not be applied to the Appellant because  he
      applies to enter as the family member of a person settled in  the  UK.
      Were that not so, though, the fact of having  practised  deception  in
      the past would lead to a mandatory refusal  and  refusals  of  further
      applications for a period of ten years.  Although of course I  am  not
      dealing with a mandatory refusal because paragraph  320(7B)  does  not
      apply, the emphasis placed  by  the  Respondent  on  the  exercise  of
      deception as a ground for refusal of leave is something  which  I  can
      and do take into account.

  46. Another relevant factor, though, is the extent to which the  Appellant
      has accepted and explained the past deception and shown that he has no
      intention of further deceiving the authorities.  To that extent,  what
      I say above about the lack of candour on the part of the Appellant and
      his witnesses is something which I consider I should  and  I  do  take
      into account.

  47. The extent to which the refusal on  general  grounds  impacts  on  the
      circumstances of the Appellant and others, particularly in relation to
      family life, is something which I take  into  account  below  via  the
      medium of Article 8 ECHR.

  48. Particularly in light of the Appellant's continued denial of his  past
      immigration history and failure properly to explain  and  accept  past
      failures made by him and those acting on his behalf,  I  am  satisfied
      that it is appropriate for entry  clearance  to  be  refused  on  this
      basis.

  49. For those reasons, I am satisfied that paragraph 320(11) is met.   The
      Respondent's decision is in accordance with the  Rules  and  with  the
      law.

   Article 8 ECHR

  50. The Appellant seeks to enter  the  UK  as  the  spouse  of  a  British
      citizen.  It is not disputed that the relationship is genuine.   As  I
      have already indicated, I cannot  take  into  account  the  additional
      circumstance of the birth of the Appellant's child who  is  a  British
      citizen.  That is a matter with which others will have to  grapple  if
      and when a further application is made for entry clearance.

  51. The Appellant met his wife on 14 November 2008 and their  relationship
      began in January 2009 (see 2013 decision).  They have maintained their
      relationship by telephonic and electronic communication, visits by the
      Appellant's wife and holidays spent together  outside  the  UK.   They
      married in Nigeria on 30 September 2011.

  52. The Appellant's wife would have been aware when they  first  met  that
      the Appellant did not have the right to live in the UK.  He  had  been
      refused leave to remain on the last  occasion  in  October  2008.   As
      Judge Bennett found in the 2013 decision, at the  time  they  married,
      she would have been (or should have been) aware that the Appellant had
      been refused a visa  in  October  2009  because  of  the  exercise  of
      deception.

  53. The Respondent refused the Appellant's application on this occasion on
      the grounds that he did not meet the financial requirements  but  also
      because he did not meet the suitability  requirements  of  the  Rules.
      That is based on the Appellant's character and conduct  for  the  same
      reasons as for the refusal under paragraph 320(11) of  the  Rules.   I
      accept that the Appellant's past deception is reason enough to  render
      him unsuitable on character and conduct grounds.  For  the  reasons  I
      have given above in that regard,  the  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
      suitability requirements.

  54. It follows that the Appellant cannot meet the Rules in relation to the
      application.  The application fails on general grounds and on  grounds
      of suitability.

  55. No submissions were made to me about the financial circumstances.  The
      Appellant's wife did not take  up  her  current  employment  until  24
      August 2015 and therefore after the date of the Respondent's decision.
       It does appear from the application form for entry clearance, though,
      that her previous employment paid �19,826.04 and that the Respondent's
      refusal was based on a failure to provide the specified documents.  It
      appears from the original grounds of  appeal  that  this  failure  was
      remedied by the provision of further documents with those  grounds  of
      appeal.  It appears at  the  very  least  that  the  couple  would  be
      financially independent.

  56. If an application does not meet the Rules, the issue outside the Rules
      is whether refusal of entry clearance  leads  to  unjustifiably  harsh
      consequences for the Appellant and those  affected  by  the  decision,
      here, the Appellant's wife.  The essential  question  is  whether  the
      Respondent's decision to refuse entry clearance is disproportionate.

  57. In this case, although the Appellant's wife is a British  citizen  and
      was born and raised here, her father lived  in  Nigeria.   It  appears
      that  her  parents  are  estranged  and  she  does  not  have  a  good
      relationship with her father.  Nonetheless, it is not said that  there
      are "insurmountable obstacles" to her  living  in  Nigeria.   She  has
      visited that country to see her husband and indeed they married there.



  58. The Appellant's wife has employment in the UK but it is not  suggested
      that she could not find similar employment in Nigeria.  The  Appellant
      works in Nigeria and there is no suggestion that he could not  support
      his family there.

  59. There is no evidence to suggest therefore that family life between the
      Appellant and his wife could not be enjoyed in Nigeria.   I  emphasise
      again, that I am here considering only  the  Appellant's  relationship
      with his wife because I cannot take into account  the  fact  that  the
      couple now have a British citizen child.

  60. Balanced against any interference arising  with  the  couple's  family
      life by having to conduct that family life either at  a  distance  (as
      they have since 2009) or in Nigeria, I take into  account  the  public
      interest (and the factors set out in section 117B of  the  2002  Act).
      In this case, because of the Appellant's past  deception,  the  public
      interest in maintaining effective immigration control  is  heightened.
      I take into account that the Appellant's application fails because  it
      cannot succeed within the Rules and that the reason it cannot  succeed
      under the Rules is because the Appellant has, in the  past,  exercised
      deception for which he continues to deny any responsibility.

  61. Drawing the above considerations together, the Appellant and his  wife
      have  failed  to  show  that  the  consequences  of  refusal  of   the
      application leads to unjustifiably harsh consequences.  There  are  no
      insurmountable obstacles to the couple continuing their family life as
      a couple  in  Nigeria.   Balanced  against  the  public  interest,  in
      particular in circumstances where  the  application  cannot  meet  the
      Rules because the Appellant has previously  exercised  deception,  the
      refusal of entry clearance is not disproportionate.

  62. The appeal therefore fails also on human rights grounds.



DECISION


The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.

Signed

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
Dated:  23 April 2018
                        ANNEX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  OA/06793/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Thursday 1 February 2018                   |                             |
|                                              |......9 February             |
|                                              |2018...............          |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                               MR DANIEL OLOWE

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - SHEFO
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Harris, Counsel, instructed by Mansouri & Son
                    solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
No anonymity order was made by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  is  no  good
reason to make an anonymity direction in this case.






                    ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND DIRECTIONS



Background

   1. The Appellant appeals the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Lucas
      promulgated on 18 May 2017  ("the  Decision")  dismissing  his  appeal
      against the Respondent's decision dated  9  March  2015  refusing  his
      application for entry clearance as a partner under Appendix FM to  the
      Immigration Rules.  In light of the date of the Respondent's decision,
      it is accepted that  this  is  an  appeal  which  proceeds  under  the
      provisions of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the
      2002 Act") prior to amendment by the Immigration Act 2014  ("the  2014
      Act").  That is potentially relevant to the Appellant's grounds.

   2. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria.  His spouse, Mrs  Olufunmilayo
      Abiola Olowe ("the Sponsor"), is a British citizen albeit of  Nigerian
      descent.  She was born and lives in the UK.   The  couple  married  in
      Nigeria on 30 September 2011.  The couple now have a child born on  22
      September 2016.  That child was  not  born  as  at  the  date  of  the
      Appellant's application (made on 15 December 2014) nor at the date  of
      the Respondent's decision (either the initial decision or  the  review
      decision).

   3. The Respondent initially refused the Appellant's  application  on  the
      basis that the Sponsor's income did not  meet  the  minimum  threshold
      requirement.   However,  that  reason  was  withdrawn  by  the   Entry
      Clearance Manager ("ECM") on review by  a  decision  letter  dated  18
      April 2016.  However, the other reason  for  refusal  was  maintained.
      That reason is phrased in the ECM's letter as follows:-

           "...the appellant  made  frivolous  applications  for  leave  to
           remain in 2003 and made deceptive visa application in  2009.   I
           am satisfied that the  application  fell  to  be  refused  under
           paragraph 320(11).  The decision is therefore in accordance with
           the law and the Immigration Rules  and  I  am  not  prepared  to
           exercise discretion in the appellant's case".

        The ECM went on  to  review  the  application  in  accordance  with
        Article 8 ECHR but concluded that the decision  was  proportionate.
        The Sponsor could travel to Nigeria to be with the Appellant.

   4. The Judge upheld the Respondent's reliance on paragraph 320(11) of the
      Immigration Rules ("the Rules").   He  therefore  concluded  that  the
      Respondent's decision was in accordance with the Rules  and  the  law.
      He also found that the Respondent's decision did not breach Article  8
      ECHR as the couple could continue their relationship as they had  done
      since 2011 or the Sponsor could choose to  relocate  to  Nigeria  with
      their child.

   5. Permission to appeal the Decision was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge L Murray in the following terms so far as relevant:-

           "[3]  The sole ground of refusal was paragraph  320(11)  of  the
           Immigration Rules.  The burden of proof was on the Respondent in
           respect of this ground of refusal and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
           Judge arguably failed to so direct himself, directing himself at
           paragraph 30 that the burden  was  on  the  Appellant.    It  is
           further arguable that the Judge  failed  to  direct  himself  in
           relation  to  the  relevant  case  of  PS   (paragraph   320(11)
           discretion: care needed) [2010] UKUT 440  (IAC)  and  failed  to
           carry out the required careful balancing  exercise  taking  into
           account all the relevant factors.  It follows that the Article 8
           assessment is also arguably flawed."

   6. The appeal comes before me to determine whether there  is  a  material
      error of law in the Decision and if so either to re-make the  decision
      or to remit to the First-tier Tribunal to do so.

   Discussion and conclusions

   7. The first ground relates to the burden of proof applied by the  Judge.
      Mr Harris directed my attention to [30] of the Decision which reads as
      follows:-

           "[30] The burden of proof is upon the Appellant and the standard
           of proof is of the balance of  probabilities.   In  relation  to
           Human Rights, it is of a real risk of the relevant violation"

   8. As Mr Harris rightly pointed out, this is an appeal under the 2002 Act
      provisions prior to amendment by the 2014 Act.  As such,  the  grounds
      on which the Appellant is able to rely include that  the  Respondent's
      decision is not in accordance with the Rules  etc  rather  than  being
      confined to whether the decision breaches human rights.  If  this  had
      been a post-2014 Act appeal, the Judge would be right to say that  the
      burden is on the Appellant to the balance  of  probabilities  (as  the
      appeal would only have  been  on  the  ground  that  the  Respondent's
      decision is in breach of the Human Rights Act 1998).

   9. Mr Harris drew my attention to the case of JC (Part 9 HC395-burden  of
      proof) China [2007] UKAIT 00027 ("JC").   The  relevant  part  of  the
      headnote reads as follows:-

           "Paragraph 320 of Statement  of  Changes  of  Immigration  Rules
           HC395 sets out general grounds for refusal of entry or leave  to
           enter additional to those (mainly substantive) grounds  set  out
           in parts 2-8 of these rules.  In relation  to  all  the  general
           grounds ....the burden of proof rests on the decision  maker  to
           establish any contested precedent fact."

  10. Mr Harris also submitted, by reference also to JC, that  the  standard
      of proof is not  the  balance  of  probabilities  but  rather  a  more
      elevated standard since deception is at issue.

  11. On the latter point, I do not accept Mr  Harris'  submission  for  the
      simple reason that what was said about standard of  proof  in  JC  was
      expressly disapproved by the Court of Appeal (Richards LJ) in R  (oao)
      Giri v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2015] EWCA Civ  784
      as follows:-



           "[36] In JC the tribunal said (at paragraph 13) that the
           approach adopted in an earlier tribunal decision, that in
           relation to a question of deception "the standard of proof will
           be at the higher end of the spectrum of balance of probability",
           still held good. That was incorrect, as should have been
           apparent from the citation, in the same paragraph, from the
           judgment in R (N) v Mental Health Review Tribunal (Northern
           Region) [2005] EWCA Civ 1605, [2006] QB 468 (referred to by the
           tribunal under the title R (AN) v Secretary of State for the
           Home Department). I gave the judgment of the court in that case.
           Paragraph 62 stated:
                 "Although there is a single civil standard of proof on the
                 balance of probabilities, it is flexible in
                 its application. In particular, the more serious the
                 allegation or the more serious the consequences if the
                 allegation is proved, the stronger must be the evidence
                 before a court will find the allegation proved on the
                 balance of probabilities. Thus the flexibility of the
                 standard lies not in any adjustment to the degree of
                 probability required for an allegation to be proved (such
                 that a more serious allegation has to be proved to a higher
                 degree of probability), but in the strength or quality of
                 the evidence that will in practice be required for an
                 allegation to be proved on the balance of probabilities."
           [37]  That statement was subsequently approved, with an
           immaterial qualification, by the House of Lords in In re
           D [2008] UKHL 33, [2008] 1 WLR 1499 (see per Lord Carswell at
           paragraph 27). The judgment of the House of Lords in In re B
           (Children) [2008] UKHL 35, [2009] 1 AC 11, handed down on the
           same day as the judgment in In re D, was to the same effect. As
           Lord Hoffmann emphasised:
                 "13. ... I think that the time has come to say, once and
                 for all, that there is only one civil standard of proof and
                 that is proof that the fact in issue more probably occurred
                 than not ....
                 15. ... There is only one rule of law, namely that the
                 occurrence of the fact in issue must be proved to have been
                 more probable than not. Common sense, not law, requires
                 that in deciding this question, regard should be had, to
                 whatever extent appropriate, to inherent probabilities
                 ...."

  12. However, although recent decisions of both this Tribunal and the Court
      of Appeal in the so-called "ETS litigation" have nuanced the  approach
      to the burdens of proof where  deception  is  alleged  (the  so-called
      "boomerang" approach), the legal  burden  remains  throughout  on  the
      Respondent. Therefore, although, if this were an appeal under the post-
      2014 Act provisions, the Judge might have been right to say as he did,
      he erred in his approach to the correct burden  in  this  appeal.   Mr
      Staunton conceded that there is an error in relation to ground one.

  13. The second and third of the grounds can  be  taken  together  as  both
      concern the appeal relating to application of paragraph 320(11) of the
      Rules.   It is necessary at this point to say something more about the
      factual background to this case to set the grounds in context.

  14. The Appellant came to the UK in 1999 when he was still  a  minor.   He
      was permitted to come here legally as  his  mother's  dependent.   His
      father was, it appears,  a  British  citizen.   His  mother  has  also
      settled in the UK.  There were a series of applications  made  on  the
      Appellant's behalf.  Two were made in 2003 when he was aged seventeen.
       Those were refused.  One was made as a dependent after the  Appellant
      turned eighteen in 2004.  That was refused in 2008.  Those are  relied
      upon by the Respondent as the "frivolous" applications.  According  to
      Mr Harris' submissions, the reasons why those applications  apparently
      failed was that the Appellant's father, who was responsible for making
      the  applications  on  his  behalf,  was  poorly   advised   and   the
      applications were therefore either made on an inappropriate  basis  or
      with insufficient supporting documentation.  I say apparently  because
      there is little evidence other  than  the  scant  information  in  the
      application for entry clearance about what those applications were and
      why they did not succeed.

  15. Be that as it may, the Appellant made an application in 2009 which  is
      the starting point for the deception allegation.  The  Appellant  says
      that he made a mistake and answered "no" instead of "yes"  to  one  of
      the questions (see [8] of the Decision).  Again,  though,  I  have  no
      evidence as to what the question was which the  Appellant  accepts  he
      answered incorrectly.  The Appellant left the  UK  voluntarily  on  19
      October 2009.

  16. Similarly, I have no evidence as to an earlier appeal in  2013.   That
      was an appeal against a decision, it appears, dated  5  December  2012
      refusing entry clearance for settlement, consequent on  the  deception
      alleged in the 2009 application.   The  Respondent  applied  paragraph
      320(11) of the Rules.  The Tribunal in 2013 upheld that refusal.

  17. Turning back to the grounds, ground two asserts that the Judge wrongly
      placed excessive reliance on the  2013  appeal  decision.   The  third
      ground asserts that the Judge failed to assess for himself whether the
      alleged aggravating circumstances justified  refusal  under  paragraph
      320(11).

  18. I begin by noting that neither I nor Mr  Harris  or  Mr  Staunton  had
      before us a copy of the 2013 appeal decision.  Mr  Harris  assured  me
      that Judge Lucas had a copy provided to him but there is  no  copy  in
      the papers and I am  surprised  if  this  is  so  that,  when  placing
      reliance on the earlier determination at [32] of the  Decision,  Judge
      Lucas did not say who was the Judge who  made  the  earlier  decision,
      what was the date of that decision or quote  the  finding  made.    Mr
      Harris rightly pointed out that he must have had sight of the  earlier
      determination when he drafted his grounds as reference is made to  the
      findings made and the date of the decision at  [40]  of  his  grounds.
      However, he admitted that he was no longer able to find a  copy.   For
      that reason, I have included expressly a direction that a copy of  the
      earlier decision be provided by the Appellant's solicitors as well  as
      evidence relating to the earlier applications and refusals (so far  as
      they are able).

  19. It is somewhat difficult to reach a concluded view on  the  second  of
      the grounds without sight of the earlier decision.  Mr Harris  accepts
      that Judge Lucas was entitled to take  the  earlier  findings  as  the
      starting point (applying Devaseelan).  He also appeared to accept that
      the previous Tribunal had rejected the Appellant's explanation of  the
      wrong answer as being a mistake as the Tribunal upheld  the  deception
      allegation.

  20. One of the points which Mr Harris makes in the grounds  probably  also
      requires sight of the earlier decision because he asserts at  [21]  to
      [25] that the wording of  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Rules  and  the
      guidance relevant to the application of that paragraph has changed  in
      the interim.  He refers at [21] of the grounds to the earlier Tribunal
      dealing with an application made on 22 December 2011 and decided on  5
      March 2012.  However, according to the entry clearance application  on
      this occasion, there is no decision dated 5 March 2012.   There  is  a
      decision dated 5 December 2012.   If, as appears likely, it  was  that
      decision which was the subject of the  appeal  determined  in  January
      2013, the distinction which Mr Harris  seeks  to  draw  based  on  the
      different wording may be misconceived.

  21. Mr Harris does though make good grounds two and three in the following
      way.  Ground 320(11) of the Rules falls within  that  section  of  the
      general grounds where leave to enter is normally to be refused.  It is
      not a mandatory ground.   As  such  it  involves  the  exercise  of  a
      discretion.

  22. The wording of rule 320(11) of the Rules as it existed at the date  of
      the Decision reads as follows (so far as relevant):-
           "where the applicant has previously contrived in  a  significant
           way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by;
           ......
           (iv) using deception in  an  application  for  entry  clearance,
           leave to enter or remain or in order to  obtain  documents  from
           the Secretary of State or a third party required in  support  of
           the application (whether successful or not); and
           there are other aggravating circumstances  such  as  absconding,
           not meeting temporary admission/reporting restrictions  or  bail
           conditions, using an assumed identity  or  multiple  identities,
           switching nationality,  making  frivolous  applications  or  not
           complying with the re-documentation process."
           [my emphasis]

  23. Mr Harris also drew my attention to what  is  said  in  PS  (paragraph
      320(11) discretion: care needed) [2010] UKUT 440 (IAC):-

           "In exercising discretion under paragraph 320(11) of HC 395,  as
           amended, to refuse an application for entry clearance in a  case
           where the automatic prohibition on the grant of entry  clearance
           in paragraph 320(7B) is disapplied  by  paragraph  320(7C),  the
           decision  maker  must  exercise  great  care  in  assessing  the
           aggravating circumstances said to justify refusal and must  have
           regard to the public interest in encouraging those unlawfully in
           the United Kingdom to leave and seek to regularise their  status
           by an application for entry clearance."

  24. Mr Harris pointed out that, since the previous  appeal,  further  time
      has elapsed.  As such, by the date of the hearing before Judge  Lucas,
      the Appellant had been kept out of the UK for nearly eight years.   He
      had  during  that  time  married  a  British  citizen  and  was  in  a
      relationship  which  has  been  accepted  as  genuine  and  subsisting
      (although it is right to point out that the relationship was  also  in
      being in 2013).  By reason of the application  of  paragraph  320(11),
      though, the Appellant was being punished for "frivolous"  applications
      made some fourteen years previously and a mistake or deception  itself
      made about eight years previously.  Mr Harris pointed out  that  there
      is no time limit attached to the breaches cited in  paragraph  320(11)
      (unlike the position relating to paragraph 320(7B) of the Rules).   As
      such, he submitted, the Judge  could  not  simply  take  the  previous
      finding as the end point but had to exercise  discretion  taking  into
      account the changed circumstances since the previous appeal.

  25. Mr Staunton conceded an error also in  relation  to  grounds  two  and
      three.  I am satisfied for the reasons given above that he  was  right
      to do so.   Accordingly, those grounds are also made out.

  26. It is self-evident that the errors made in relation to the  burden  of
      proof and how paragraph 320(11) of the Rules should be applied in this
      case is material to the outcome. I therefore set aside the Decision.

  27. In light of those conclusions, I do not strictly need to say  anything
      about ground four.  However, I do so  because  this  ground  raises  a
      point of legal construction which may need to  be  considered  in  the
      course of re-making the decision.  I therefore flag it up now so  that
      the parties can consider it in their skeleton arguments.

  28. Ground four concerns Article 8 ECHR.   Insofar as this ground  relates
      to the Judge's finding about the  Sponsor's  ability  to  relocate  to
      Nigeria, I am unpersuaded by it.  Based on what is said by the Supreme
      Court in  Agyarko  and  Ikuga  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2017] UKSC 11, there is no error in  the  Judge's  finding
      that the Sponsor could relocate  to  Nigeria.   Consistent  with  that
      authority, the matters asserted at  [41]  of  the  grounds  could  not
      amount to insurmountable obstacles.  There has though been  one  quite
      major change in the Appellant's circumstances, namely the birth of his
      daughter.  Since she  is  a  British  citizen  and  in  light  of  the
      Respondent's policy that it is not  reasonable  to  expect  a  British
      child to relocate outside the EU, the position  under  Article  8  may
      well be changed.

  29. There is however a potential obstacle to that conclusion.  This is  an
      appeal which pre-dates the changes to appeal provisions  made  by  the
      2014 Act.  As such, section 85 of the 2002 Act in its un-amended  form
      applies.  That reads as follows (so far as relevant):-

           "Matters to be considered

                 1) An appeal under section 82(1) against a decision shall
                    be treated by the Tribunal as including an appeal
                    against any decision in respect of which the appellant
                    has a right of appeal under section 82(1).
                 ......
                 (4)  On an appeal under section 82(1), 83(2) or
                 83A(2) against a decision the Tribunal may  consider
                 evidence about any matter which it thinks relevant to the
                 substance of the decision, including evidence which
                 concerns a matter arising after the date of the decision.
                 (5) But in relation to an appeal under section 82(1)
                 against refusal of entry clearance or refusal of a
                 certificate of entitlement under section 10-
                    (a)subsection (4) shall not apply, and
                    (b) the Tribunal may consider only the circumstances
                    appertaining at the time of the decision to refuse."

  30. Mr Harris' preliminary thoughts on this matter were that this  section
      did not apply to the Article 8 ground.  That ignores though  that  the
      appeal is against the decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  and  not
      against any separate decision refusing a human rights claim.  As such,
      it seems to me that the restriction of the matters which the  Tribunal
      can consider applies equally to the Article 8 ground.  I make it clear
      though that I have not reached any concluded view about this  and  the
      parties will wish to consider their positions  prior  to  the  resumed
      hearing.

  31. In conclusion, the Appellant has established errors of  law  based  on
      grounds one to three.  I do not need to deal  with  ground  four.   In
      light of the errors of law which I  have  identified  (and  which  the
      Respondent concedes), I set  aside  the  Decision  and  I  have  given
      directions below for the resumed hearing.

DECISION
The First-tier Tribunal Decision involves the making of a material error  on
a point of law. I therefore set aside the First-tier  Tribunal  Decision  of
Judge Lucas promulgated on 18 May 2017 and  make  the  following  directions
for the re-making of the decision.

DIRECTIONS
   1. By 4pm on Thursday 1 March 2018, the  Appellant's  solicitors  are  to
      file with the Tribunal and serve on  the  Respondent  a  copy  of  the
      Tribunal's decision in the 2013 appeal  relating  to  the  Appellant's
      case or in default a letter explaining that they do not have and  have
      not been able to obtain a copy.
   2. By 4pm on Thursday 1 March 2018, the Appellant is  to  file  with  the
      Tribunal and serve on the Respondent any further evidence on which  he
      relies.  In particular, the Tribunal  will  be  assisted  by  evidence
      concerning  the  detail  of  previous  applications   for   leave   to
      remain/entry clearance made by the Appellant or on his behalf and  the
      reasons for refusal of those applications together with details of the
      wrong answer given in the 2009  application  on  which  the  deception
      allegation relies.
   3. By 4pm on Thursday 15 March 2018, both parties are to  file  with  the
      Tribunal and serve on the other party skeleton arguments dealing  with
      the legal issues which arise in this appeal.  Those should include the
      parties' submissions on the legal issue which I identify at  [29]  and
      [30] of my decision above.
   4. The resumed hearing will be listed before me on  the  first  available
      date after 25 March 2018 with a time estimate of half day.
Signed           [pic] Dated:  8 February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

