
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06382/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 29 January 2018                     |On 7 February 2018                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                    [M S]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       EntRY CLEARANCE OFFICER (ACCRA)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gaffar, Counsel instructed through Direct
Access
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge NJ Bennett sitting at Hatton Cross on 16 March 2017)  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of an Entry Clearance Officer to refuse
    him entry clearance as the dependent child under the age of 18  of  his
    father and sponsor, [SS].  The Judge dismissed the  appellant's  appeal
    as he was not satisfied that his father had had sole responsibility for
    his upbringing, or that the appellant  had  discharged  the  burden  of
    proving that there were serious  and  compelling  considerations  which
    made his exclusion from the UK undesirable.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 18 December 2017, First-tier Tribunal  Judged  Shimmin  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  all  grounds
    raised.  In particular, it was arguable that the Judge had erred in law
    in consideration of the evidence in relation to remittances made by the
    appellant's father and sponsor; that he  had  erred  in  respect  of  a
    consideration of the  evidence  in  relation  to  the  school  letters,
    including letters that post-dated the decision; that he  had  erred  in
    failing to put matters in relation to the Welfare Report to the sponsor
    during the hearing, and that he had irrationally rejected the  findings
    of the Welfare Report.

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Ivory Coast, whose date of birth is [  ]
    2000.  In May 2014 or early  2015,  the  appellant  applied  for  entry
    clearance to join his father in the UK.  In his  application  form,  at
    Part 9 (Additional information) he said that he would like to join  his
    father in the UK because he really missed him and he would also have  a
    chance to study in one of the best countries in the world, which  would
    give him a great chance in his future  life.   He  gave  details  of  a
    permanent residential address in Abidjan where he had been residing for
    the past 3 years and 6 months.

 4.  The  application  was  supported  by   a   Certificate   of   Parental
    Authorisation and a Welfare Report.  The certificate, dated 29  October
    2014, recorded that the appellant's mother, Mrs [A]  (the  wife  of  Mr
    [A]) had under the  rights  of  parental  authority  conferred  by  law
    allowed her minor child [SA] to join his father in the  United  Kingdom
    for the purposes of family reunification.

 5. The Welfare Report dated 10 December 2014 had been prepared by a Social
    Worker, Mr Kouame Georges.  In a section headed "Case History", he said
    that the appellant's birth mother had brought him up on her  own  since
    his birth father had left to go to England.  She was  now  living  with
    her new spouse, and because of the continued presence of the  appellant
    in their home, the new couple always had issues.

 6. In a section headed "Situational analysis", he said that the  appellant
    did not enjoy the affection of his step-father, who did not  appreciate
    his presence in the house.  So, the appellant felt rejected,  and  that
    was why he had sought at all costs to live with his birth  father.   Mr
    Georges opined that the birth father was the best person to look  after
    the appellant, and to give him a better future; and he opined that  the
    child's mother, for reasons beyond her control  and  ability,  was  not
    able to take care of the appellant any more.

The Reasons for Refusal

 7. By a notice dated 25 February 2015, an Entry Clearance Officer in Accra
    (post-reference  Accra\857371)  gave  his  reasons  for  refusing   the
    appellant's application.  He noted that he had provided  evidence  from
    his mother, and a report from the Welfare Court.  Both stated  that  he
    was unsettled at home, following his mother's re-marriage, and that  it
    would be in his best interests to move to the UK to  join  his  father.
    His mother said that violence reined at home, so that the  police  were
    obliged to intervene sometimes.  But, there was no evidence to  support
    the claim of police intervention.  The object of Rule 297(i)(f) was  to
    allow a child to join a parent or relative in the  UK  only  when  that
    child could not be adequately cared for by his parents or relatives  in
    his own country.  It had never been the intention of the Rules  that  a
    child should be admitted to the UK due  to  the  wish  of  or  for  the
    benefit of other relatives in the UK.  No independent evidence had been
    provided which would demonstrate that his mother was unable to care for
    him in Ivory Coast.

 8. While the Social Services Report stated that his father was involved in
    decisions relating to his welfare, he had not claimed that  his  father
    had had sole responsibility for his upbringing.   Accordingly,  he  was
    satisfied that he did not.

 9. It  also  had  been  considered  whether  his  application  raised  any
    exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the right  to  respect
    for family life contained in Article 8 ECHR, warranted a grant of entry
    clearance to come to the UK outside the requirements of the Rules.

10. He had lived apart from his sponsor since 2001, which is one year after
    he had been born.  He had been able to maintain a relationship with the
    sponsor for the last 14 years, and no reason had been  advanced  as  to
    why he could not continue to do so.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision, of the First-tier Tribunal

11. Both parties  were  legally  represented  before  Judge  Bennett.   The
    appellant's father gave oral evidence, and he was cross-examined by the
    Presenting Officer.  He said that in around 2012 his son had moved from
    the house where he lived with his mother to  live  with  Dr  [S].   The
    address which he had given in his visa application form  was  Dr  [S]'s
    address.  He had then moved to Miss [B]'s house almost two years ago.

12. The sponsor was asked why he had sent money to the  appellant's  mother
    in 2014, if the appellant had  left  her  house  by  that  point.   His
    initial explanation was that he had only sent her money once  or  twice
    to help her out.   When it was put to him that Western Union's  records
    showed that he had sent her money six times  between  January  and  May
    2014, which suggested that the appellant  was  still  living  with  his
    mother, he replied that his son was living with her at this time,  "but
    not always". He had sent her money to support both  the  appellant  and
    her, despite the fact she was living with another man  who  had  driven
    his son out of the house.

13. The sponsor was asked about the remittances to Dr [S].  Pages  1-18  of
    the appellant's bundle showed that he had sent money to Dr [S]  between
    September 2014 and January 2015.  The sponsor said he did this  because
    the appellant was living with Dr [S].  He sent money  every  month  for
    the appellant's maintenance.

14. In his closing submissions on behalf of the respondent, the  Presenting
    Officer highlighted some discrepancies in the evidence.  In his witness
    statement, the father said that the appellant had left his mother "last
    year", which would have been in 2015.  He invited the Judge to find  on
    the balance of probabilities that the appellant had continued  to  live
    with his mother up until 2015 and probably  until  after  the  date  of
    decision.  The Welfare Report contradicted the father's  evidence.   If
    his evidence was correct, the Welfare  Report  was  wrong  because  the
    appellant was not living with his mother (contrary to what  was  stated
    in the Welfare Report).  The Tribunal could not therefore be  satisfied
    that they had been given an accurate account of the situation in  Ivory
    Coast.

15. In reply, Counsel submitted that the fact that the  appellant's  father
    had been sending money to Dr [S] since September  2014  was  consistent
    with the appellant living with Dr [S].  He accepted that  the  father's
    evidence was not, on its face, consistent with the Welfare Report,  but
    he relied on the finding in the Welfare Report that the care which  the
    appellant  received  from  his  mother  was  almost  non-existent.   He
    submitted that the father was "not spinning  a  tale".   The  teacher's
    letter dated 18 March 2015 said that the appellant had had to move from
    the mother's house because of problems at home.  This  was  a  measured
    and sincere letter from the teacher which did not  sit  well  with  the
    respondent's case.  The father had had sole responsibility and  he  had
    to make very difficult decisions for the appellant.  Due weight  should
    be given to the Welfare Report.

16. At paragraphs [15]-[31], the Judge found that  there  were  significant
    discrepancies in the evidence and he gave his reasons for finding  that
    responsibility for the appellant's upbringing had probably been  shared
    between mother and father.  At  paragraphs  [32]-[37]  (comprising  two
    closely-typed pages), the Judge gave his reasons for  finding  that  he
    was not satisfied that there were any serious or compelling  family  or
    other considerations which made the appellant's exclusion undesirable.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

17. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Gaffar (who did  not  appear  below)  developed  the  arguments
    advanced in the grounds of appeal.  He submitted that  there  had  been
    material unfairness, in that the discrepancies identified by the  Judge
    had not been put to the sponsor in cross-examination.  It was too  late
    for the Presenting Officer to raise credibility issues in  his  closing
    submissions.  The appellant had not been given an adequate  opportunity
    to put his case in response to the adverse credibility findings made by
    the Judge.

18. In reply, Ms Everett submitted that  the  grounds  of  appeal  were  in
    essence no more than an expression of disagreement with  findings  that
    were reasonably open to the Judge for the reasons which  he  gave.   It
    was not the case that every single piece of evidence needed to  be  put
    to the sponsor.  Firstly, there were  matters  which  lay  outside  the
    sponsor's direct knowledge; and, secondly, he had been put on notice of
    the areas of challenge by the terms of the  refusal  decision  and  the
    contents of the ECM's Review.



Discussion

19. At paragraph [27] of his decision, the Judge set out  the  guidance  on
    sole responsibility given by the Tribunal in TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 49
    at paragraph [52].  The  guidance  cited  by  the  Judge  included  the
    following:

         (iv) Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in  the
         upbringing of a child, it will be exceptional that one of them will
         have sole responsibility.

         (ix)  The  test  is,  not  whether  anyone  else   has   day-to-day
         responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control  and
         direction  of  a  child's  upbringing,  including  making  all  the
         important  decisions  in   the   child's   life.    If   not,   the
         responsibility is shared so not 'sole'".

20. The representatives were  in  agreement  that  this  was  an  old-style
    immigration appeal, and accordingly  the  focus  was  entirely  on  the
    circumstances appertaining at the date of the refusal decision.

21. Shortly before the refusal decision, the mother had (as the Judge  held
    at paragraph [28]) used her parental authority to allow  the  appellant
    to join his father in the UK.   The  Judge  also  held  that  this  was
    probably the most important decision which had yet been made about  the
    appellant's upbringing.  In addition, the message of the Welfare Report
    dated December 2014 was that the appellant was still  living  with  his
    mother, as the Judge held at paragraph [23].

22. So it was open to the Judge to find that his mother was  probably  very
    much involved in his upbringing at the date of decision, because he was
    probably living with her at the time and because she was also very much
    involved in the decision for him to come here.

23. At paragraph [29], the  Judge  addressed  the  countervailing  evidence
    which, if accepted, supported the alternative scenario  of  the  mother
    having abdicated responsibility for the child's upbringing by the  date
    of decision, with the consequence that  the  father  had  assumed  sole
    responsibility.

24. On the topic of school letters, the Judge observed that a  letter  from
    the appellant's previous school said that  the  school  had  had  "very
    limited contact" with his mother.  The Judge held  that  'very  limited
    contact' was not synonymous with 'no contact', and so  the  letter  did
    not show that the mother was probably not involved at the time  in  his
    upbringing.  Mr Gaffar referred me to this letter, and  submitted  that
    the Judge had engaged in impermissible 'cherry-picking'.   He  had  not
    fairly considered the entirety of the contents of  the  school  letter,
    which highlighted the extent to which the father took a close  interest
    in the appellant's schooling.

25. However, this criticism is unmerited, as  the  Judge  makes  this  very
    point himself in paragraph [30].  He accepts that the father has  taken
    interest  in  the  appellant's  schooling,  as  the  letters  from  the
    appellant's schools testify.  The fact that  the  father  had  taken  a
    close interest in the appellant's  schooling  did  not  mean  that  the
    mother had taken no interest.  Accordingly, it was open to the Judge to
    find that the school letters did not show that  the  birth  mother  was
    probably not involved in the appellant's upbringing.

26. The grounds of appeal take a different point in respect of the  Judge's
    findings at paragraph [29].  It is pleaded that the  Judge's  rejection
    of the findings of the Welfare Report is  irrational.  For  it  was  an
    independent report which had been accepted by the Family Court  in  the
    Ivory Coast; and the Presenting Officer  had  advanced  no  submissions
    which undermined the findings of the Family Court  or  of  the  Welfare
    Report.

27. This error of law challenge is inaccurate and/or highly tendentious  in
    a number of respects.  The Judge did not in terms reject  the  findings
    of the Welfare Report at paragraph [29].  He identified one shortcoming
    in the report at paragraph [29], and he discussed the  shortcomings  in
    the report at much greater length at paragraphs [35]  and  [36],  as  a
    prelude to his conclusion at paragraph  [37]  that  he  was  unable  to
    accept that the conclusions in the Welfare Report led to a finding that
    there  were  probably  serious   and   compelling   family   or   other
    considerations which made the appellant's exclusion undesirable at  the
    date of decision.

28. Although the  English  translation  (the  French  original  having  not
    apparently been disclosed) refers to the  Welfare  Report  as  a  Court
    report, there is in fact no evidence that the report was presented to a
    Family  Court  in  Ivory  Coast,  or  that  it  was  prepared  on   the
    instructions of a Family Court.  Moreover, it was open to the Judge  to
    hold that  the  Welfare  Report  had  serious  shortcomings,  which  he
    discusses at paragraphs [35] and [36]: (a) the writer  of  the  Welfare
    Report did not explain the methodology used for preparing  the  report;
    (b) it was unclear who was  interviewed  while  the  report  was  being
    prepared, and whether the  writer  went  to  the  appellant's  home  to
    observe the situation there, what other enquiries were  made,  and  how
    far the evidence  was  critically  examined  to  produce  an  objective
    assessment; (c) the findings of the report were at  variance  with  the
    implications of the letter from the appellant's current  school,  which
    said that his conduct was good, or very good, and  that  his  work  was
    satisfactory, thus giving no reason to  believe  that  the  appellant's
    studies or conduct at school were suffering because of past or  present
    problems at home; (d) the Welfare Report gave little  analysis  of  the
    underlying factual basis for the conclusions it reached - for  example,
    it said that the  mother's  care  of  the  appellant  was  almost  non-
    existent, but it did not explain the shortcomings in her  care  or  how
    this affected the appellant.

29. The appellant and sponsor were put on notice by the  refusal  decision,
    and also by the Entry Clearance Manager's review, that  the  respondent
    contested the reliability and probative value of  the  Welfare  Report.
    They were put on notice that the respondent did not accept the  central
    thrust of the appellant's case, which was that it was essential for his
    welfare and wellbeing that he should be granted entry clearance to join
    his father in the UK as his mother was no longer able to care for him.

30. It is apparent from the Presenting Officer's lines of cross-examination
    referred to in paragraphs [9] and [10] of the decision,  and  from  the
    Presenting  Officer's  closing  submissions,  that  he  maintained  and
    developed the  adverse  credibility  challenge  inherent  in  both  the
    refusal  decision  and  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's  review.   The
    appellant was legally represented, and his Counsel was able to  respond
    to the adverse credibility points made by the Presenting Officer in his
    closing submissions in reply.  Accordingly,  I  am  wholly  unpersuaded
    that there has been material unfairness as submitted by Mr Gaffar.  The
    appellant knew the case that he had to meet, and  he  had  an  adequate
    opportunity to put his case at the appeal  hearing  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

31. Paragraph 7 of the grounds raises the issue of the absence of a mention
    of domestic violence in the Welfare Report.  It is pleaded that it  was
    wrong for the Judge not to put these  matters  to  the  sponsor  or  to
    appellant's Counsel.  This submission is is wholly without merit, and I
    note that Mr Gaffar did not adopt  it  in  his  oral  submissions.  The
    absence of a mention of domestic violence in  the  Welfare  Report  was
    specifically raised in the refusal decision. In the  circumstances,  it
    was clearly not  incumbent  upon  the  Judge  to  ask  the  sponsor  or
    appellant's Counsel to comment on it.  Similarly, it was not  incumbent
    upon the Presenting Officer to cross-examine the sponsor on the  issue.
    The burden rested with  the  appellant  to  bring  forward  independent
    evidence of domestic violence, and the appellant  failed  to  discharge
    this burden.

32. Another specific area of challenge relates to the Judge's  findings  on
    the remittances made by the father.   It  is  pleaded  that  the  Judge
    materially erred in law by finding that it was not  credible  that  the
    appellant's father would continue to remit  funds  to  the  appellant's
    mother, even after the appellant had left his  mother's  house.  It  is
    pleaded that it was not open to the Judge to find that there  could  be
    other reasons as to why the appellant's father had remitted funds to Dr
    [S] between 1 September 2014 and  10  January  2015  -  that  is  other
    reasons apart from the appellant residing with Dr [S] for that period.

33. This error of law  challenge  ignores  the  fact  that  the  Presenting
    Officer had successfully demonstrated, through his cross-examination of
    the appellant's father, that there were  significant  discrepancies  in
    the evidence he gave about the alleged motive for the remittances.

34. Contrary to what had been represented in the application, the new claim
    advanced by way of appeal was that the appellant had long since  ceased
    to reside with his mother, and from 2012 he had resided with Dr [S] for
    a substantial period of time, followed by him taking up residence  with
    Miss [B].  It was open to the Judge to  find  that  the  appellant  was
    still living with his mother at the time of the  refusal  decision,  as
    indicated by the Welfare Report, and to reject  the  father's  evidence
    about his motivation for the proven remittances  in  2014-2015  to  the
    appellant's mother and to Dr [S], for the  reasons  which  he  gave  in
    paragraphs [16]-[23].




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date 30 January 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge













