

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06267/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 November 2017                           |On 10 November 2017           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                       SHAKUNTALABEN DALUBHAI CHAUHAN
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER -NEW DELHI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mrs Simms instructed by Howard Kennedy LLP.
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Colyer promulgated on 23 February 2017 following a hearing  at  the
        Nottingham Justice Centre.





Background


     2. The appellant, a citizen of India, applied for entry  clearance  to
        the  United  Kingdom  as  a  partner  under  Appendix  FM  of   the
        Immigration  Rules.  The  application  was  refused   pursuant   to
        paragraph  320(11)  on  the  basis  the  appellant  had  previously
        contrived in a significant way to frustrate the intentions  of  the
        Immigration Rules and in relation to the financial requirements  in
        respect of the sponsor's documentation regarding self-employment.
     3. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [24} of the decision under
        challenge which can be summarised in the following terms:


                  a. In the application for entry  clearance  the  appellant
                     provided the sponsor's  details  stating  in  reply  to
                     question 84 that the relationship between her  and  the
                     sponsor is "friend" [25].
                  b. The applicant  made  a  concession  that  her  previous
                     conduct had not been in line  with  what  was  expected
                     under the immigration law but provided an  explanation.
                     This information was consistent with that  provided  by
                     the decision maker in the refusal [26 - 27].
                  c. The decision-maker was satisfied paragraph 320(11)  was
                     applicable as a result the following facts recorded  in
                     the refusal:


                      "You entered the United Kingdom on 25th/06/2003.  You
                      held a visit visa which was valid from 02/12/2003. On
                      17/05/2006, you were arrested and  served  with  form
                      IS151A is an over stayer.  On  15/06/2006,  you  were
                      sentenced to 5  months  imprisonment  following  your
                      conviction for possessing  a  false  instrument;  you
                      were in possession of a false British  passport.  You
                      were removed from the United Kingdom on 08/09/2006.


                      You have made a number of applications and have  been
                      encountered by police and immigration authorities  in
                      the United  Kingdom.  You  have  used  the  following
                      identities:    Shakuntalaben    Dalubhai     Chauhan,
                      Shakuntalaben  Vadnerkar  and  Shakuntalaben  Vasudev
                      Vadnerkar. You  have  used  the  following  dates  of
                      birth: 07/10/1958, 07/10/1959 and 17/10/1959.


                      Taking the above into account, I note the following:-


                      You entered the United Kingdom  in  June  2003.  Your
                      leave expired in December  2003.  You  then  spent  a
                      period of almost three years in  the  United  Kingdom
                      without  any  leave  to  enter  or  remain.  You  are
                      therefore an over stayer.


                      You have used a number of  different  identities  and
                      dates of birth. You were convicted in possession of a
                      false  instrument  when  you  are  found  to  be   in
                      possession  of  a  false   British   passport;   this
                      indicates that you attempts to switch nationality  in
                      order to remain in the United Kingdom.


                      Given all the above, I am  satisfied  that  you  have
                      previously  contrived  in  a   significant   way   to
                      frustrate the intention of the Rules, and I therefore
                      refuse your application under  paragraph  320(11)  HC
                      395 as amended."


                  d.  The  explanation  provided  by   the   appellant   was
                     considered by the Judge and is set out in the  decision
                     under challenge but was not found to be reliable in all
                     the  circumstances.  The  Judge  finds  that   as   the
                     appellant had an Indian passport she  would  have  been
                     aware of the official forms and procedure for obtaining
                     a  valid  passport  and  the  explanation   given   for
                     obtaining a false British passport was  found  to  lack
                     credibility. The Judge  records  that  the  appellant's
                     conviction is for a very  serious  immigration  offence
                     and that the decision-maker was correct to be satisfied
                     that the appellant had contrived in a  significant  way
                     to frustrate the intentions of the Rules  and  refusing
                     the application by reference to paragraph 320(11) [30].
                  e. The Judge notes that 320(11) is a discretionary  remedy
                     and that the entry clearance  officer  in  this  appeal
                     refused to exercise discretion  and  that  it  was  not
                     appropriate to grant leave on a discretionary basis [32
                     - 36].
                  f. The decision-maker refers to discrepancies in documents
                     accompanying the application form relating to financial
                     matters for  which  the  Judge  notes  the  appellant's
                     explanation and sponsor's statement [37 - 38].
                  g. The Judge notes that even though documentation may  now
                     be in the appeal bundle it was not with the application
                     leading  to  it  being  found  the  decision-maker  was
                     correct in the reasons for refusal in  respect  of  the
                     financial requirements [39].
                  h. The Judge notes the refusal refers to specific evidence
                     and documents not being submitted regarding income from
                     dividends, the failure to submit documents relating  to
                     the sponsor's income from pensions and deficiencies  in
                     tax documents submitted; leading to  a  conclusion  the
                     appellant failed to provide  the  detailed  documentary
                     evidence required under the Rules and  therefore  could
                     not meet those requirements. [40 - 45].
                  i. The Judge thereafter considered article 8 ECHR as  this
                     matter was raised in the grounds.  The Judge finds  the
                     appellant  had  established  she  had  a  genuine   and
                     subsisting relationship with her  British  partner  who
                     had lived in the UK most of his  life  and  is  settled
                     here, having previously lived in India and visited on a
                     number of occasions. The Judge found that the appellant
                     and her partner are able to live together in India  [46
                     - 47].
                  j. The Judge finds there are no  insurmountable  obstacles
                     to relocation to India [48].
                  k. In relationship to a public interest  argument,  [56  -
                     62], the Judge considers section 117B of the 2002 Act.
                  l. Article 8 conclusions are set out at [63 - 66] in which
                     it is found the respondent's decision is  proportionate
                     to any interference with a protected right.


     4. The appellant sought permission to appeal which was  granted  on  a
        limited basis by a Designated Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  in
        the following terms:


             The second ground relates  to  the  treatment  of  the  appeal
             against the refusal under paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration
             Rules. It is  arguable  that  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's
             decision made no express reference to the issue of discretion.
             The issue was addressed by the Entry Clearance  Manager  (ECM)
             in his review at paragraph 4 of the second page.  Is  arguable
             that the Judge erred in treating this as a  consideration  and
             refusal to exercise discretion because the ECM's statement can
             be read as a finding that there was  no  issue  of  discretion
             being exercise ball [sic] because the application had not been
             made by reference to those paragraphs of the Immigration Rules
             mentioned in paragraph 320(7C)(A)(i).  Paragraph  320(7C)  was
             deleted on 9 July 2012 by HC 194 so was not  relevant  to  the
             decision under appeal.


     5. Mrs Sims accepts the scope of the  grant  of  permission  which  is
        limited to the second ground set out above, only.



Error of law


     6. In relation to the grant of permission referring to what the author
        of the grant believed was how the ECM's statement can be read I  do
        not find it made out that the ECM was suggesting that there was  no
        issue of discretion being exercisable. The ECM notes in the review:


             "The grounds of appeal refer to Paragraph  320(11)  and  state
             that an exception should have  been  made  for  the  appellant
             under Paragraph (7C)(i) of  the  Immigration  Rules.  However,
             Paragraph  (7C)(i)  refers  to  a  spouse,  civil  partner  or
             unmarried or same-sex partner under Paragraph 281  or  259  A.
             The appellant submitted her application on 20  May  2014.  The
             Entry Clearance Officer rightly assess the  application  under
             Appendix FM which came  into  force  on  9  July  2012.  I  am
             therefore satisfied the decision  to  refuse  under  Paragraph
             320(11) was correct. The decision was also checked and  upheld
             by another ECM at the time of refusal.


     7. The ECM deals  with  the  appellant's  arguments  relating  to  the
        element of discretion in the following terms:


             The grounds of appeal assert that  discretion  ought  to  have
             been exercised differently. This appears  to  imply  that  the
             appellant cannot meet the requirements of the relevant rule as
             reliance is being placed on the exercise of discretion. In any
             event there is no explanation why the  appellant  thinks  that
             discretion ought to have been  exercised  differently.  Having
             examined the case  and  supporting  evidence  available  I  am
             satisfied that the decision is correct and I am  not  prepared
             to exercise discretion in the appellant's favour.


     8. The original grounds of appeal against  the  decision  of  the  ECO
        argued that exception should be applied. As noted by  the  ECM  the
        grounds in  effect  assert  that  discretion  ought  to  have  been
        exercised differently not that discretion was not exercised by  the
        ECO. Indeed, at [2] of the original Grounds of Appeal the appellant
        pleads "That the person making the decision should  have  exercised
        differently a  discretion  conferred  by  immigration  rules."  The
        review by the ECM does not state that discretion  should  not  have
        been exercised but flags up that the appellant fails  to  establish
        in her grounds of appeal in what way discretion ought to have  been
        exercised differently. The ECM having reviewed the decision was not
        prepared to exercise the  same  discretionary  power  in  a  manner
        different from that of the ECO. Any  assertion  that  the  ECM  was
        arguing the exercise  of  discretion  was  not  applicable  has  no
        arguable merit.
     9.  The  Judge  was  aware  of  the  appellant's  arguments  regarding
        discretion and discretionary powers  and  refers  at  [32]  to  the
        decision in PS (paragraph 320(11)  discretion  care  needed)  India
        [2010] UKUT 440 and the header of that decision in which the  Upper
        Tribunal state:


             "in exercising discretion under paragraph 320 (11) of HC  395,
             as amended, to refuse an application for entry clearance in  a
             case where the automatic prohibition on  the  grant  of  entry
             clearance in paragraph 320 (7 B) Mr supplied by paragraph  320
             (7  C),  the  decision  maker  must  exercise  great  care  in
             assessing  the  aggravating  circumstances  said  to   justify
             refusal must have regard to the public interest in encouraging
             those unlawfully in the United Kingdom to leave  and  seek  to
             regularise  their  status  by   an   application   for   entry
             clearance."


    10. The Judge noted that in that appeal the appellant returned  to  his
        home country with a view to making an application from outside  the
        United Kingdom to join his wife in the  United  Kingdom,  in  other
        words, he sought to regularise his immigration status in the United
        Kingdom. The Judge further notes from PS the following:


             "it might have been thought that the provisions  of  paragraph
             320 (7B)  and  (7C)  were  among  other  things,  intended  to
             encourage a person in the position  of  Mr  S  voluntarily  to
             leave the United Kingdom, to remain outside United Kingdom for
             a significant period  and  then  to  seek  to  regularise  his
             immigration status by applying properly for leave to enter the
             United Kingdom to join his wife. That would  appear  to  be  a
             desirable objective of the  rules  since  it  would  encourage
             those who were unlawfully in the United Kingdom to leave  and,
             as explained, to seek to regularise their immigration status."


    11. The key findings by the Judge  in  relation  to  the  discretionary
        issues and paragraph 320(11) are found at [35] - [36] which are  in
        the following terms:




             35.  The Entry Clearance Officer in this appeal, in making the
                  decision of refusal, declines to exercise  discretion.  It
                  is clear that the Entry Clearance  Officer  has  addressed
                  his/her mind to the relevant question, namely  whether  in
                  the circumstances of this case the appellant's  breach  of
                  UK immigration law was sufficiently aggravating so  as  to
                  justify the refusal.


             36.  I agree with and accept the respondent's submissions  and
                  decision on this aspect of the appellant's  case  for  the
                  same reasons. I find that the decision of  the  respondent
                  to refuse the appellant's application under paragraph  320
                  (11) was correct.


    12. The text of the refusal, set out at [3c] above, was  challenged  by
        Mrs Simms on the basis it was argued that all the  factors  it  was
        argued the Judge should have considered and taken into account were
        not considered. These factors were set out in the skeleton argument
        before the First-tier Tribunal.
    13. The finding of the Judge was not that the ECO  has  not  considered
        the discretionary aspect but that having considered it  he  or  she
        was not minded to exercise discretion in  the  appellant's  favour.
        This is the true  meaning  of  the  phrase  "declines  to  exercise
        discretion.
    14. If  the  decision  maker  has  lawfully  exercised  discretion  the
        Tribunal must either (a) uphold the decision maker's  decision  (if
        the Tribunal is unpersuaded that the  decision  maker's  discretion
        should have been exercised differently); or (b) reach  a  different
        decision in the exercise of its own discretion. In this appeal, the
        Judge upheld the decision.
    15. It is not disputed that the ECM had established the precedent facts
        which  brought  into  play  the  finding  that  the  appellant  had
        contrived in a significant way to frustrate intention of the Rules.
    16. In relation to the appellant's reliance upon  PS  a  more  detailed
        analysis of that decision shows that in PS the Tribunal held  that,
        in exercising discretion under paragraph  320(11)  of  HC  395,  as
        amended, to refuse an application for entry  clearance  in  a  case
        where the automatic prohibition on the grant of entry clearance  in
        paragraph 320(7B) is disapplied by paragraph 320(7C), the  decision
        maker  must  exercise  great  care  in  assessing  the  aggravating
        circumstances said to justify refusal and must have regard  to  the
        public interest in  encouraging  those  unlawfully  in  the  United
        Kingdom to  leave  and  seek  to  regularise  their  status  by  an
        application for entry clearance. The Tribunal noted the guidance on
        the application of paragraph 320(11) to be found in Entry Clearance
        Guidance under the heading "Refusals", in relation  to  aggravating
        circumstances, provides as follows.  As at December 2010 this read:
        "Please note that  the  list  below  is  not  an  exhaustive  list.
        Aggravating circumstances can include actions such as:  absconding;
        not  complying  with  temporary  admission  /  temporary  reporting
        conditions/bail   conditions;   not   complying   with    reporting
        restrictions; failing to comply with removal directions (RDs) after
        port refusal  of leave to enter (RLE); failing to comply  with  RDs
        after  illegal  entry;  previous  working  in  breach  on   visitor
        conditions within short time of arrive in the UK (ie  pre-meditated
        intention to work);  previous recourse to NHS  treatment  when  not
        entitled; previous receipt of  benefits  (income,  housing,  child,
        incapacity or otherwise) or NASS benefits when not entitled;  using
        an assumed identity or multiple  identities;   previous  use  of  a
        different identity or multiple identities  for  deceptive  reasons;
        vexatious attempts to prevent removal  from  the  UK,  eg  feigning
        illness; active attempt to frustrate  arrest  or  detention  by  UK
        Border Agency or police; a sham marriage / marriage of  convenience
        /  polygamous  marriage  in  the  UK;   harbouring  an  immigration
        offender;  facilitation / people smuggling; escaping from UK Border
        Agency detention;  switching of nationality; vexatious or frivolous
        applications;  not complying with  re-documentation  process."  The
        guidance goes on to state: "All cases must be considered  on  their
        merits, the activities considered in the round to see whether  they
        meet the threshold under paragraph  320(11),  taking  into  account
        family life in the UK and, in the case of children,  the  level  of
        responsibility for the breach.  Where  an  applicant  falls  to  be
        refused under 320(7A)  or  320(7B),  the  ECO  must  also  consider
        whether it is  also  appropriate  to  refuse  the  applicant  under
        paragraph 320(11).  Where 320(7C) applies which makes an  applicant
        exempt from 320(7B), an ECO must consider whether a  refusal  under
        paragraph 320(11) is appropriate."  As  the  guidance  had  not  be
        considered the appeal was allowed on the basis that it was  not  in
        accordance with the law.
    17. This appeal is factually different as it is not a case of  a  right
        being usurped by  another  provision  of  the  Rules  although  the
        Tribunal was invited, by analogy, to  find  the  similar  processes
        applicable. As it is the Immigration Rules that state  in  relation
        to paragraph 320(11) that an application for entry clearance should
        normally  (my  emphasis)  be  refused  where  the   applicant   has
        previously  contrived  in  a  significant  way  to  frustrate   the
        intention of the Rules, it is clear this is not a mandatory  ground
        of refusal. That fact was known by the ECO and the Judge as there a
        specific reference to this in the refusal of entry clearance.
    18. It is not made out that  the  decision-maker  was  unaware  of  the
        obligations contained in the published guidance when considering  a
        discretionary ground of refusal and, according to the  ECM  review,
        also referred the decision to be checked by another ECM at the time
        of refusal which was upheld. It may be that the ECO's  decision  is
        not set out in the manner in which Mrs Simms asserted it should be,
        the failure of which amounted to arguable legal error in that there
        is not a list of the factors the guidance indicates  needed  to  be
        considered with findings in relation to each and every aspect,  but
        it is not made out that the decision-maker failed to  consider  the
        relevant factors or failed to consider the exercise of discretion.
    19. Mrs Simms submitted that the specific wording of the rule with  the
        finding in relation to 320(11) appearing halfway  down  the  second
        page  before  consideration  of  whether  the  application   raises
        exceptional circumstances is indicative that the decision had  been
        made  with  relation  to  320(11)  at  the  earlier  stage   before
        considering exceptional circumstances later  on  in  the  decision,
        sufficient to amount to arguable legal error.
    20. The ECO, having dismissed  the  matter  under  the  Rules  both  in
        relation to 320(11) and in finding the  appellant  could  meet  the
        financial  requirements  of  Appendix  FM,  considered  the  matter
        outside the Rules. This in  itself  involves  consideration  of  an
        exercise of discretion although one considered within the framework
        of article 8 ECHR. In relation to this aspect,  the  decision-maker
        wrote:


             "I have also considered whether your  application  raises  any
             exceptional circumstances which, consistent with the right  to
             respect for family life contained in Article 8 of the European
             Convention on  Human  Rights,  warrant  consideration  by  the
             Secretary of State of a grant of entry clearance  to  come  to
             the United Kingdom outside the requirements of the Immigration
             Rules. I am satisfied that it does not. Your application  does
             not fall for a grant of entry clearance outside the rules."


    21. The above finding reinforces the earlier conclusion of the ECO that
        on the facts it was not appropriate to exercise discretion  in  the
        appellant's favour. It also appears on the  facts  of  this  matter
        that in light of the evidence before the Judge the finding that the
        decision of the ECO to  refuse  the  application  was  correct  and
        reflects the strong aggravating factors applicable in this case.
    22. It is my primary finding that the appellant has failed to  arguably
        establish  that  the  ECO  failed  to  consider  the  exercise   of
        discretion in relation to this matter as asserted by the appellant.
        It is not made out that the ECO and  two  ECM's  who  reviewed  the
        decision failed to understand  the  requirement  to  consider  this
        aspect prior to making the final decision in relation to  paragraph
        320(11). The conclusion by the Judge that discretion was  exercised
        at [35] has not been shown to be infected by arguable  legal  error
        material to the decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal;  sufficient  to
        warrant a grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
    23. The Upper Tribunal also canvassed the argument that  as  permission
        to appeal was refused in relation to the financial requirements  of
        Appendix FM any challenge on the limited basis advanced  will  have
        no realistic prospects in securing a grant of leave to enter making
        any error, even if established, not material.
    24. Mrs Simms was asked during the course of her submissions how, if  a
        finding had  been  in  the  appellant's  favour,  she  thought  the
        appellant could succeed with the application.  Her  reply  that  if
        the ECO considered discretion the appeal may be allowed is arguably
        incorrect. I say this for two reasons the first of which is that an
        exercise of discretion in the  appellant's  favour  would  only  be
        applicable to paragraph 320(11) which is a discretionary ground  of
        refusal. If, notwithstanding the clear evidential basis  supporting
        a finding that the appellant had contrived in a significant way  to
        frustrate the intentions of the rules, it was found there was  some
        other additional element that did not warrant the application being
        refused on  that  basis  it  would  still  be  incumbent  upon  the
        appellant to establish that she could satisfy the  requirements  of
        Appendix FM.  The  unchallenged  conclusion  that  the  maintenance
        requirements had not been shown to be satisfied on the basis of the
        evidence before the decision-maker shows that the application  will
        fail in any event.
    25. Whilst the Upper Tribunal understands that individuals may wish  to
        pursue discrete points in cases if they feel  that  it  may  create
        difficulties for them at a later stage if findings are  maintained,
        there still has to be  merit  in  such  a  challenge.  The  primary
        finding in relation to this matter is not only that  the  assertion
        the ECO failed to exercise discretion is not made out but  that  it
        has not been established, in any event, that there is any  material
        error in the decision to dismiss the appeal.
    26. It is open to the appellant to make a fresh application at any time
        during the course of which she will be able to provide  full  range
        of financial documents required by Appendix FM with reference to FM
        - SE, and will be able to make detailed submissions in relation  to
        any potential application of 320(11) which  may  be  sufficient  to
        persuade a future ECO of the merits of her case and that it may  be
        appropriate for her to be granted the leave is sought.
    27. In relation to article 8 ECHR; this is examined in  detail  by  the
        Judge who finds at [64] that the  appellant's  private  and  family
        life may be continued  in  India  and  in  which  the  Judge  gives
        adequate reasons  for  concluding  that  any  interference  with  a
        protected right is, on the facts of this matter, warranted.
    28. No arguable legal error material to the  decision  to  dismiss  the
        appeal is made out. This application is dismissed.


Decision

    29. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    30. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 9 November 2017










