
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06867/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29th July 2014                             |On 6th  August 2014          |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge POOLE

                                   Between

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MRS RABIA HAIDARI
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Erwin Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Bandegani, Counsel


                                  Decision

Decision on Error of Law

   1.  In  this  determination  I  will  refer  to  the  parties  using  the
      descriptions used before the First-Tier Tribunal.

   2. The appellant is a female citizen of Afghanistan born  8  March  1989.
      She applied for entry clearance with a view to settlement as a  spouse
      of  a  person  present  and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom.    The
      application was refused and the appellant appealed that decision.

   3. The appeal came  before  Judge  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  Ghaffar
      sitting at Newport on 9 January 2014.  Both parties  were  represented
      (the appellant  by  Mr  Bandegani).   The  judge  heard  evidence  and
      submissions and in a determination dated 22 January 2014  allowed  the
      appeal "under the Rules" and at paragraph 17 of the determination said
      "as I have allowed the immigration appeal I have  not  considered  the
      Article 8 appeal before me".

   4. In summary the judge noted a concession on the appellant's behalf that
      she could not meet the requirements of Appendix FM, however the  judge
      went on to consider the appeal under paragraph EX1 of Appendix FM  and
      considered that by reason of EX1 the appellant was entitled to succeed
      in her appeal.

   5. The respondent sought leave to appeal the decision alleging a material
      misdirection in law upon the basis that EX1 of Appendix FM  could  not
      apply as it was an entry clearance case.  The grounds  also  suggested
      that the appeal was allowed under Article 8 ECHR  (which  in  fact  it
      wasn't).  Reference is made in the  grounds  to  Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT
      00640.

   6. The application for leave came before another judge of the  First-Tier
      Tribunal who granted leave for the following reasons:

         "1.  The respondent seeks permission to appeal, in time, against  a
      decision  of  the  First-Tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Ghaffar)  who,  in  a
      determination promulgated on 22 January 2014,  allow  the  appellant's
      appeal against the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse  to  grant  the
      appellant entry clearance as  the  spouse  of  a  person  present  and
      settled in the United Kingdom.

     2.  There is a concession by the appellant's  representative  noted  at
      paragraph 10 of the determination that paragraph FM  does  not  apply.
      Despite this the judge has allowed the appeal  under  paragraph  EX-1.
      In accordance with the guidance  in  Sabir  (Appendix  FM  -  EX1  not
      freestanding) [2014] UKUT 63 (IAC) he should not have done so.

      3. The judge goes on to acknowledge he has not considered Article 8.


      4.  Accordingly I find there is  an  arguable  error  of  law  in  the
      determination".

   7. Hence the matter came  before  me  in  the  Upper  Tribunal.   At  the
      commencement of the hearing Mr Bandegani indicated that there had been
      no response under Rule 24 of the Procedure Rules.

   8. Mr Richards relied  upon  the  grounds  seeking  leave  save  for  the
      allegations regarding human rights which had not formed the  basis  of
      the appeal being allowed.  Mr Richards  said  the  judge  had  clearly
      erred in law as EX1 was not a freestanding provision whereby an appeal
      could be allowed under the Rules.  He invited  me  to  set  aside  the
      decision of Judge Ghaffar.

   9. Mr Bandegani accepted that the judge had made  an  error  in  law  but
      argued  that  the  error  was  not  material.   The  judge  had  found
      (paragraph 15) that there were insurmountable obstacles to the  couple
      enjoying family life outside the United  Kingdom.  If  the  judge  had
      correctly dealt with the EX1 he would then have gone on to  deal  with
      Article 8 and in all likelihood would have reached the same conclusion
      by allowing the appeal under Article 8.

  10. I indicated that I considered it far too large a step to suggest  that
      if a judge had considered Article 8 (and he had specifically indicated
      that he had not) it was inevitable that  he  would  have  allowed  the
      appeal.  Clearly there was an error which  must  be  material  to  the
      decision that the judge made in allowing the appeal without  reference
      to Article 8.  He had not dealt with Article 8 at all, so clearly  the
      decision was in respect of the Rules and it was wrong.  The error  was
      therefore material and the decision must therefore be  set  aside.  In
      the circumstances the judge was also in error in not considering Art 8
      ECHR.

  11. In reaching this conclusion  I  have  taken  notice  of  the  reported
      decision in Sabir (Appendix FM - EX1 not freestanding) [2014] UKUT 63.

  12. The decision of Judge Ghaffar must thereby be set aside and  falls  to
      be remade by the Upper Tribunal and this appeal  is  to  resume  at  a
      later date for that to take place.  The  continued  hearing  shall  be
      listed before me and I  direct  that  each  representative  shall,  in
      advance of that hearing, lodge and serve a written submission  on  the
      effect on this appeal of The Immigration Act  2014  and  whether  this
      appeal should be allowed or dismissed.





Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Poole


