

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06014/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 25 July 2013                               |On 26 July 2013              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?


                                   Between

                                     FOA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                           Entry Clearance Officer
                                    Lagos

                                                                  Respondent


                          Determination and Reasons

Representation
For the appellant:           Unrepresented
For the respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

   1.       An anonymity order was issued by the First-tier Tribunal  and  I
      have therefore continued to apply it.

   2.       This appeal comes before me following the  hearing  on  13  June
      when I found an error of law in the determination  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge. That decision sets out the background and issues and I
      therefore reproduce it below:
      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
      appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge P Lane on 11 April 2013.


      2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born on 29 October  1970.  He
      entered the UK illegally in December 2003 having spent three months in
      France, remained here unlawfully and then appears to have returned  to
      Nigeria in late 2008. He seeks entry clearance as the  spouse  of  the
      sponsor, JF, a British national whom he met whilst he was  in  the  UK
      and whom he married in Nigeria on 11 February  2009.  His  application
      was refused by the  ECO  on  17  January  2012  under  paragraphs  281
      (i)(a)(ii-vi)  and  320(11).  The  ECO  was  not  satisfied  that  the
      appellant had the necessary English language  test  certificate,  that
      the marriage was genuine and subsisting with the  intentions  of  both
      parties to live together permanently and that adequate maintenance and
      accommodation would be available. It  was  also  considered  that  the
      appellant  had  contrived  in  a  significant  way  to  frustrate  the
      intentions of the rules by  entering  the  UK  illegally,  living  and
      working here with a false identity and then failing to  disclose  this
      conduct on an earlier entry clearance application.


      3. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Behan  at  Hatton
      Cross on 14 January 2013. It was dismissed  under  the  rules  and  on
      Article 8 grounds by way of a determination promulgated on 2  February
      2013.


      4. There have been two earlier entry clearance applications refused on
      29 June 2009 and 5 October 2009. The first was not  appealed  but  the
      second was and  it  was  heard  and  dismissed  by  Immigration  Judge
      Martineau in March 2010 (OA/58502/2009 refers; the Tribunal  file  has
      since been destroyed although a copy of the determination  is  on  the
      present file).

      Error of Law

      5. The matter first came before me at a Case Management Review hearing
      on 9 May 2013 when the sponsor attended with her father. The procedure
      and issues were explained and the documentary  evidence  on  file  was
      checked, sorted out and copies for the  respondent.  The  matter  then
      resumed on 13 June. I heard from Mr Tarlow and from  the  sponsor  who
      was assisted by Mr Cady, a Mackenzie friend. At the conclusions of the
      hearing I indicated that I had found an error of law  in  the  judge's
      Article 8 assessment but not with respect to her  decision  under  the
      rules. I now give reasons for that decision.


      6. With regard to the challenge under the Immigration  Rules,  I  find
      that the judge was wrong to say the sponsor had been "evasive" in  her
      evidence and had not provided documentary evidence, as she claimed  to
      have done, to confirm an offer of accommodation from her  parents.  In
      fact this letter  had  been  sent  to  the  Tribunal  and  was  either
      overlooked by the judge or not linked  to  the  file  in  time.  As  a
      result, the judge found adequate accommodation was not available. I do
      not however find that this error undermines the  conclusion  that  the
      appellant cannot succeed  under  the  rules.  I  say  this  for  three
      reasons. First, as an out of country appeal I  am  only  permitted  to
      take account of evidence relating to facts in existence at the date of
      the decision. When the appellant made his application the  information
      he provided to the ECO was that he would be living with the sponsor at
      her property. There was no suggestion that they would  live  with  her
      parents. Therefore even if the letter offering accommodation had  been
      seen, it would not have assisted the appellant as far as  the  refusal
      on accommodation was concerned. Second, the appellant did not have the
      required English language certificate (indeed he appears to have  done
      nothing since with respect to obtaining it).  Third,  the  sponsor  is
      unemployed and  is  on  benefits.  The  judge  considered  the  letter
      offering employment to the appellant but found that it did not specify
      whether the employment would be full time or  permanent  and  gave  no
      indication of salary. As such her finding that it could not be  relied
      upon to  meet  the  maintenance  requirements  was  sound.  For  these
      reasons, as the appellant cannot meet the requirements of the rules in
      any event, the judge's mistaken assessment of  the  sponsor  does  not
      impact upon her decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  paragraph  281
      grounds.


      7. With regard to paragraph 320(11), the judge was  required  to  take
      the previous determination as her starting point as this is  what  she
      did. There is no dispute that the appellant entered, lived and  worked
      here without leave and that he used a  false  identity.  Whether  this
      identity belonged to a friend or a relative or to a complete  stranger
      is neither here nor there.  He  acted  fraudulently  and  despite  the
      sponsor's protestations that this was only so he could support himself
      and his family in Nigeria, it is dishonest behaviour. The  matter  was
      properly  considered  by  Judge  Martineau  and  challenges   to   his
      determination were unsuccessful. In the circumstances Judge Behan  was
      entitled to rely upon it in the way that she did. No error of law  has
      been shown in that respect.


      8. That leaves Article 8. the judge did not find there was family life
      between the appellant and the sponsor because she did not accept  that
      the  appellant  was  sincere  in  his  intentions  however   she   did
      nevertheless proceed to consider the matter in the  alternative,  that
      is to say on the basis that the relationship was genuine. She  applied
      the Razgar steps and considered proportionality.  That  is  where  she
      fell into error.


      9. At paragraph 25 she found that it would be reasonable to expect the
      sponsor to relocate to Nigeria. She reaches this decision without  any
      analysis of the sponsor's personal  circumstances  and  ties  to  this
      country. The sponsor is a troubled lady who has spent  many  years  of
      her life in an abusive marriage, dealing with the after affects of  an
      unpleasant divorce (the financial settlement aspect of  which  remains
      ongoing) and coping with a brutal rape and its after-effects.  On  top
      of that she has  had  a  host  of  medical  problems  which  were  not
      diagnosed early as  they  were  passed  off  as  stress  related.  She
      continues to be  under  the  care  of  the  hospital  and  remains  on
      medication. She has a close relationship with her  children  and  with
      her parents. She is white, British born as is her family and has never
      lived outside the UK. Previous visits to Nigeria have left her feeling
      vulnerable  due  to  the  difficulties  she  experienced   there.   To
      complicate matters further, the man who raped her is  Nigerian,  known
      to the appellant and due to be deported once he has served his  prison
      sentence. Not surprisingly, she is fearful that if  she  travelled  to
      Nigeria to live or to  visit,  she  would  be  placing  herself  in  a
      situation where it would be easy for him  to  find  her.  The  judge's
      finding that such a woman could reasonably locate to Nigeria either to
      live or for visits should have been made only after all these  matters
      were taken into account. As this was not  done,  the  judge  erred  in
      reaching that conclusion.


      10. The judge then proceeded to consider  whether  family  life  could
      continue if the sponsor did not relocate  to  Nigeria.  She  found  at
      paragraph 26 that it  could  because  visits  could  be  made.  Again,
      however, the judge erred in not taking account  of  the  circumstances
      referred to above. The evidence before her was that  the  sponsor  did
      not feel safe visiting Nigeria and so the  finding  that  family  life
      could continue in this  way  was  flawed.  Her  decision  should  have
      focused on whether family  life  could  continue  without  visits  and
      whether the decision remained  proportionate  even  if  it  meant  the
      marriage would  effectively  end.  These  matters  were  not  properly
      considered.


      11. For these reasons I find that the judge's decision  on  Article  8
      has to be set aside and remade.


      12. Although the sponsor was anxious for the matter to be  dealt  with
      immediately without a further hearing, after consultation with Mr Cady
      she agreed to a resumed hearing and  to  obtain  documentary  evidence
      from the appellant addressing his intentions and past conduct. A  date
      for 25 July has been  agreed.   Notwithstanding  Mr  Cady's  help  and
      support,  the  appellant  may  consider  it  helpful  to  find   legal
      representation to assist the sponsor at the next hearing.

      Decision

      13. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appeal
      under the Immigration Rules contains no errors of law and that part of
      the determination is to stand. The decision on Article 8 does  however
      contain errors of law and is set aside in its entirety.  It  shall  be
      remade at a hearing on 25 July.

      Directions

      14. All further documentary evidence must be served upon the  Tribunal
      and the respondent no later than 15 July 2013. The  following  matters
      are in issue:
         . Whether there is family life between the appellant and sponsor
         . Whether the appellant has a private life in the UK
      Whether the decision to refuse  entry  clearance  is  a  proportionate
      response when the rights of the appellant and sponsor  and  any  other
      affected parties are taken into account.

Appeal hearing

   3.       Prior to the hearing I received a lengthy witness statement from
      the appellant along with a print out  of  visits  to  a  gym  made  by
      himself and  the  sponsor  in  2008  and  2009.   They  show  numerous
      overlapping visits.

   4.       The sponsor attended alone. She explained that Mr Cady had  been
      stuck in an elevator and therefore had been unable to attend. She was,
      nevertheless, content to proceed.  It was agreed that  the  only  live
      issue was Article 8.

5.    The sponsor gave oral evidence. She confirmed that the  appellant  was
      her husband; they had married in Nigeria in 2009 after he had left the
      UK in 2008. He had left voluntarily. Mr Tarlow was able to confirm  at
      this stage that no enforcement action had been taken against  him  and
      he later confirmed that no charges had brought by the police  for  his
      use of a false identity.

6.    The sponsor said that they met in the UK on 21  August  2007  and  had
      started dating immediately. At first the relationship was  casual  but
      it soon grew serious. She would go and stay with him at his  place  as
      he was unable to come to hers (her former marital home  under  ongoing
      dispute with her ex-husband).  She said that she had  visited  Nigeria
      on six occasions; four times in 2009, once in 2010 and once  in  2011.
      Evidence in the form of her passport  is  on  the  Tribunal  file  and
      endorsements to support that may be seen.  She stated that they stayed
      in touch via telephone calls and emails. Evidence of calls and  emails
      is before me.

7.    The sponsor said that the appellant had  been  working  for  T  mobile
      before he left. He still had an  offer  of  employment  open  to  him;
      additionally he had been given an offer of employment  on  a  farm  in
      Holland and she would be prepared to stay there with  him  during  the
      periods where extra work was needed there.

8.    In response to Mr Tarlow's questions, the sponsor said  that  she  and
      the appellant frequented go to the gym together;  it  used  to  be  an
      Esporta Club but had been taken over by Virgin Active.  She  said  she
      had not been aware of his lack of immigration status initially but  he
      had later disclosed this to her. She said she had been so  overwhelmed
      by what had been going on in her life at  the  time  that  this  meant
      little to her; additionally  she  had  no  experience  of  immigration
      matters. She had also been aware that he was using  a  false  name  to
      work but he had used his real name for all his other dealings.

9.    The sponsor confirmed that she had  read  the  appellant's  statement.
      She confirmed she had visited Nigeria six times.  She  confirmed  that
      the appellant had told her he had  worked  in  order  to  support  his
      family. She had met many of them but he had a large family and she did
      not know them all. He was one of eight children and his siblings  also
      had children. She said that some of them  worked  as  traders  on  the
      streets.

10.   The sponsor was asked whether  she  would  be  able  to  continue  her
      marriage by way of visits as she had been doing. She  said  she  would
      not. She would be afraid to go to Nigeria.  She  described  having  to
      hide in the car when she went out so that they were not stopped by the
      police looking for large bribes. She said her parents and her children
      would also be worried if  she  went  there.  Additionally  there  were
      financial concerns. The appellant had been paying for half the  travel
      costs and she had been paying the rest out of her  compensation  funds
      but he needed to keep his cash for use when he came here and her funds
      were dwindling. She said it was not safe for her to walk  the  streets
      there; someone had to be with her constantly. She  would  be  an  easy
      target  for  abduction  and  she  would  be  held  for  ransom.    She
      acknowledged that she had not felt this way on her earlier visits  but
      she soon found out what  it  was  like  there.  Nevertheless  she  had
      continued to go because she wanted to be with the appellant.

11.   The sponsor stated that since the attack  on  her  in  2010,  she  had
      developed excruciating pains in her head, pins and needles in her arms
      and feelings of dizziness. She  was  on  medication  but  it  was  not
      helping her.  She had not had these problems on the  pre  2011  visits
      and on the last visit although she had suffered she had  used  alcohol
      to deaden the pain. The situation was now worse.

12.   That completed the oral evidence. I then heard submissions. Mr  Tarlow
      relied on refusal letter and submitted that  the  appellant  had  been
      doubly deceitful; first, in using a false identity to  work  here  and
      second, in failing to disclose his unlawful  status  when  making  his
      visa application. He submitted that deception had  to  be  taken  into
      account when the Article 8 assessment was  undertaken.   He  submitted
      that whilst it was not reasonable to expect the sponsor to relocate to
      Nigeria to live, it was reasonable to expect  her  to  visit  and  the
      marriage could be continued as it had been the last few years  by  way
      of  electronic  communication,  telephone  calls   and   visits.    He
      acknowledged that was difficult but submitted that was the price to be
      paid for dishonesty. The appellant should not be permitted  to  return
      until the ECO changed his mind.

13.    The  sponsor  responded.  She  submitted  that  she  had  never  been
      dishonest. The appellant had, but he was sorry for what he  had  done.
      He had done his best to  make  amends  and  to  put  things  right  by
      returning to Nigeria in order to sort the problem out.  They had  been
      in regular contact ever since. She had known his true  identity.  They
      had been apart for so many years. Her attacker had now  completed  his
      sentence but the appellant who had committed a lesser crime was  still
      being punished. They did not know what could be done to make it right.



14.   That concluded the hearing. I reserved my determination  which  I  now
      give.

Findings and Conclusions

15.   The issue before me  is  whether  the  decision  interferes  with  the
      appellant's private and family life in  such  a  way  as  to  make  it
      disproportionate.  In  assessing  this,   I   have   regard   to   the
      circumstances and facts that prevail as at the  date  of  hearing.   I
      would state at the outset  that  I  have  found  JF  to  be  a  wholly
      impressive and persuasive witness. She has  been  truthful  throughout
      the proceedings, spontaneous and  coherent  in  giving  her  testimony
      despite her many medical difficulties and I accept her evidence in its
      entirety.

16.   I accept that the appellant and sponsor have established family  life.
      I note Mr Tarlow did not seek to dispute that their  relationship  was
      genuine and subsisting. I accept the sponsor's evidence,  corroborated
      by the appellant's statement, that  they  met  in  2007,  developed  a
      relationship and that it soon became serious. I find that the  sponsor
      was in a particularly vulnerable situation at that time,  having  just
      been  through  an  abusive  marriage  and  that  this  escalated   the
      relationship with the appellant into something serious faster than she
      would have otherwise intended. I also note that although the ECO noted
      the documentary evidence to show ongoing contact had been lacking when
      the application was made, there is substantial evidence before  me  to
      show that the couple have been in touch  over  the  years  by  way  of
      telephone calls, emails and by the  sponsor's  six  visits.  The  real
      issue in this case is the proportionality of the decision.

17.   I accept that the appellant who had been here  unlawfully  decided  to
      return to Nigeria voluntarily in  order  to  resolve  his  immigration
      status and to make an application to live  with  the  sponsor  in  the
      proper way. Three such applications have been made.  I  note  that  no
      enforcement action was taken against the appellant and that  he  chose
      to leave voluntarily. He could have stayed and pursued his  Article  8
      claim from the UK but, to his credit, he  did  the  decent  thing  and
      returned. I also note that the police did not  press  charges  against
      him for the use of a false identity. It  is  unfortunate  that  having
      returned to Nigeria to do things the right  way,  the  appellant  then
      took bad advice and sought to conceal his previous presence in the  UK
      when he made his first entry clearance application. Had he come  clean
      at that stage, these proceedings may well have been  shorter.  Instead
      he  attempted  to  conceal  his  wrongdoing  thereby  compounding  the
      difficulty in which he had he placed himself.

18.   I have read with care  his  lengthy  witness  statement  in  which  he
      accepts his past misdeeds and asks for a chance to put the past behind
      him and make good his promises to his wife. It has to be said that she
      needs him desperately. I will not set  out  the  details  of  all  her
      trials over the last few years; these are touched upon in the error of
      law decision inserted in the first part of this determination. Suffice
      to say, despite her many and serious problems, she has  stood  by  him
      throughout, never faltering and adamant that she will fight  until  he
      is able to join her.  It cannot have been easy for her  to  manage  on
      her own through these many  difficult  years.  Although  she  has  had
      support from her parents, I can appreciate that it  is  the  appellant
      whom she really needs by her side.

19.   There is no question that the appellant behaved dishonestly.  He  also
      behaved stupidly, if I may say so, by trying to  cover  up  that  fact
      when he applied for entry clearance. I accept, however, he did so  out
      of desperation to be reunited with his wife and on the very bad advice
      of an agent. I can understand why the sponsor was so furious with  him
      when  she  found  out  (Judge   Martineau's   determination   refers).
      Nevertheless, as the sponsor says, the appellant has paid  the  price.
      His punishment has been to be separated from the sponsor  since  2008.
      I asked Mr Tarlow when he made his submissions whether it was the case
      that someone in the appellant's  position  should  have  to  'pay  the
      price' indefinitely and his response was that he should, until the ECO
      changed his mind.

20.   I have considered the ECO's decision,  upon  which  Mr  Tarlow  placed
      reliance. However, I note that the ECO did not consider Article  8  at
      all. He should have done. I also take account of  the  fact  that  the
      appellant was not charged with any crime. Whilst I am not condoning in
      any way his use of a false identity in order  to  take  employment,  I
      note that he was not involved in any drug related or violent activity.
      I take the view that there  must  come  a  time  when  an  immigration
      offender has 'done his time' and  when  continued  separation  from  a
      spouse becomes disproportionate. It cannot be said that  this  depends
      on when an ECO changes  his  mind  given  that  this  matter  was  not
      considered by him at all in the first place.

21.   I have considered  Mr  Tarlow's  proposition  that  the  marriage  can
      continue as it has done over the last few  years  by  way  of  visits,
      emails and telephone  calls.  That,  however,  can  never  be  a  true
      marriage. Whilst it may be tolerable for a limited period,  it  cannot
      be a substitute for a relationship where the parties can physically be
      together. I consider that there are cases where an appellant's conduct
      is such that separation may have to be permanent or indefinite however
      I do not consider that to be the case here and, of course, this is not
      a deportation appeal. I have considered with care whether the  sponsor
      can be expected to continue  her  marriage  in  this  way  and  indeed
      whether the appellant can also be expected to be  satisfied  with  the
      status quo. It may be somewhat easier for the  appellant  who  has  no
      health issues and is surrounded by close family. The  same  cannot  be
      said for the sponsor who lives alone and has been struggling  to  cope
      with her ill health, ongoing acrimonious dispute  over  finances  with
      her ex-husband as well as the aftermath of a vicious rape in 2010.   I
      accept her evidence that despite her six visits to Nigeria,  she  does
      not feel able to go there any more. I note that her health has rapidly
      deteriorated after the incident in 2010 and I accept that she does not
      feel safe there and that her parents and her children are worried  for
      her safety should she return there. Circumstances  change  and  whilst
      the sponsor may have been fit enough to make the long journey there in
      previous years, she does not appear to be anywhere near well enough to
      manage that now. The  substantial  documentary  evidence  on  file  in
      respect of her ill health and ongoing pain makes for  very  depressing
      reading.

22.   I accept the evidence that the appellant would  have  employment  upon
      arrival. I have no  reason  to  impugn  the  contents  of  the  letter
      offering him work as a security guard. Even if that offer were not  on
      the table, I have no reason to find that he would not be able to  find
      work particularly as he had managed to work the  entire  time  he  was
      here before. I also consider that the appellant's presence here  would
      be of great assistance to the sponsor and may get her off benefits;  a
      fact which would be in the public  interest.  Additionally,  there  is
      evidence to show that the appellant  has  sold  a  plot  of  land  and
      intends to bring the proceeds of that sale to the UK.

23.    In  conclusion  then,  the  appeal  comes  down  to  this:  does  the
      appellant's past conduct justify his continued exclusion from the  UK?
      In other words, is the public interest in keeping the  appellant  from
      the UK for his past misconduct of  greater  weight  in  the  balancing
      exercise than his right and the right of his wife to  enjoy  a  family
      life together. Given the time that has passed  since  the  appellant's
      misconduct,  the  long  separation  from  his  wife  which  has   been
      punishment it itself, her specific and compelling  need  to  have  him
      with her on a permanent rather than a temporary basis, his ability  to
      find employment so as to assist with his  wife's  financial  situation
      and the fact that his statement discloses genuine regret  and  remorse
      on his part, I conclude that the scales are tipped in  favour  of  the
      appellant.

24.   I would say in conclusion that this  has  been  a  difficult  case  to
      determine and that the appellant is fortunate to have such a steadfast
      and devoted wife as it has surely been her doggedness to fight on  his
      behalf that has assisted him to succeed in this appeal.


 Decision

25.   The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law in  respect  of  Article  8
      and that part of the determination is set aside. The appeal is allowed
      on Article 8 grounds.






      Signed:








      Dr R Keki?
                   Judge        of        the         Upper         Tribunal



            26 July 2013

