
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA064332015



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 May 2016                               |On 24 May 2016                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAHMOOD

                                   Between

                           AN IMMIGRATION OFFICER
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Mr KRZYSZTOF SKRABA

                        (No Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Ms S Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:     No attendance and not represented.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This matter  comes  before  me  pursuant  to  permission  having  been
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mark Davies dated 12  April  2016.
    The appeal relates to a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  B  Cox
    promulgated on 20 October  2015.  The  Judge  had  allowed  the  appeal
    against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  admission  pursuant  to
    Regulation 11 of the Immigration (European Economic  Area)  Regulations
    2006.  The appeal before me is that of the Immigration Officer, but  to
    ease following this decision I shall continue to refer to Mr Skraba  as
    the Appellant and the Immigration Officer as the Respondent.

2.    The Judge had  set  out  the  background  to  the  Appellant's  appeal
    whereby an Immigration Officer at  Calais  had  refused  the  Appellant
    entry to the United Kingdom because it was said  that  the  Appellant's
    exclusion was justified on grounds of  public  policy  because  of  his
    criminal convictions which had included robbery.

3.     The  Judge  concluded  that  the  Appellant's  personal  conduct  did
    represent a genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat  affecting
    one of the fundamental interests of society.  However  the  Judge  felt
    able to allow the appeal because he concluded that the last offence was
    in 2007 and the Respondent had not provided  any  evidence  to  suggest
    that following the Appellant's release from prison in 2007 that he  had
    committed any further offences.

4.    The  Respondent's  grounds  of  appeal  contended  that  there  was  a
    misdirection of law arising out of a mistake of fact  because,  amongst
    other things, the Appellant was  extradited  to  Poland  in  2013  (the
    explanatory statement says 2014) and  was  convicted  following  having
    absconded and breached his  bail  conditions  for  which  he  served  a
    further sentence of 6 months imprisonment.

5.    During the hearing before me  I  invited  Mr  Whitwell  to  deal  with
    paragraphs 10 and 11 of the Judge's decision which refers to this  very
    aspect raised in the grounds as not having been taken into account.  Mr
    Whitwell said that the real point was that the fact that the  Appellant
    had absconded from Poland for his  offences  was  the  feature  of  the
    offending which needed to  be  given  greater  prominence  and  it  was
    therefore wrong for the Judge to conclude that there  were  no  further
    offences recorded against the Appellant since  2007.  That  is  because
    there was the further sentence of imprisonment of 6 months in 2013/2014
    and the continuing nature of the absconding/breach of bail.

6.    I can see that because the Judge was dealing with the  appeal  on  the
    papers therefore the clarification now being provided was probably  not
    as clear at the time of the hearing before him. Therefore  albeit  with
    initial reluctance, I conclude that there is a material error of law in
    the Judge's decision.

7.    I shall therefore set aside the decision of the Judge.  Upon  remaking
    the decision I  conclude  that  the  Appellant  represents  a  genuine,
    present  and  sufficiently  serious  threat  affecting   one   of   the
    fundamental interests of society  because  of  his  offending  and  the
    serious nature of the offences recorded against him. The fact that  the
    Appellant was at large for such a long period of  time  and  thereafter
    the fact that he  was  imprisoned  again  in  2013/2014  indicates  the
    serious way in which the Polish authorities viewed  his  offending  and
    the fact that he had breached his bail conditions by absconding for  so
    many years. Therefore  in  assessing  Regulations  19  and  21  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations and in particular Regulation 21(5)(c) the
    Appellant's appeal has to be dismissed.

8.    I conclude that the Appellant does  have  a  propensity  to  re-offend
    because the Respondent has proved that is so.

9.    I remake the decision and dismiss the Appellant's appeal  against  the
    Immigration  Officer's  decision  refusing  him  entry  to  the  United
    Kingdom.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal  Judge  involved  the  making  of  a
material error of law and is set aside.

I remake the decision and dismiss the Appellant's appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                       Date: 16 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood


