

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06799/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd September  2013                       |On 24th September 2013       |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                              MR shoukat parvez
                                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R O'Ryan (instructed by Silverdale Solicitors)
For the Respondent:  Mr G Harrison (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  1st  October  1961.  He
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Foudy) promulgated on  21st  May  2013  dismissing  his
    appeal against the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision  to  refuse  to
    grant him entry clearance as a spouse.

2.   The judge dismissed the appeal on the basis that  the  Appellant  could
    not be accommodated without reliance on additional  public  funds.  She
    did so on the basis that the Sponsor currently receives a 25%  discount
    on her council tax because she lives alone. She is  entirely  dependent
    upon public funds for payment of her rent and council tax and  so  that
    additional 25% would have to  be  financed  by  way  of  public  funds.
    Although it was claimed that the Appellant had the offer of  employment
    in the UK the Judge found that not to be genuine.

3.   The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal on  1st  July  2013.  In
    granting permission to appeal the Judge noted that it was no  error  of
    law for a Judge to consider a different subparagraph of 281 of  HC  395
    at the hearing should it raise a concern for the Judge (see RM (Kwok On
    Tong: HC 395 para 320) India [2006] UKAIT 00039). However the Judge did
    find it arguable that in this case the First-tier Tribunal had erred in
    law by "not giving an opportunity to the Appellant to lodge appropriate
    documentary evidence to prove adequacy of maintenance  in  response  if
    this was a new matter raised by the Judge for the first time during the
    hearing and for which the Appellant was not required to be prepared for
    or able to respond to".

4.   Mr O'Ryan provided me with the benefit and tax  credit  rates  relevant
    at the date of decision and he also provided me  with  IO  ("Points  in
    Issue") Nigeria [2004] UKAIT 00179.

5.   It is accepted that the Entry Clearance Officer did not raise  adequacy
    of maintenance or  reliance  upon  public  funds  in  the  refusal.  In
    reciting the reasons for refusal in her determination Judge Foudy  does
    refer to the Appellant's inability to be  maintained  and  accommodated
    adequately without recourse to  public  funds.  In  doing  so  she  was
    mistaken.  The Entry Clearance Officer referred only to the adequacy of
    the accommodation. However, for the reasons which follow  that  has  no
    bearing on the Judge's decision and reasoning.

6.   The Judge found in the Appellant's favour on the other reasons for  the
    Entry  Clearance  Officer's   refusal.   However,   when   looking   at
    accommodation and the adequacy of  the  accommodation  which  had  been
    raised by the Entry Clearance Officer, the Judge noted  that  the  rent
    and the council tax were paid for entirely from public funds. While the
    rent would not increase by virtue of the Appellant's arrival in the UK,
    the council tax payable would. At paragraph 10 of the determination the
    Judge noted that Mr Malik, on the  Appellant's  behalf  accepted  there
    would be an increase in the amount of council tax payable as he  agreed
    that the Sponsor would lose her discount once  the  Appellant  arrived.
    The Judge noted that Mr Malik argued that there would  not  however  be
    any increased reliance on public funds because at the date of  decision
    the Appellant had an offer of employment.

7.   The Judge noted that there was no witness from the takeaway  restaurant
    purporting to offer employment to confirm the offer  and  to  establish
    that  the  business  could  afford  to  take   on   another   employee,
    significantly as the position had apparently been  kept  open  for  the
    Appellant for an inordinate period of time. The Judge also  noted  that
    no hours of work were specified and so it could not be shown  that  the
    earnings would be sufficient  to  eliminate  reliance  on  council  tax
    benefit. The Judge noted also that the  offer  of  employment  was  not
    consistent with the oral evidence of the Sponsor.   Unsurprisingly  the
    Judge concluded the job offer was not genuine.

8.   In the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal  it  is  argued  that  in
    raising an issue not raised by the Entry Clearance Officer or indeed by
    the Home Office Presenting Officer at the start of the proceedings  the
    Judge was guilty of procedural unfairness which amounted to an error of
    law. I note from the Judge's record of proceedings  that  they  were  a
    great many questions asked of the Sponsor  about the job offer  and  in
    submissions the Home Office Presenting Officer  referred to reliance on
    public funds in relation to council tax and the credibility of the  job
    offer. It was also dealt with in his  submissions  by  the  Appellant's
    representative.

9.   Accordingly, there is no question of procedural unfairness.  The  issue
    that was concerning the Judge was clearly  canvassed  at  the  hearing.
    Questions were asked and answered about it and submissions made on  the
    point. The Appellant was professionally represented at the hearing  and
    if the representative had any concerns over a new issue being raised he
    could and should have applied for an adjournment and yet he did not. No
    complaint was raised at the time about the new issue.

10.  For the above reasons I find that the First-tier Tribunal did not  make
    an error of law in its  determination  and  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal is therefore dismissed.





Signed                 Dated 23rd September  2013



Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
