
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
OA/06585/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 12th January 2016                   |        On 16th February 2016        |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                          mr Nizar Noor Ali Daredia
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                   Mumbai

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Zane Malik instructed by Malik Law Chambers
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant, a citizen of India born on 18th December 1960,  appealed
    with permission, against the First-tier Tribunal  decision  promulgated
    on 21st April 2015, which dismissed his appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and on Human Rights grounds.  The appellant had applied to  enter
    the United Kingdom as a Partner under Appendix FM  of  the  Immigration
    Rules and his application was refused by an Entry Clearance Officer  on
    12th May 2014.

 2. The application for  permission  to  appeal  relied  on  an  unreported
    decision of the Upper Tribunal in Gurpreet Singh v ECO  (OA/04089/2011)
    and the requirement within the  respondent's  published  guidance  that
    refusal under paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules requires prior
    Entry  Clearance  Manager  authorisation.   It  was  submitted  in  the
    application for permission to appeal that, and  there  was  one  ground
    only, the Entry Clearance Officer's decision to refuse the  appellant's
    application under  paragraph  320(11)  of  the  Immigration  Rules  was
    inconsistent with  her  own  published  policy  and  therefore  not  in
    accordance with the law and therefore; the judge erred in upholding the
    Entry Clearance Officer's refusal.

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Malik initially contested that the argument
    centred on whether the point of the  prior  Entry  Clearance  Manager's
    authorisation was raised before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  whether
    this could now be properly considered.

 4. Mr Malik, however, conceded that in fact  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer made on 15th May 2014 made no reference to  Paragraph
    320(11) but reference to refusing the application for  entry  clearance
    on the basis of EC-P.1.1(c)  and  in  particular  Immigration  Rule  S-
    EC.1.4(c) and S-EC.1.5. Those Rules are set out as follows:
         "S-EC.1.4. The exclusion of the applicant from the UK is  conducive
         to the public good because they have:
         (c)  been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 12  months,
             unless a period of 5 years has passed since  the  end  of  the
             sentence.
         S-EC.1.5. The exclusion of the applicant from the UK  is  conducive
         to the public good because, for example,  the  applicant's  conduct
         (including convictions  which  do  not  fall  within  paragraph  S-
         EC.1.4.),  character,  associations,  or  other  reasons,  make  it
         undesirable to grant them entry clearance."

 5. I note that the Entry Clearance Manager, in error,  made  reference  to
    the Entry Clearance Officer exercising his discretion  under  paragraph
    320(11) but the ECM was  in  fact  incorrect.   The  decision  for  the
    purposes of the appeal is the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.

 6. Mr Kandola also noted that paragraph 320(11) of the  Immigration  Rules
    was not in play in this appeal and that the  appeal  was  bound  to  be
    dismissed.

 7. Both S-EC.1.4  and  S-EC.1.5,  unless  contrary  to  the  Human  Rights
    Convention, are mandatory in their operation.

 8. Mr Malik accepted that there was no reference to Paragraph  320(11)  in
    the Entry Clearance Officer refusal decision  and  also  accepted  that
    there was no Article 8 challenge within the permission to appeal;  only
    the application of the Immigration Rules was challenged.

 9. In conclusion, it is clear from the decision that the appellant applied
    for entry clearance as a partner under Appendix FM of  the  Immigration
    Rules.   The  Entry  Clearance   Officer   detailed   the   appellant's
    immigration history in the refusal and noted that records held  in  the
    United Kingdom indicated that the appellant was convicted of a criminal
    offence on 7th March 2006 and sentenced  to  imprisonment  for  fifteen
    months.  In the light of that conviction the  appellant  was  therefore
    refused under paragraph ECP.1.1(c) and S-EC.1.4(c) for ten  years  from
    the date of sentence and which meant that he was banned  from  entering
    the UK until 7th March 2016.  That conviction was not in dispute and  I
    observe that unless the fact on which the decision rests is in  dispute
    the application of that rule is mandatory.

10. The Entry Clearance Officer also considered the  circumstances  of  his
    application and that the appellant had a family  unit  in  the  UK  but
    noted his immigration history which  was  that  the  appellant  arrived
    illegally in the UK in 1996 and applied for indefinite leave to  remain
    which was refused in 1997 and he appealed against this  decision  which
    was refused in 1998.  The appellant failed  to  comply  with  reporting
    restrictions and absconded and made an application  in  September  1999
    to the Home Office using a false identity and he was issued with an  EA
    residence permit  and  re-entered  the  UK  using  a  false  Portuguese
    passport and on each occasion was an illegal entrant.  He  submitted  a
    Portuguese passport in support of an application for  indefinite  leave
    to remain in March 2003 but it was noted that that  passport  had  been
    previously reported lost  or  stolen.   In  May  2003  he  was  refused
    indefinite leave to remain and given 28 days to leave  the  UK  and  in
    November 2003 he applied along  with  his  stated  family  members  for
    indefinite leave to remain.  On 15th January 2006 he was  arrested  and
    taken to a police  station  and  was  questioned  regarding  the  false
    Portuguese passport and was then charged, convicted  and  sentenced  to
    fifteen months for obtaining property by deception  and  twelve  months
    for seeking to obtain leave to enter by means including deception.

11. On 26th July 2007 removal directions were sent with an emergency travel
    document and he was removed from the UK (voluntary departure).

12. In 2008 the appellant made a further application as  a  family  visitor
    and after interviews, in which  he  admitted  to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer  the  above  noted  immigration  and  criminal   history,   his
    application was refused.  He made a further application in 2011 as  the
    spouse of a person present and settled in the UK and this  was  refused
    on 12th August 2011 on the basis of paragraph 320(18) and 320(19).   It
    was on the basis of  the  history  of  the  appellant  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer also  refused  the  application  under  paragraph  S-
    EC.1.5.

13. At no point did the Entry Clearance Officer refer to paragraph  320(11)
    and indeed neither  the  appellant's  conviction  nor  his  immigration
    history was disputed by him.  The refusal makes mention of  a  previous
    Entry Clearance Officer decision dated 12th August 2011  being  refused
    under Paragraph 320(18) and 320(19) but  even  that  decision  did  not
    refer to Paragraph 320(11).

14. The First-tier Tribunal Judge proceeded [15 of the  decision]  to  deal
    with the appeal  on  the  basis  of  paragraph  320(11)  but  that  was
    incorrect.  That was an obvious legal error.  As  these  are  mandatory
    grounds there is no discretion on  the  part  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer which can be challenged by way of appeal and thus  the  grounds
    for permission to appeal are misconceived.

15. There was no challenge within the application for permission to  appeal
    and no grant with respect to Article 8 and on human rights grounds  and
    although the judge proceeded in error in dealing with  the  application
    under paragraph 320(11) I nonetheless retain the findings in respect of
    the human rights grounds but remake the decision with  respect  to  the
    Immigration Rules and dismiss the appeal on the  mandatory  grounds  as
    cited above.

16. The First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and his  decision  is  set
    aside in relation to the Immigration Rules.  The decision is  preserved
    in respect of the dismissal on Human Rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

I remake the decision and dismiss Mr Daredia's appeal.

The appeal is thus dismissed both under the Immigration Rules and  on  Human
Rights Grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date 10th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 10th February 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



