
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06365/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26th August 2015                  |On 3rd September 2015                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                          Ms RABIA SULTAN MOHAMMAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini (counsel), instructed by Starck Uberoi,
                    solicitors & advocates.
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    I have considered whether any parties require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Khan promulgated  on  16  April  2015,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal.



Background

3.    The appellant was born on  15  February  1958  and  is  a  citizen  of
Afghanistan. The appellant applied for entry clearance to come to the UK  as
a dependent of her son, who has leave to remain  in  the  UK  until  3  July
2018. On 13 May 2013, the respondent refused the appellant's application.

The Judge's Decision

4.    The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal.  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge M A Khan ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
respondent's decision, finding that  the  appellant  could  not  fulfil  the
requirements of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and that there  was  no
reason to consider any rights that the appellant  might  have  in  terms  of
Article 8 ECHR out-with the Immigration Rules.

5.    Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  13  July  2015,  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Frankish gave permission to appeal, stating inter alia:

         "The sponsor records that he is a married man  with  five  children
         but he,  himself,  is  an  only  child  (paragraph  7).  While  not
         necessarily material in itself that the FTTJ refers (paragraph  10)
         to the sponsor's sisters giving evidence, that point combined  with
         the fact that the medical evidence  is  considered  (paragraph  23)
         only as to the issue of  where  the  appellant  might  be  located,
         amounts to an arguable error"

The Hearing

6.    Before I heard from Mr Saini, counsel for the appellant, Mr  Nath  for
the respondent conceded that the determination promulgated on 16 April  2015
contained a material error of law. He explained  that  the  evidence  before
the First Tier Tribunal included documentary medical evidence  and  accepted
that that medical evidence, although referred to  briefly  at  [23]  of  the
determination, has apparently not been considered by the Judge. He  conceded
that there is no analysis of the medical evidence and no  findings  of  fact
in relation to the medical evidence. Mr Nath conceded  that  the  inadequacy
of the findings in relation to the medical evidence amounts  to  a  material
error of law and conceded the appeal, asking that the case  be  remitted  to
the First Tier Tribunal to be heard of new.

7.    Mr Saini reminded me that there were seven separate grounds of  appeal
but accepted that, as it  was  now  common  ground  that  the  determination
contains a material error of law, there was no need to address  me  further.
He also asked that the case be remitted to the First  Tier  Tribunal  to  be
determined de novo.

Analysis

8     In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC), it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

9     The Judge's determination promulgated on  16  April  2015  contains  a
material error of  law.  It  is  beyond  dispute  that  documentary  medical
evidence was placed before  the  judge  and  that  he  has  carried  out  no
analysis of that evidence, nor has he stated whether he accepts  or  rejects
that evidence. The medical evidence is a central issue in this case  and  it
is evidence on which no findings in fact have been made. The judge does  not
demonstrate that account has been taken of the  evidence  presented  to  the
First Tier Tribunal, nor does the judge adequately set out what evidence  he
accepts and what evidence he rejects, nor the reasons for  either  accepting
or rejecting that evidence.

Finding of Material Error

10.   The failure of the First Tier Tribunal to properly set out  and  weigh
the evidence before it constitutes a material error of law.  The  judge  has
manifestly made inadequate findings in  fact.  This  is  a  material  error,
since had the judge made findings in  fact  on  the  basis  of  the  medical
evidence placed before him, the outcome might have been different. That,  in
my view, is the correct test to apply.

11.   I therefore find that a material error of  law  has  been  established
and the judge's determination cannot stand and must  be  set  aside  in  its
entirety.

Remittal to the First tier Tribunal

12.    Under  Part  3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
Statement of the 25th of September 2012 the case  may  be  remitted  to  the
First Tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

    (a) the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or  other  opportunity  for  that
    party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or



    (b) the nature  or  extent  of  any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
    necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such
    that, having regard to the  overriding  objective  in  rule  2,  it  is
    appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

13.   In this case none of the findings of fact are to stand and the  matter
will be a complete re hearing.

14.   I consequently remit the  matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
before any First-tier Tribunal Judge (IAC) other than  First  Tier  Tribunal
Judge M A Khan.

Decision

15.   The making of the decision of the First-tier tribunal is tainted by  a
material error of law.

16.   I set aside the decision.

17.   I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for determination of new.


Signed      Date 1st September 2015

                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
