
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06599/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                          |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 21 August 2014                               |On 28 August 2014          |
|Signed 22 August 2014                           |                           |


                                   Before

                    UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RICHARD CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                             MRS MST MALA BEGUM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms R Pickering, Counsel instructed by David Gray and Co
For the Respondent: Mr P Mangion, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  who  appeals  against  the
      decision of the Respondent, the Entry Clearance Officer  Dhaka,  taken
      on the 28 January 2013, to refuse her  application  for  a  settlement
      visa join her spouse Lala Miah, "the Sponsor".

   2. The appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cope  at  North
      Shields on the 6 January and the 19 January, 2014.  The judge  refused
      the Appellant's appeal finding the Sponsor not to be credible.

   3. The issue before the judge was whether the  Appellant  had  adequately
      demonstrated that her relationship  with  the  Sponsor  was  genuinely
      subsisting at the time of the application and  that  she  intended  to
      live together permanently in the United Kingdom.

   4. It appears that towards the  end  of  the  cross  examination  of  the
      sponsor, First Tier Tribunal Judge Cope realised  that  he  had  heard
      similar evidence from the witness in another, unrelated appeal. During
      a break in proceedings the judge interrogated his computer  and  found
      that the sponsor had been a witness in a visitor appeal he  had  heard
      more than 18 months earlier.  He noted that he had found  the  sponsor
      not to be a credible witness  on  that  occasion.  He  had  found  the
      sponsor not credible, because in the earlier appeal  the  sponsor  had
      given evidence as a witness that he claimed to be working when in fact
      he was not working.

   5. The judge told both parties representatives.  In fact  they  had  also
      both appeared  before  him  in  the  previous  appeal  and  the  judge
      concluded that both representatives were aware  at  the  beginning  of
      this appeal that this was the case.  Having read out various parts  of
      his earlier determination to the  parties,  the  judge  then  reminded
      himself that in the previous appeal the Sponsor was found  not  to  be
      credible because he claimed to be working when  in  fact  he  was  not
      working.  The judge noted that the Sponsor appeared  to  be  repeating
      the same  claim  and  decided  that  this  reflected  adversely  to  a
      significant degree on the Sponsor's credibility.

   6. There was no reason, he found, to make it  inappropriate  for  him  to
      consider hearing the appeal  and in doing so  he  purported  to  apply
      Secretary of State for the Home Department v D  (Tamil)  [2002]  UKIAT
      00702 * (formerly known as Devaseelan) and used  his  finding  in  the
      earlier appeal that the sponsor  was  not  a  credible  witness  as  a
      starting point for his findings as to  the  sponsor's  credibility  in
      this appeal.

   7. I was urged by Mr Mangion to find that  there  was  no  error  in  the
      judge's determination.  He pointed out that the judge had given  every
      opportunity to the Appellant's representatives and had pointed out  to
      them that they had also appeared before him.  He  suggested  that  the
      judge had not erred by applying D (Tamil) in those  circumstances  and
      the judge  was  entitled  to  treat  the  representatives  as  having,
      effectively, waived any potential objections they might  have  to  him
      hearing the appeal.

   8. Ms Pickering reminded me  that  the  issues  were  whether  or  not  a
      bystander would believe that the proceedings  were  conducted  fairly.
      Given that the judge has made an adverse finding  in  respect  of  the
      Sponsor in an earlier appeal and then appears  to  have  adopted  that
      finding and made further adverse findings and dismissed  this  appeal.
      He should have  declined  to  continue  hearing  the  appeal  once  he
      remembered the earlier hearing and the  adverse  finding  he  made  in
      thespect  of  the  sponsor's  credibility.  The  Appellant   and   her
      representatives  were  clearly  taken  by  surprise  and  the  earlier
      determination was not something that had been filed by the parties  or
      which they were aware of before the hearing.  The Appellant was not of
      course present and was denied the opportunity of properly  responding.



   9. Counsel addressed me briefly in respect  of  the  third  challenge  on
      which permission had been granted.  She suggested that the  judge  had
      failed to ask himself the correct questions.  The issue  for  him  was
      maintenance and the intention  of  the  parties  to  permanently  live
      together.  His decision is notably coloured by  his  previous  adverse
      credibility finding.  She suggested that since the Appellant had  been
      denied a fair hearing, the only appropriate course would  be  for  the
      matter to be remitted to the first hearing before a judge  other  than
      Judge Cope.

  10. I have concluded that Judge Cope has materially erred in  law  in  his
      determination.  I set aside his determination.

  11. No criticism is made of the judge for having  to  failed  to  remember
      immediately, that more than eighteen months previously  he  had  heard
      evidence from the Sponsor who was sponsoring an another appellant in a
      visitor appeal.  One can hardly expect the representatives to remember
      the case either.  However, it  appears  from  his  determination  that
      First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cope  realised,   having   heard   cross-
      examination of the Sponsor, that the Sponsor had appeared  before  him
      as a witness in a completely different appeal.   At  the  end  of  his
      cross-examination he found a copy of the determination on his computer
      and noted that he had dismissed the earlier appeal and in  the  course
      of  his  determination  he  had  made  adverse  findings   about   the
      credibility of this Sponsor as a witness in that  earlier  case.   The
      judge considered the matter and  concluded  that  the  representatives
      appearing on behalf of the Appellant and the Sponsor were  effectively
      waiving any potential objections they may  have  to  him  hearing  the
      appeal.   He  appears  to  have  read  out  parts   of   his   earlier
      determination where it relates to the Sponsor's evidence, but not give
      a copy of that determination  to  either  representative.  Instead  he
      purported to apply D (Tamil) and, having  reminded  himself  that  the
      Sponsor had been found not credible in the earlier appeal, (which  was
      completely unconnected with this Appellant) concluded  that  since  he
      had given very similar evidence (to the effect that  he  was  working,
      when in fact he had not been working) what the  sponsor  had  said  in
      oral evidence "to a very significant degree" and personally  reflected
      on the sponsor's credibility.

  12. As Counsel pointed out, the Appellant was not present and did not have
      a proper  opportunity  to  respond  to  this  evidence.   The  earlier
      determination in question had not been copied for the  representatives
      and they were not offered an adjournment so that they  might  consider
      the position.

  13. I believe that the judge  erred  by  proceeding  to  hear  the  appeal
      himself having realised that the Sponsor was  someone  in  respect  of
      whom he had made adverse findings of credibility  in  an  earlier  and
      unconnected appeal.

  14. I agree with Counsel; the Appellant has effectively  been  denied  the
      opportunity of a fair  hearing.  It  seems  to  me  that  this  is  an
      appropriate case, bearing in  mind  the  Senior  President's  Practice
      Statement, where the correct course would be to remit this  appeal  to
      the First-tier Tribunal for a  fresh  hearing  before  an  Immigration
      Judge other than Immigration Judge Cope.

                        I believe that two hours should be allowed  for  the
                       appeal  and  that  a  Bangladeshi  interpreter   with
                       Sylheti dialect should be booked for the hearing.





Signed[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

