
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06415/2014
                                                               OA/06416/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd September 2015                |On 15th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                  (Chennai)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MR MURUGASU THANABALASINGHAM
                      MRS PUVANESWARY THANABALASINGHAM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Walker, a Home Office presenting officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Musquit of counsel


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. In this appeal, the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  appeals  against  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Randall)  allowing  the
         appeal of Mr and Mrs  Thanabalasingham  ('the  claimants')  against
         decisions taken on 22 April 2014 to refuse them entry clearance  as
         adult dependent relatives.

Background Facts

      2. The claimants are citizens of Sri Lanka.  Murugasu Thanabalasingham
         ('the first claimant') was born on 12 March  1942  and  Puvaneswary
         Thanabalasingham ('the second claimant') was born on 20 March 1946.
          They applied for entry  clearance  as  dependent  relatives  under
         appendix FM of the Immigration Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)  ('the
         Immigration Rules'). In decisions dated 22  April  2014  the  Entry
         Clearance Officer refused entry clearance. The decisions were based
         on similar reasons for refusal, namely, the Entry Clearance Officer
         was not satisfied that the claimants required  long  term  personal
         care to perform everyday tasks and that they  would  be  unable  to
         obtain the required level of care in Sri Lanka.

Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

      3.  The  claimants  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.    In   a
         determination promulgated on 10 March 2015, Judge  Randall  allowed
         the claimants' appeals under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  in  the
         alternative under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
         Rights.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

      4. The respondent sought permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
         On 30 April 2015 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pirotta  granted  the
         respondent permission to appeal.  Thus, the appeal came before  me.



      5. There were three main grounds of  appeal  namely;  that  the  judge
         erred by i)  taking  into  account  and  relying  on  post-decision
         evidence, ii) failing to take into account the  Country  of  Origin
         Information Report when concluding that there is  no-one  available
         in Sri Lanka who could reasonably provide  the  required  level  of
         care and iii) in finding (in the  alternative)  that  it  would  be
         disproportionate to exclude the claimants from the United Kingdom.

Discussion

Post decision evidence and need for personal care

      6. The grounds of appeal assert that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         erred by taking post-decision evidence into consideration (contrary
         to s85A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  ("the
         2002 Act'), that evidence of deterioration in the claimants' health
         conditions is not  admissible  simply  because  the  condition  was
         extant at the date of decision and that the correct approach is  to
         make a fresh application on the basis of the changed circumstances.
         In support of that submission the respondent relies on the case  of
         AS (Somalia) v SSHD [2009] UKHL 32.

      7.  Mr  Walker  made  significant  concessions  at  the  hearing.   He
         acknowledged that there was an apparent conflict in the grounds  of
         appeal in that the post-decision evidence concerns the condition of
         the second claimant at the date of  decision.  Mr  Walker  conceded
         that the post-decision evidence (in particular the letter  dated  4
         February 2015 from Dr Yathunanthanan)  did  refer  to  the  medical
         condition existing as at the date of the decision. On the basis  of
         that concession, he also accepted  the  judge's  finding  that  the
         second claimant was in need of long-term personal care at the  date
         of decision.

      8. I do not need, therefore, to consider  the  grounds  of  appeal  in
         relation to post decision evidence or the finding that  the  second
         claimant needed long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks.

      9. There are 2 grounds remaining for consideration.  Firstly,  whether
         the judge erred in finding that the claimants would  be  unable  to
         obtain the required level  of  care  in  Sri  Lanka,  and  secondly
         whether the judge erred in finding (in  the  alternative)  that  it
         would be disproportionate to exclude the claimants from the  United
         Kingdom.

Availability of care in Sri Lanka

     10. Mr Walker relied on the grounds of appeal which assert that on  the
         facts of the case it has not been demonstrated that there is no one
         available in Sri Lanka who could  provide  the  required  level  of
         care. It is open to the claimants'  children  to  visit  and  offer
         support or re-locate if necessary. Mr  Walker  submitted  that  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to take account of the Country  of
         Origin Information Report which clearly states that  mental  health
         support is available and the second claimant's  own  evidence  that
         she has received treatment.  Whilst the second claimant may  prefer
         to live with her children and whilst this  might  have  a  positive
         impact on her condition the claimants' children chose to leave  Sri
         Lanka  -  preference  of  carer  is  not  catered  for  under   the
         Immigration Rules or Article  8.  I  raised  the  issue  with  both
         representatives as to what form of 'care' was in issue.  Mr  Walker
         (as did the grounds of appeal) referred to availability of  medical
         care. The requirement for 'care' in the rules appears to relate  to
         the care necessary for performing everyday tasks i.e. personal  not
         medical care. This was considered to be the meaning of care by  the
         First-tier Tribunal (see para 46) and no  dispute  has  been  taken
         with this point. Mr Walker was unable to  refer  to  evidence  that
         personal care was available in Sri Lanka to a person in the  second
         claimant's position.

     11. Mr Musquit indicated that he would take advantage of the fact  that
         the Entry Clearance Officer's representative has  not  referred  to
         any evidence that personal care is readily available.  He  referred
         to the judge's findings on the  witness  evidence,  the  judge  had
         found the witnesses to be credible and accepted  that  the  sponsor
         had been unable to recruit someone to  provide  personal  care.  He
         accepted (in response to my questions on the  appropriate  type  of
         care that is in issue) that the judge had conflated availability of
         medical care with personal care but submitted that the two were not
         entirely dissociable as the  second  claimant's  medical  condition
         impacted on the ability to find personal care as she was  resistant
         to intervention and uncooperative  because  of  her  mental  health
         condition.

Material Error of law

     12. The burden of proof was on the claimants to demonstrate  that  they
         were unable to obtain the required level  of  care  even  with  the
         practical and financial help of the sponsor. The evidence  of  this
         should be from a health authority, local authority, doctor or other
         health professional. The judge made a number of findings in respect
         of the inadequacy of the care that  the  claimants  are  receiving.
         Many of the findings relate to medical care. The judge relates  the
         effect of the lack of care homes with  appropriate  facilities  and
         medical treatment to the second claimant's need for long term  care
         to perform everyday tasks. In the circumstances of the instant case
         this appears to be reasonable because the second claimant's  mental
         health issues clearly have  an  impact  on  the  accessibility  and
         provision of personal care. With regard to the  previous  provision
         of private care, in paragraph 53, the judge sets out  the  evidence
         provided by the former carer and the  witnesses'  evidence  finding
         that their evidence  that  'they  had  been  unable  to  recruit  a
         replacement due to people's reluctance  to  work  with  the  second
         appellant given her depression' was credible.  The  judge  accepted
         that the sponsor had 'done what she can to provide practical  help,
         including sending her husband over to Sri Lanka to assist, in  both
         finding a replacement carer, and in seeking  out  care  homes  that
         might obviate the need  for long-term personal care in the  UK,  in
         both of which tasks he was unsuccessful.

     13. On the basis of the admissible evidence the judge found that  there
         are no medical or institutional resources in Sri Lanka that obviate
         or satisfy the need of the second claimant for long-term access  to
         personal care and that there is nothing of a practical nature  that
         the appellant can do to provide care to the claimants (para 54).

     14. These  findings  of  the  judge  were  properly,  intelligibly  and
         adequately reasoned and based in the findings of fact  made,  after
         hearing and seeing the evidence.  The Secretary of  State  has  not
         established a material error of law in this respect.

     15. There is no material error of law in the findings of the judge  and
         application of the Immigration Rules.

     16. Given my findings on  the  Immigration  Rules  I  do  not  need  to
         consider the ground of appeal in relation to Article 8.

     17. I have considered whether any parties require the protection of  an
         anonymity direction. No anonymity direction  was  made  previously.
         Having considered all the  circumstances  and  evidence  I  do  not
         consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

Decision

     18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  to  allow  the  claimants'
         appeals under the Immigration Rules does  not  contain  a  material
         error of law.

     19. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed. The decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 14 September 2015
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw

