
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06061/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th August 2015                  |On 20th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                               mr JETMIR VLADI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra, Counsel, instructed by Norton Folgate
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is an Albanian and Australian national  who  applied  for
    entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a returning resident here. His
    application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer  (ECO)  and  his
    subsequent appeal dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Bart-Stewart
    in a decision promulgated on 6 February 2015.

 2. Grounds of Appeal were lodged and it was noted by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Pirotta that the application had properly  raised  concerns  that
    the judge may have made a material error of law and there was "merit in
    the application on the issue of the application of paragraph 19  alone.
    Leave is not granted to pursue the other grounds".

 3. A Rule 24 notice was lodged by the Secretary of State  indicating  that
    the judge had considered the matter under the provisions of Immigration
    Rule 19 and concluded there were insufficient matters going  in  favour
    of the Appellant.  It was said no material error of law was disclosed.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.

 5. Prior to the hearing the Appellant's solicitors had lodged  an  updated
    index and additional bundle  of  documents  highlighting  a  number  of
    documents that were  not  before  the  judge.   For  the  Appellant  Ms
    Malhotra properly accepted that as this was an error of law  hearing  I
    was not permitted to look at the additional documents  lodged  as  they
    were not  documents  lodged  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bart-
    Stewart.

 6. Ms Malhotra relied on her grounds set out in the skeleton  argument  at
    N1 to N4. Those grounds focused on the basis that permission  had  been
    granted solely on the basis of Section 19 of the Immigration  Act  2014
    and in particular Section 117B.  The Appellant's case was that  he  had
    three school-going British children who are established in this country
    in their home and within their extended family unit with uncles,  aunts
    and grandparents.  The Appellant's wife is a British national who works
    as a nurse, is a tax payer, and has  lived  in  this  country  for  the
    majority of her life.  In the circumstances it would not be  reasonable
    to expect the children to relocate  especially  since  the  family  had
    returned to re-establish  themselves  here.   In  addition  there  were
    "special" circumstances  surrounding  this  case.   The  Appellant  had
    enjoyed the benefit of indefinite leave to remain  and  had  failed  to
    satisfy the returning resident rule due to an error. He had  a  British
    wife and children.  The  uncertainty  of  his  immigration  status  was
    placing a heavy burden on him and his family.

 7. Ms Malhotra accepted that given that the Grounds of Appeal had  focused
    on the discretion available to  the  judge  under  Section  19  of  the
    Immigration Rules, it  did  seem  probable  that  permission  had  been
    granted on the judge's exercise of discretion under that paragraph.  It
    was important to note that even at the date of decision the family were
    returning to an established  set up in this country.   In  response  to
    comments from Ms Isherwood, Ms Malhotra said that the Appellant had  in
    fact been in the UK form 2001 to 2005 as a failed asylum  seeker.   The
    judge had therefore made an important factual error in  regard  to  the
    Appellant's  length  of  residence  here  and  given  that  error   the
    discretion should have been exercised  differently.   I  was  asked  to
    order a rehearing in this case.

 8. For the Home Office Ms Isherwood relied on her rule 24  notice.   There
    was no material error in law. The background was that the Appellant was
    a failed asylum seeker.  It was important to note that at the  date  of
    decision by the ECO was 10th April 2014.  The judge had weighed up  the
    evidence under paragraphs 19 of the Immigration Rules and had made  the
    appropriate decision.

 9. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

10. The basic facts in this case are  non-contentious.   The  Appellant  is
    someone who had indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom  which
    was granted on 15th November  2008.   He  and  his  wife  relocated  to
    Australia to live  there  in  April  2009.   They  have  three  British
    children.

11. They decided to make their home in the United Kingdom  and  given  that
    all, apart from the Appellant,  are  British  citizens,  there  was  no
    difficulty with that decision except that the Appellant  had  to  apply
    for entry clearance. He did so in his capacity as a returning resident.
    The  ECO  considered  his  application  under  paragraph  18   of   the
    Immigration Rules and noted that because he had been living outside  of
    the UK for over two years and had not lived here for most of his  life,
    he was not  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 18(ii).  He therefore refused the application.  There  is  no
    quibble from the Appellant about that part of the decision.

12. However, as the judge pointed out,  the  ECO  had  a  discretion  under
    paragraph 19 of the Rules which neither the ECO nor the Entry Clearance
    Manager who reviewed the Grounds of Appeal had considered.   The  judge
    explained that the facts to be assessed  included  the  length  of  the
    Appellant's original residence, the time that he has been  outside  the
    United Kingdom, the reason for the delay, the reasons for going  abroad
    and the intentions, the nature of family ties here and whether he had a
    home in the United Kingdom and if admitted would received residency.

13. The judge noted that the ECO had said that the Appellant  entered  here
    for settlement on 11th September 2006 and  left  on  17th  April  2009,
    meaning he had lived in the UK for only three years.  She recorded that
    Ms Malhotra had said that the Appellant had lived in the UK  from  2009
    although the grounds of application make it clear  that  this  was  not
    said. The judge noted that  the  family  had  decided  to  relocate  to
    Australia where the Appellant's wife had secured employment  and  there
    was no suggestion that the intention was to be away for less  than  two
    years.  The judge noted that the Appellant  lived  with  his  wife  and
    children there and the family were settled.  Indeed,  he  had  obtained
    Australian citizenship which was further evidence of strengthening ties
    outside the UK.  Overall the judge found that there  were  insufficient
    factors in the Appellant's favour that would have merited the  exercise
    of discretion in the Appellant's favour under paragraph 19  as  at  the
    date of decision.

14. What emerged before the judge was that both the Appellant and his  wife
    were unaware that there was a "two year cut off" (see  paragraph  8  of
    the decision) and because he  had  been  given  "indefinite"  leave  he
    considered that he could return at any stage.

15. One particular point of criticism from Ms Malhotra was that  the  judge
    had erred in stating that the Appellant had lived in the  UK  for  only
    three years. I was told that, in fact, he had been here  from  2001  to
    2005 when he was attempting to obtain asylum.   That  information  does
    not appear to have been placed before the judge who probably relied  on
    the evidence contained in the statement of the Appellant who  said  (J1
    of the bundle) that he obtained leave  to  remain  as  a  spouse  of  a
    British national on 8th September 2006 and arrived here  to  stay  with
    his spouse on  11th  September  2006,  departing  the  UK  to  work  in
    Australia on 17th April 2009. His previous history of  being  a  failed
    asylum seeker was not disclosed in the statement.  Furthermore  in  his
    application form at question 28 he gives his date of  arrival  as  11th
    September 2006. At question 91 he  was  asked  how  long  he  had  been
    resident in the UK and the answer given was "2  years  and  7  months".
    From the information given to the judge she was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the Appellant had lived here for  a  relatively  short  period  of
    time.  Certainly there is no suggestion that the  Appellant  has  lived
    most of his life here. The judge set out the terms of paragraph  19  of
    the Rules and focused on the issues raised there and whether or not  it
    would be appropriate for discretion to be exercised in the  Appellant's
    favour.

16. What the judge was bound to do, which  she  did  do,  was  to  look  at
    matters as they stood at the  date  of  decision:  see  DR  (ECO:  post
    decision evidence) Morocco* [2005] UKIAT 00038. She looked at the facts
    presented to her and what factors were relevant to apply in  the  issue
    of discretion under paragraph 19 of the Rules. The  reasons  she  gave,
    which are stated above, are clear and coherent. In order to succeed  in
    this case the Appellant has to show that the judge has made an error in
    law and that the reasons given are perverse and irrational.

17. By a wide margin the Appellant fails to show  that.   It  follows  that
    there is no error of law in this decision which must stand.

18. In passing I would only observe that the Appellant was present  at  the
    hearing and the parties told me that he was an  overstayer.   The  fact
    that he has not succeeded in  coming   here  as  a  returning  resident
    under the Rules does not preclude him  trying  to  succeed  in  another
    application and presumably  he  can  ask  the  Secretary  of  State  to
    exercise her discretion to allow him leave to remain here under Article
    8 ECHR given the current family  circumstances.  Alternatively  he  can
    return to one of his countries of nationality and make  an  application
    for entry clearance.

Notice of Decision

19. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

20. I do not set aside the decision.

21. No anonymity direction is made.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

