
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
OA/06710/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |Determination Promulgated |
|On 1 August 2014                         |On 5 August 2014          |
|                                         |                          |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                      MISS THIVIYAJANANI SELVAPRAGASAM
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Saini, Counsel
      (instructed by Genga & Co Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mrs L Kenny, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
           Judge King on 29 April 2014 against the determination of  First-
           tier Tribunal Judge Thanki who  had  dismissed  the  Appellant's
           appeal in a determination promulgated on 9  January  2014.   The
           determination covered both the Appellant and her  brother.   The
           brother's appeal was allowed under Appendix FM by the judge  but
           that was the subject of the grant of permission to appeal  which
           will be addressed by the tribunal in a separate determination.


      2.    The Appellant is a national of Sri Lanka,  born  on  14  January
           1988, who had sought leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  for
           settlement as an adult dependant child under Appendix FM,  which
           was refused by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  Chennai  on  15
           February 2015.  It was conceded before  Judge  Thanki  that  the
           Appellant could not meet Appendix FM and her appeal was  pursued
           on Article 8 ECHR grounds.   The  Appellant's  mother  had  been
           granted leave to enter on review by the Entry Clearance  Manager
           and, as already noted, the judge  had  allowed  the  Appellant's
           brother's appeal.  Thus  the  judge  was  well  aware  that  the
           Appellant would be remaining in Sri Lanka on her own.


      3.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  King,
           following refusal by First-tier Tribunal Judge R A Cox,  because
           he considered that it was arguable  that  the  judge  had  given
           insufficient consideration to the emotional and  cultural  bonds
           between the Appellant, her mother and brother.  She had not  yet
           demonstrated an independent life.  The Respondent indicated by a
           rule 24 notice that the appeal was opposed.




      Submissions - error of law


      4.    Mr Saini for the Appellant relied  on  the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal on which permission to  appeal  had  been  granted.   The
           judge had not placed the appeal into the  South  Asian  cultural
           context.  The Appellant had lived with her father until she  was
           9, a fact the judge had overlooked or been mistaken about in his
           inchoate assessment.  Her father was continuing to supervise her
           life in  the  traditional  culture  of  protection  for  single,
           unmarried female.  The fact that the  Appellant  was  absent  at
           university was not important as the  Appellant  otherwise  lived
           with her mother and brother.  The Appellant was guarded  at  her
           hall of residence.   It  was  the  case  that  her  father  (her
           sponsor) was not a refugee and had returned to Sri Lanka  for  a
           funeral as the judge had correctly noted.


      5.    Mrs Kenny for the Respondent submitted that the evidence  showed
           as the judge had found that the Appellant lived away from  home.
           The judge's reasons had been adequate.  The Appellant  had  been
           living with her mother and there had been no male protection  at
           their home.  There were other relatives in Sri Lanka.


      6.    In reply, Mr Saini submitted that the judge had not  taken  into
           account  the  susceptibility  of  young  women  and  the   other
           relatives were not relevant.


      7.    The tribunal reserved its determination which now follows.




      No material error of law finding


      8.    In the tribunal's view little  can  be  usefully  added  to  the
           reasons for refusing permission to appeal given  by  Judge  R  A
           Cox:


            "It was acknowledged on [the Appellant's behalf] that she  could
           not meet the requirements of Appendix FM  of  the  [Immigration]
           Rules but reliance was placed on Article 8  outside  the  rules.
           The judge had allowed the appeal of  her  brother,  who  suffers
           from epilepsy and requires constant attention from his mother in
           particular.


            "I have carefully considered the determination  in  relation  to
           the grounds.  Having done so, I find no arguable merit in  them.
           They amount in truth to more than a disagreement with adequately
           reasoned and sustainable conclusions that were fully open to the
           judge in all the circumstances.  Article 8 is  not  designed  to
           provide a remedy for every misfortune or disappointment in life.
            Rather, the enquiry  is  of  hard-edged  legal  nature  whereby
           appeals to such matters as "cultural  nuances"  (ground  20  are
           unlikely to carry significant weight.


            "The grounds do not  disclose  an  arguable  material  error  of
           law..."


      9.    It is not easy to see why permission to appeal  was  granted  by
           the Upper Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant was not in  the  United
           Kingdom and there was no reference to the Article 8 ECHR  rights
           of her father in the grant.


      10.   The determination took full account of the submissions that  the
           Appellant could not live by herself as a  single  woman  in  Sri
           Lanka and was not independent: see [21]  and  [25].   The  judge
           found that Article 8 ECHR was not engaged in connection with the
           Appellant's father, who had long been absent from her life.   At
           one point in [26] the judge refers to contact twice since birth,
           erroneously, although elsewhere he states that the sponsor  left
           Sri Lanka when the Appellant was a child, accurately.   But  the
           substance of the case was the same,  i.e.,  an  almost  complete
           absence for the majority of the Appellant's  life,  albeit  that
           the Appellant's father was supporting  her,  as  the  judge  had
           correctly noted.   The error of fact was thus not material.


      11.   The Appellant was already 25 by the date of the decision and had
           been living away from home for several years.   That  is  not  a
           person leading a sheltered life.  Her  studies  were  in  dance,
           which it was  hardly  necessary  for  the  judge  to  point  out
           involves public performance.  Such  objective  evidence  as  was
           placed before the judge did not show that single  women  in  Sri
           Lanka are at risk. There was  no  cultural  evidence  which  the
           judge  ignored.   The  Appellant  was  in  any  event  an  adult
           proposing to move to a somewhat different culture where  amongst
           other matters the Equality Act 2010 applies.  It was open to the
           judge  to  find  that  the  Appellant  was  already  leading  an
           independent life in Sri  Lanka  and  could  continue  to  do  so
           without undue difficulty.


      12.   Moreover, it was equally obvious that  the  whole  situation  of
           family separation was based on family choice.   The  sponsor  is
           not a recognised refugee.  The civil war in Sri Lanka ended over
           5 years ago.  There was no evidence before the  judge  that  the
           family the sponsor left behind has ever  suffered  harm  on  his
           account, nor indeed any of his other relatives.  He thus is able
           to  return  to  Sri  Lanka  and  live  his  family  life  there,
           particularly if he wished to supervise his  daughter  until  her
           marriage.  The result of the Entry Clearance  Officer's  refusal
           in the daughter's case was to leave matters  as  they  had  been
           between herself and her sponsor.


      13.   The tribunal finds that there was no material error  of  law  in
           the determination and there is no basis for interfering with the
           judge's decision.
      DECISION


      The making of the previous decision did not involve the making  of  an
error on a point of law and stands unchanged

      Signed                                  Dated




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell




