
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06606/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 April 2016                      |On 19 May 2016                       |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                                Naz Wali Khan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Gaisford of Counsel instructed by Nandy & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on  5  December  1969.   He
    appeals the decision of the respondent on 1  May  2014  to  refuse  his
    application for entry clearance as  the  husband  of  the  sponsor,  Ms
    Saleh.

2.   The appellant had arrived in this country on  a  visit  visa  in  March
    2006.  He had remained in the UK after the expiry of his visit visa  in
    July of that year.  He met the sponsor  who  had  indefinite  leave  to
    remain in the UK in 2007.  He had applied for leave to remain in the UK
    as her partner in 2011.   That  application  was  unsuccessful  and  an
    appeal against that decision was dismissed by  Designated  Judge  Lewis
    following a hearing on 8 May 2012.  The appellant returned to  Pakistan
    in 2013  to  make  the  application  which  is  the  subject  of  these
    proceedings.

3.   The sponsor attended  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier  Judge.
    However she was unable to communicate with the interpreter as she spoke
    a different dialect to that of  the  interpreter.   There  had  been  a
    previous adjournment of the  appeal  on  9  March  2015.   Mr  Gaisford
    appeared before the First-tier Judge as he did before me and  requested
    that the case should be dealt with on  the  basis  of  the  papers  and
    submissions.  The previous decision of the Designated Judge was  before
    the Tribunal and the issues were limited to ones concerning the English
    qualification  and  the  marriage   certificate.    The   Home   Office
    representative accepted that the case could proceed on that basis.  The
    judge records as follows:

         "Taking into  account  the  fact  that  both  representatives  were
         prepared to proceed on this basis and  being  aware  of  the  delay
         which  had  already  been  experienced  because  of  the   previous
         adjournment I agreed to  proceed  by  way  of  submissions,  having
         regard to the overriding interests of justice and fairness."

    The judge summarised the reasons for refusal in  paragraph  10  of  her
    decision.  The  respondent  took  the  point  that  the  appellant  was
    required to satisfy the English language requirement  in  paragraph  E-
    ECP.4.2 of the Immigration Rules but had failed to do so prior  to  the
    date of refusal on 1 May 2014.  I should interpolate that the appellant
    had submitted an English language certificate with his appeal dated  30
    July 2014 following an examination taken in June 2014.

4.   The respondent was not satisfied that the  death  certificate  relating
    to the death of the appellant's first wife, Umbar Ali,  was  valid  and
    therefore the respondent did not accept that the  appellant's  marriage
    to Ms Saleh was valid.  In relation to this point  the  judge  did  not
    find it necessary to make any findings.

5.    In  relation  to  Article  8  the  respondent  accepted  there  was  a
    subsisting relationship between the  parties.   However  there  was  no
    apparent bar to the sponsor moving to Pakistan bearing in mind that  at
    the time the parties entered into their relationship the appellant  was
    an overstayer.  The decision was proportionate.

6.   Having considered the submissions the judge found no  reason  to  doubt
    the assessment of Judge Lewis that:

         "a.  The appellant knowingly overstayed  in  the  UK  and  did  not
             attempt to regularise his position until 2010 at the earliest;



         b.   The  appellant  had  an  economically  established  family  in
             Pakistan in 2012 and his relationship with them at  that  time
             was good;

         c.   Apart from his family life  with  his  wife,  the  nature  and
             quality of his private life in the UK was tenuous,  comprising
             one educational qualification and some unlawful working;

         d.    The  appellant  and  his  wife  intended  to  live   together
             permanently in 2012 and he could satisfy the English language,
             maintenance and accommodation requirements of the  Immigration
             Rules at that time."

    On the issue of the  English  language  qualification  requirement  the
    judge found in paragraph 30 that as the appeal was an  out  of  country
    appeal she could only consider the circumstances at  the  date  of  the
    respondent's decision which was 1 May 2014  and  could  not  take  into
    account the later English examination.  As  a  result  the  appellant's
    appeal under the Rules did not  succeed.   The  judge  then  turned  to
    consider Article 8 outside the Rules and referred to the questions  set
    out in Razgar v Secretary of State [2004] UKHL 27.  The judge  answered
    the first three questions set out in  Razgar  in  the  affirmative  and
    found in relation to question four that it would be in  furtherance  of
    the permitted aim to impose  the  English  language  requirements.   In
    relation to the issue of proportionality the judge reminded herself  to
    consider the effects not only on the appellant but also  on  his  wife.
    The judge concluded her determination as follows:

         "45. I find that the family life of  the  Appellant  and  Ms  Saleh
             could reasonably be expected to be enjoyed in  Pakistan.   The
             Appellant had an economically established family  in  Pakistan
             in 2012 with whom he had good relations and there  is  nothing
             in the evidence to lead me to conclude that this position  has
             changed.   Ms  Saleh  is  not  a  British  citizen.   In  2012
             Designated  Judge  Lewis  found  that  she  had  visited   the
             Appellant's family and had found them to be  extremely  lovely
             people although with different customs  and  cultures.   Again
             the evidence does not lead me to find that this  has  changed.
             She arrived in the UK  on  18  July  2004  (according  to  the
             Appellant's entry clearance application).  Her date  of  birth
             is 5 December 1969 and she was born  in  Indonesia.   She  has
             therefore  adapted  to  a  change  in  culture   and   customs
             previously when she moved to the UK at the age of 34 and I see
             no reason why she could not do so again.  She is only 45 years
             old and there is no evidence of any health issues which  would
             cause her problems if she were to move  to  Pakistan.   Beyond
             evidence of employment there is no evidence of Ms Saleh having
             other ties in the UK which would impact upon  her  ability  to
             move to Pakistan.

         46.   Section  117B  NIAA  sets  out   specific   public   interest
             considerations which I  must  consider  in  carrying  out  the
             proportionality assessment.  The Appellant is  able  to  speak
             English to an extent.  Although he was unable to  satisfy  the
             changed requirements of the Immigration Rules in 2014 as at  1
             May 2014, he was able to study for and obtain an  entry  level
             Certificate in ESOL Skills for Life (Speaking  and  Listening)
             (Entry 2) as found by Judge Lewis.

         47.  In relation to the financial independence test in Section 117B
             the Appellant satisfied the Respondent that  his  sponsor  met
             the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules.  His wife
             has the means to support him and therefore he would not  be  a
             burden on taxpayers.

         48.  However, Section 117B(4) provides that little weight should be
             given to a relationship formed with a qualifying partner where
             it is established  by  a  person  when  they  are  in  the  UK
             unlawfully.   "Qualifying  partner"  is  defined  to   include
             "settled" persons  and  "settled"  is  defined  under  Section
             33(2A) Immigration Act 1971  as  persons  who  are  ordinarily
             resident  in  the  UK  without  any  restriction   under   the
             immigration laws on the period for which they may remain.   Ms
             Saleh has  indefinite  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  and  is
             ordinarily resident in the UK.  She is therefore a  qualifying
             person.

         49.  The  Appellant  met  Ms  Saleh  in  December  2007  and  their
             relationship has developed since that time.   That  period  is
             entirely after his visit visa had expired on 19 July 2006.  He
             was therefore in the UK unlawfully when his relationship  with
             Ms Saleh was established.  I am  therefore  required  to  give
             little weight to that relationship.

         50.  Mr Gaisford referred me to the case of Mostafa (Article  8  in
             entry clearance) [2015] UKUT 00112 (IAC).  That case does  not
             assist the Appellant.  It  concerned  a  situation  where  the
             tribunal did not have jurisdiction to consider the Immigration
             Rules and it was  decided  that  being  able  to  satisfy  the
             Immigration Rules is a weighty matter to be taken into account
             in the Article 8 analysis.   That  situation  does  not  apply
             here.  I have been able to consider the Appellant's case under
             the Immigration Rules and he does  not  satisfy  those  Rules.
             However, I have been able to take into account his ability  to
             speak English in the proportionality exercise  notwithstanding
             the  failure  to  meet  the  specific   requirement   of   the
             Immigration Rules as at 1 May 2014.

         51.   I  have  weighed  up  all  these  facts  and  conclude  that,
             considering the ability of the Appellant and Ms Saleh to carry
             on their life together in Pakistan, the little  weight  I  can
             give to their relationship and  the  public  interest  in  the
             maintenance of effective immigration  controls,  the  decision
             taken by the Respondent is necessary and proportionate."

7.   Permission to appeal was granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  12
    February 2016 on the basis that it was arguable that the judge did  not
    conduct a sufficient analysis of the evidence adduced by the  appellant
    in relation to the English language certificate and it was arguable  in
    the light of the provisions of Section 117 that the judge "should  have
    furnished greater clarity in this respect".  It  was  further  arguable
    that the judge had made insufficient findings of fact in the context of
    the ability of the appellant's wife to adapt to life in Pakistan.   The
    respondent in the response submitted that the ground in relation to the
    English language certificate was misconceived in that Section 85(5)  of
    the 2002 Act applied and postdecision evidence  should  not  have  been
    considered in the light of AS (Somalia) [2008] EWCA Civ 149.  Reference
    was made to paragraph 18 where it was  pointed  out  that  in  overseas
    appeals a fresh application could be made relying on any  human  rights
    based  points.   The  judge  had  correctly  taken  into  account   the
    appellant's ability to speak English as well as his failure to  provide
    an English language certificate.  The  ability  to  speak  the  English
    language was a neutral consideration at best following the decision  of
    AM (Malawi) [2015] UKUT 0260  (IAC).   The  judge  had  considered  all
    relevant circumstances  when  considering  whether  family  life  could
    reasonably  be  enjoyed  in  Pakistan  and  the  grounds  were  a  mere
    expression of disagreement with the judge's conclusions.  In  ground  5
    (which took issue with  the  last  sentence  of  paragraph  45  of  the
    determination) it had been conceded in the grounds that  the  statement
    may have been "fairly generic" in nature.

8.   Mr Gaisford submitted that evidence had been excluded.  He referred  to
    the grounds and the fact that the appellant  had  taken  the  exam  and
    passed it was a matter of residual evidence and should  be  taken  into
    account.  No reference had been made to EX.1 in Appendix  FM.   It  was
    acknowledged that this point had not been taken in  the  grounds.   The
    sponsor had not given evidence and had only provided  a  statement  and
    the appeal had had  to  be  adjourned  on  two  occasions.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer could have taken into account the appellant's English
    qualification and it would  be  disproportionate  to  require  a  fresh
    application to be made.  Counsel referred to SS (Congo) v Secretary  of
    State [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at paragraphs 54 to  56  and  what  was  said
    about near miss cases.

9.   Mr Bramble submitted in  response  that  the  arguments  had  moved  on
    considerably from the grounds upon which permission had  been  granted.
    He relied on the Rule 24  response  and  submitted  there  was  nothing
    untoward  in  it  being  decided  that  the  case  could   proceed   on
    submissions.  It was a straightforward case.  Mr Gaisford submitted  in
    reply that  it  was  Robinson  obvious  that  the  sponsor  would  have
    established a private life in the UK.

10.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge if it was materially flawed in law.

11.  At that hearing the appellant was represented by  Mr  Gaisford  and  Mr
    Gaisford settled the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   It  was
    Counsel's decision to proceed  with  the  hearing  notwithstanding  the
    interpreter difficulties.  The  process  was  entirely  fair.   At  the
    hearing before me Counsel sought, as Mr Bramble commented to widen  the
    grounds considerably from  the  initial  grounds  settled  by  Counsel.
    There had been no attempt in advance of the hearing to raise additional
    points.  I see no reason to admit further arguments that had  not  been
    employed before and such arguments were not  "Robinson"  obvious:  R  v
    Secretary of State ex parte Robinson [1997] Imm. A.R. 568.

12.  I find that the First-tier Judge was correct  in  concluding  that  she
    could only take into account the circumstances as at the  date  of  the
    respondent's decision and could not take into account the later English
    exam.  She did not accordingly err  in  finding  that  the  appellant's
    appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  could  not  succeed.   She  then
    conducted a full review of the appellant's Article 8 appeal outside the
    Immigration Rules, correctly addressing herself  to  the  questions  in
    Razgar.  She bore in mind the effect of the decision on  the  appellant
    and the sponsor.  She took into account the findings that had been made
    by Designated Judge Lewis.  Although she had properly  decided  not  to
    admit the evidence of the English exam in relation to  the  immigration
    decision, she considered the ability of the appellant to speak  English
    in the context of Section 117B and the financial requirements.

13.  She also took into account that the relationship with the  sponsor  had
    been established at a time when  the  appellant  had  been  in  the  UK
    unlawfully.  She makes  it  quite  clear  that  she  had  in  mind  the
    appellant's ability to speak English  notwithstanding  the  failure  to
    meet the specific requirements of the Rules.

14.  I agree with Mr  Bramble  and  the  points  made  in  the  respondent's
    response that the arguments advanced go little further than  expressing
    disagreement with the decision of  the  First-tier  Judge.   I  see  no
    evidence that the First-tier Judge did not take into  account  all  the
    available evidence including the sponsor's  witness  statement.   There
    was no procedural unfairness in this case.  The  appellant's  interests
    were protected by Counsel who took an advised decision to proceed  with
    the hearing notwithstanding the interpreter difficulties.

15.  I find that the First-tier Judge carefully considered all the  relevant
    evidence and reached proper conclusions on it.  She  did  not  arguably
    misdirect herself in concluding as she did and I accept  the  arguments
    advanced by the respondent and as deployed by Mr Bramble.  The  grounds
    of appeal do not disclose a material error of law on the  part  of  the
    First-tier Judge.   Accordingly,  this  appeal  is  dismissed  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Judge stands.

Anonymity Direction

16.  The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and I make none.


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed   Date 13 April 2016

G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
