
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06468/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th January 2016                  |On 15th January 2016                 |
|Prepared 8th January 2016            |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                                     BS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - accra
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss C. Querton of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P. Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of The Gambia born on  7th  September  2006.
    She appealed against a decision of the Respondent dated 30th April 2014
    to refuse to grant her indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom  as
    the child of her father [FS] a citizen of Gambia with indefinite  leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom ("the  Sponsor").  The  Respondent  had
    refused the application because he doubted the relationship between the
    Sponsor and the Appellant (this is no longer in dispute). Although  the
    Appellant's mother had said she was unable to look after the  Appellant
    (due to overcrowding) that did not mean  she  played  no  role  in  the
    Appellant's upbringing.  The Appellant's appeal was  allowed  at  first
    instance by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Callow sitting  at  Taylor
    House on  31st  March  2015.   The  Respondent  appealed  against  that
    decision and in a decision dated 12th November 2015  I  set  aside  the
    decision at first instance and directed that the  appeal  be  re-heard.
    On 12th November 2015 I gave my written reasons for finding a  material
    error of law in the first instance decision such that it fell to be set
    aside.  Attached to this determination is a copy of those reasons.  For
    the sake of convenience I will continue to refer to the parties as they
    were known at first instance. The issue in this  case  is  whether  the
    Sponsor can show that he had sole responsibility for the Appellant.

The Determination at First Instance

2.   At paragraph 3 of his determination the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  set
    out the facts in the case at the date of the Respondent's decision:

    (i)  The Appellant was 7 years old and was a pupil at [A-  School  S-].
         She was only issued with a birth certificate two months before  she
         made an application to join her father in the UK.  Unlike  the  law
         in the UK for example there is no requirement to register  a  birth
         within the defined period.  The norm is that birth certificates are
         generally applied for when the need  arises.   The  same  situation
         prevailed with her siblings.  Birth certificates were  applied  for
         prior to them making applications for a clearance  and  which  were
         not reasons for refusal.

    (ii) The Sponsor subsequently married the  Appellant's  stepmother  and
         was granted entry clearance to the United Kingdom as  a  spouse  on
         25th August 2010. He arrived to take up residence  on  1st  October
         2010 and on 28th January  2013  was  granted  indefinite  leave  to
         remain.  Accordingly he is present and settled in the UK.   As  the
         Sponsor had separated from the Appellant's mother at  the  time  of
         his departure for the UK, arrangements were made for the  Appellant
         and her siblings to live with their paternal aunt.  The mother, due
         to overcrowding at her own residence, was unable to accommodate the
         children.  She surrendered day-to-day care to the aunt  subject  to
         the sole responsibility of the Sponsor.  Subsequent  to  taking  up
         residence in the UK the Sponsor has regularly returned to Gambia to
         facilitate  his  children's  applications  and  to  monitor   their
         situation.  When he personally applied for entry clearance he  made
         no mention of the Appellant as at that time her birth had not  been
         registered.  It was his  understanding  that  the  mention  of  his
         children were subject to proof of a birth certificate.

    (iii)    In her affidavit the aunt confirmed  that  the  children  were
         left in her care and that all the  important  decisions  concerning
         their lives with regard to their welfare, upbringing and  education
         were made by the Sponsor.  The Sponsor regularly  remitted  varying
         sums for the upkeep of the children and to pay their school fees.

3.   The Judge cited both TD [2006] UKAIT 00049 and Buydov [2012]  EWCA  Civ
    1739.  The test of whether responsibility for a child's upbringing  was
    sole was a factual matter to be decided upon  all  the  evidence.   The
    Judge accepted that the facts showed that the Sponsor was the father of
    the Appellant and  he  was  solely  responsible  for  her  despite  the
    proximity of the Appellant's mother (who was said to live  about  a  35
    minute drive away).  The Sponsor made all the  important  decisions  in
    the Appellant's life and continued to be  solely  responsible  for  her
    wellbeing.

4.   The Respondent appealed and following a hearing on 22nd October 2015  I
    indicated that I would set aside the First-tier decision in  this  case
    as the Judge had not dealt properly with the second part of TD  (Yemen)
    that in the case of a  parent  still  alive  whether  that  parent  has
    effectively abandoned the child.  The Respondent had made the point  in
    the refusal letter that even if the Appellant's mother had  surrendered
    day-to-day care to the paternal aunt that was insufficient to show that
    the  Appellant's  mother  had  abandoned  the  Appellant.   That  issue
    remained outstanding.  The Appellant needed to show  more  evidence  on
    the point of her mother's involvement than had been produced thus  far.
    I gave directions for further evidence to be adduced and the  case  was
    listed for a re-hearing.

The Proceedings in Relation to the Appellant's Sibling

5.   The Appellant had an older brother [T] born 21st March 1994.   He  made
    an application to the Respondent in January 2012 for leave to enter and
    settle in the United Kingdom as the dependent son  of  the  Sponsor  in
    this case.  That application was refused on  1st  March  2012  but  was
    reversed on appeal by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Whalan  sitting
    at Taylor House on 13th February 2013.  Judge Whalan had noted that the
    Sponsor at that time  had  three  children  in  The  Gambia;  [T],  the
    Appellant in the instant case before  me  and  another  daughter.   All
    three children had lived with the Sponsor until the  Sponsor  left  The
    Gambia in October 2010.  Judge Whalen noted that the children had  gone
    to live with the Sponsor's sister and he also noted the money transfers
    made by the Sponsor to The Gambia.

6.   Judge Whalan had before him affidavits of [T], the  paternal  aunt  who
    was looking after the children and the mother of the children. He found
    that they were consistent with the Appellant's case that  the  children
    had gone to live with their aunt and not their mother as she was unable
    to accommodate them her residence being overcrowded.  The  Judge  found
    the Sponsor to be a straightforward, clear and credible witness of fact
    who gave his written and oral evidence  consistently  without  apparent
    exaggeration or embellishment.  He found that the Sponsor had exercised
    sole responsibility for the care of [T] and allowed the  appeal.   That
    decision was relied upon in the substantive re-hearing  of  the  appeal
    before me but was not produced at the error of law hearing.

The Substantive Re-Hearing Before Me

7.   The Sponsor filed a further  statement  dated  23rd  December  2015  in
    which  he  said  that  the  Appellant's  mother   had   abdicated   her
    responsibilities.  It had been difficult when his relationship with the
    mother had ended.  She had left the children with him and moved on.  He
    only sought her consent to the  entry  clearance  application  "out  of
    respect".  In oral testimony the Sponsor explained that by  respect  he
    was referring to her position as  the  child's  mother  which  he  felt
    needed to be respected whatever  the  problems  that  he  and  she  had
    between them as adults.  His statement reiterated that his  sister  the
    paternal aunt would not take any decisions regarding the welfare of his
    children without consulting him first.  In oral testimony he  confirmed
    that his  sister  had  never  consulted  the  children's  mother.   The
    affidavit produced by the children's mother (which had been relied upon
    both in relation  to  the  proceedings  before  Judge  Whalen  and  the
    proceedings before Judge Callow) had been obtained by his  sister.   He
    himself had not been in contact with the Appellant's  mother  over  the
    obtaining of the affidavit.

8.   When he had left the children with his sister he had assured  her  that
    as soon as he was settled in the United Kingdom he would seek  to  take
    the children from her.  He had not  spoken  to  the  children's  mother
    about that.  The children's mother had moved on in her life, she had  a
    new partner.  She was not involved at all  with  the  children  between
    2007 and 2010 when he the Sponsor was still in The  Gambia.   When  the
    Appellant went to give her DNA sample she had been accompanied  by  her
    aunt the Sponsor's sister.

9.    In  cross-examination  he  was  asked  why  the  affidavit  from   the
    children's mother had said throughout that she could not look after the
    children because of accommodation problems rather than saying in  clear
    terms that she the mother had no responsibility for the children.   The
    Sponsor replied he  did  not  know  why  that  was  the  case  but  the
    children's mother spoke Wolof but the affidavit was  made  in  English.
    The Appellant did still have contact with her mother most recently over
    Christmas and New Year when the Appellant's mother came  to  visit  the
    Appellant at the paternal sister's house.

Closing Submissions

10.  In closing for the  Respondent  reliance  was  placed  on  the  refusal
    letter.  The issue was  whether  the  Sponsor  could  demonstrate  sole
    responsibility for  the  Appellant's  care.   The  affidavit  from  the
    Appellant's mother was not  given  in  the  clearest  terms  which  was
    possibly where a lot of the problems in  this  case  arose  from.   The
    decision in  relation  to  other  family  members  (for  example  Judge
    Whalen's decision) did make difficulties for the Respondent's  position
    in this case but it was clear that there was still some involvement  in
    the child's life by the Appellant's mother.

11.   In  closing  for  the  Appellant  Counsel  relied  upon  her  skeleton
    argument.  The findings of fact from the First-tier had been preserved.
     The additional evidence now provided by the  Sponsor  to  clarify  the
    issues put the matter beyond doubt.  The Tribunal  could  be  satisfied
    that the Appellant's mother had no involvement in the Appellant's life.
     Reliance was placed on the decision of Judge Whalen.  Due to  the  DNA
    evidence  the  parental  relationship  between  the  Sponsor  and   the
    Appellant was no longer disputed.  When the  relationship  between  the
    Sponsor and the Appellant's  mother  broke  down  all  three  of  their
    children went to live with the Sponsor and he was effectively a  single
    parent.  His evidence had been consistent about that  throughout.   The
    purpose of getting the affidavit from the  Appellant's  mother  was  to
    show what the  position  was.   There  was  some  contact  between  the
    Appellant and her mother on a yearly basis at the sister's house.  That
    had been stated previously.

12.  The Sponsor's evidence could be taken at face value, he had been  found
    to be credible in the earlier proceedings.  If  in  fact  the  mother's
    affidavit had been drafted in terms of the Immigration Rules  it  would
    have been criticised as being self-serving.  In any event  the  Sponsor
    himself was  not  sure  how  the  affidavit  had  been  prepared.   The
    Appellant's mother had evidently had some assistance  in  drafting  the
    affidavit but it would have been less  plausible  if  worded  in  exact
    terms.  The same wording had been  approved  by  Judge  Whalen  in  the
    earlier appeal and could be approved now.  Contact did not preclude the
    Sponsor from having sole responsibility.

The Relevant Case Law

13.  In TD (Yemen) the Upper  Tribunal  had  directed  themselves  that  the
    question of sole responsibility was a factual matter to be decided upon
    all the evidence.  Where one parent was not  involved  in  the  child's
    upbringing because he or she had abandoned or abdicated  responsibility
    the issue might arise between the remaining parent and others  who  had
    day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The test was whether  the  parent
    had continuing control of and direction  over  the  child's  upbringing
    including making all the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.
    However where both parents were involved in the child's  upbringing  it
    would be exceptional that one of them would have sole responsibility.

14.  In this case it had been found as a fact by Judge  Callow  that  whilst
    the Appellant's aunt, the Sponsor's sister, might have day-to-day  care
    of the Appellant the Sponsor had continuing control and direction  over
    the Appellant's upbringing including making all the important decisions
    in the Appellant's life.  The issue was whether the Appellant's  mother
    could be said  to  have  abandoned  or  abdicated  responsibility.   In
    arriving at their decision in TD (Yemen) the Upper Tribunal carried out
    an extensive review of the jurisprudence up to that date.  At paragraph
    44 the Tribunal suggested in  most  cases  (involving  two  parents)  a
    parent based in the child's own country would be said to have abdicated
    any responsibility for the child "by disappearing or taking no part  in
    the child's upbringing".

15.  The responsibility was shared where a child had both  parents  involved
    in its life.  It would run counter to the policy  of  family  unity  to
    admit a child for settlement where the parent abroad was caring for the
    child and involved in  its  upbringing.   (Paragraph  48).   Where  one
    parent had disappeared from the child's life  and  so  relinquished  or
    abdicated his or her responsibility for the child  the  starting  point
    must  be  that  it  is  the  remaining  active  parent  who  has   sole
    responsibility for the child.  (Paragraph 49).   At  paragraph  52  the
    Upper  Tribunal  summarised  the  approach  to  the  question  of  sole
    responsibility which was a practical obligation not a theoretical  one.
    Who in fact was exercising responsibility for the child? "If it is said
    that one of the parents was not involved in the child's upbringing  one
    of the indicators for that would be that the other  has  "abandoned  or
    abdicated his responsibility.  In such cases it may well  be  justified
    that that parent no longer has responsibility for the child".

16.  TD (Yemen) was further considered by the Court of Appeal  in  the  case
    of Buydov.  At paragraph 18 the Court of Appeal noted  that  in  a  two
    parent case the usual starting point would be  that  both  parents  had
    responsibility for the upbringing of the child.  At  paragraph  22  the
    Court of Appeal stated that it would usually  be  relevant  to  enquire
    whether one parent had wholly abdicated responsibility because if  they
    had it was much more likely that  the  other  parent  would  have  sole
    responsibility "but the converse  does  not  necessarily  follow".   In
    Buydov the Tribunal below had found that the parent not with the day-to-
    day care and control discussed the child with the  child's  mother  and
    maintained a genuine and active interest in the child's education.

Findings

17.  Applying the ratio of those two cases to the facts in the instant  case
    before me, the extent of the Appellant's mother's  involvement  in  the
    upbringing of the Appellant is to  have  occasional  contact  with  the
    Appellant at the address of the paternal aunt and some consultation for
    example over the decision to apply for entry clearance.  The  Sponsor's
    evidence was that in consulting the Appellant's mother he was motivated
    by his acknowledgement that the  Appellant's  mother  was  the  child's
    mother and that position needed to be respected.  It was not  that  she
    was consulted because that was the pattern  of  behaviour  between  the
    parents (as by contrast it had been in the  case  of  Buydov).   Whilst
    therefore it cannot be shown that the Appellant's mother has  abandoned
    the Appellant because she still figures in the Appellant's life, it  is
    fair  to  say  that  on  the  evidence  produced  she   has   abdicated
    responsibility for care of the Appellant.

18.  That was the matter which was not  conclusively  dealt  with  at  first
    instance in this appeal but which having heard the further evidence  in
    this  case  I  am  now  satisfied  about.   It  is  supportive  of  the
    Appellant's case that in previous proceedings (which do not  appear  to
    have been appealed) the Sponsor was found to be a credible witness  and
    it was found that the Appellant's mother did  not  have  responsibility
    for the Appellant's older brother [T].   That  is  persuasive  but  not
    conclusive since each case must be looked at on its own  facts  as  the
    Upper Tribunal in TD made clear.  On the  facts  in  this  case,  I  am
    satisfied that it is more likely than not that the  Appellant's  mother
    has abdicated her responsibility for the care of the Appellant and that
    day-to-day  care  is  exercised  by  the  Appellant's  aunt  under  the
    direction of the Sponsor.   The  Sponsor  can  be  said  to  have  sole
    responsibility for the Appellant within the definition of paragraph 297
    of the Immigration Rules.  That being so the Appellant's appeal against
    the decision of the Respondent falls to be allowed.  The  DNA  evidence
    shows conclusively that  the  Sponsor  is  indeed  the  father  of  the
    Appellant and I am satisfied for the reasons given  that  he  has  sole
    responsibility for the Appellant.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and I have set it aside.  I have re-made the decision  by  allowing  the
Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to  refuse  leave  to
enter.

Appellant's appeal allowed.

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing


Signed this 14th day of January 2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The Judge at first instance declined to make a fee  award  as  it  had  been
necessary for the Appellant to submit documents in  support  of  the  appeal
for it to succeed, documents that were not before the Respondent.   Although
I have re-made the decision and allowed the appeal, I see no  reason  to  go
behind the decision at first instance and I too decline to make a fee  award
in this case.


Signed this 14th day of January2016

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06468/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Taylor House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd October 2015                 |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Bassiri-Desfouli of Counsel


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The Respondent is a citizen of the Gambia born on 7th  September  2006.
    She appealed against the decision of the  Appellant  dated  30th  April
    2014 to refuse to grant indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom as
    the child of her father [FS], a citizen of Gambia with indefinite leave
    to remain in the United Kingdom ("the Sponsor") pursuant  to  paragraph
    297 of the Immigration Rules.  Her appeal was allowed at first instance
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Callow sitting at Taylor  House  on
    31st March 2015.   The  Respondent  appeals  with  leave  against  that
    decision.

2.   The issue in the case was whether the Sponsor could show  that  he  had
    had sole responsibility for the Respondent.  The Appellant in  refusing
    the application had doubted the relationship between  the  Sponsor  and
    the Respondent and had  doubted  whether  it  was  the  case  that  the
    Respondent's mother played no role in the Respondent's upbringing.

3.   The Judge  set  out  the  Respondent's  case  at  paragraph  3  of  his
    determination and at paragraph  11  said  that  those  facts  had  been
    established on a balance of probabilities.  The Sponsor was the  father
    of the Respondent and he was solely responsible  for  her  despite  the
    proximity of her mother and the fact that the Respondent lived with her
    aunt.   The  Sponsor  made  all  of  the  important  decisions  in  the
    Respondent's life and continued to be responsible for her wellbeing.

4.   The Appellant appealed against the Judge's  decision  arguing  that  he
    had failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  his  findings  on  material
    matters.  There was  no  evidence  that  the  Respondent's  mother  had
    abdicated her responsibilities for the Respondent but only that she had
    given up her residence due to overcrowding.  Nor was there any evidence
    that she had no involvement in the Respondent's  life.   That  she  had
    left the Respondent in the care of an aunt due to  overcrowding  itself
    suggested that the Respondent's mother had some involvement.  There was
    no evidence of sole responsibility held by the  Sponsor.   In  granting
    permission to appeal the First-tier found there was an  arguable  error
    of law as the Judge had made findings in  circumstances  where  it  was
    unclear as to the evidence on which those findings had  been  made.  In
    particular whether the child's mother had  any  ongoing  responsibility
    for the child was not addressed.

5.   At the error of law hearing before me it was argued  by  the  Appellant
    that there was very little evidence as to just what the set up  was  in
    the Gambia for the care of the Respondent.

6.   On behalf of the Respondent Counsel argued  that  the  grounds  seeking
    permission to appeal had raised matters  which  had  not  been  in  the
    original refusal letter from the Entry Clearance  Officer  for  example
    whether affidavits from family members should not have been  considered
    by the Judge.  The Respondent's siblings  had  been  granted  leave  to
    enter the United Kingdom following an earlier appeal hearing in another
    case at which the credibility of the relationship  was  accepted.   The
    Judge had accepted  the  Sponsor's  explanation  as  to  the  delay  in
    producing  the  Respondent's  birth  certificate.   In   response   the
    Presenting Officer stated that the Judge needed to make  clear  why  he
    had found in the Respondent's favour, one could not see that the  Judge
    had looked at all the requirements.  The earlier determination referred
    to (in relation to the Respondent's  claimed  siblings)  had  not  been
    produced.

Findings

7.   The Judge correctly directed himself that  the  relevant  authority  in
    this case was that of TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 00049. Deciding  who  was
    the person who had responsibility for a child's upbringing and  whether
    that responsibility was sole was a factual matter to  be  decided  upon
    all the evidence.  The difficulty was that the Judge did  not  properly
    consider the second part of TD (Yemen) that in the  case  of  a  parent
    still alive whether that parent has abandoned the child.   In  adopting
    his summary of the Appellant's case at paragraph 3 the Judge's  finding
    on this point was confined to what he had said at paragraph 3(ii)  that
    the Respondent's mother had surrendered day-to-day care of her "to  the
    aunt subject to the sole responsibility of the  Sponsor".   Whilst  the
    Judge summarised the aunt's affidavit that the children that is to  say
    the Respondent and the Respondent's claimed siblings were left  in  the
    aunt's care and that all important decisions were taken by the UK based
    Sponsor, the Judge did not state in terms that the Respondent's  mother
    had abandoned the Respondent.   Making  an  arrangement  with  her  ex-
    husband's relative to have day-to-day care of the  Respondent  was  not
    sufficient to be  able  to  draw  an  inference  that  the  mother  had
    abandoned the  child.   There  was  therefore  a  gap  in  the  Judge's
    reasoning which was pointed out in the grant of permission.

8.   At the conclusion of the hearing I indicated that I found an  error  of
    law and that the matter would have to be reheard at a later date in the
    Upper Tribunal.  It was not necessary for the case to be remitted  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal as there  had  already  been  a  substantial
    consideration of evidence in this case. Given  the  error  pointed  out
    above for the Respondent to be able to succeed in  her  appeal  against
    the Entry Clearance Officer's decision, she would  have  to  show  more
    evidence than has been produced thus far.  I therefore gave  directions
    as follows:

    (1)  Leave to the Appellant to adduce DNA evidence to be filed at court
         and served on the  Respondent  Entry  Clearance  Officer  at  least
         fourteen days before the next hearing.

    (2)  Leave to the Sponsor to file and serve an updated statement if  so
         advised.

    (3)  The case be listed for rehearing at the first available date  time
         estimate 2 hours.


Signed this 12th day of November 2015

.......................................................
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Woodcraft

