
IAC-FH-NL-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06298/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 April 2015                     |On 18 May 2015                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - islamabad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 mrs parwana
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Not present or represented


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan  who  resides  in
    Pakistan and was born on 1 January 1985.  She is married to  a  British
    citizen, Delawar Khan (hereafter referred to as the  sponsor)  and  has
    three children by him.  The children (born respectively in  2009,  2010
    and 2012) are also British citizens.  She applied for  entry  clearance
    for the purpose of settlement in the United Kingdom  with  the  sponsor
    but her application was refused by a decision of the ECO  dated  2  May
    2014.  The appellant was refused because she failed to comply with  the
    English language requirement of the Rules  (paragraph  E-ECP4.2).   She
    had sought exemption from the English language requirement  on  account
    of a medical condition (brain abscesses).  The ECO  was  not  satisfied
    that the condition was such as to exempt her from the English  language
    requirement.

 2. The appellant appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Kershaw)
    which, in a determination promulgated on 22 January 2015,  allowed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).  The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 3. In granting  permission,  Judge  Shimmin,  summarised  the  grounds  as
    follows:

         "The grounds requesting permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
         argue that the judge does not attach weight to the  fact  that  the
         appellant does not satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM  of  the
         Immigration Rules and therefore fails to give weight to the  public
         interest   considerations   weighing   against    the    appellant.
         Furthermore, no adequate reasons are given  for  finding  that  the
         decision is disproportionate."

 4.  The  appellant  was  represented  by  Counsel  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Her solicitors (Kothala & Co)  were  duly  served  with  the
    notice of hearing by first class post on 16 April  2015.   The  sponsor
    was also served at his address in London.  There is nothing on the file
    to indicate that Kothala & Co have ceased to act for the appellant  nor
    is there anything to indicate that the notices of hearing addressed  to
    the solicitors and the sponsor did not reach their intended recipients.
     In the absence of any or any proper explanation for the absence of the
    sponsor and/or the solicitors, I decided to proceed with the hearing in
    any event.

 5. Having heard the submissions of Mr Avery, I reserved my  determination.



 6. The judge in the First-tier Tribunal considered  the  question  of  the
    English language test [19].  He noted that the appellant had attended a
    hospital for three days in July 2013 and had then been discharged.   He
    noted the contents of the hospital report and the diagnosis.   However,
    at [22], he found:

         "I can see nothing within this document [the medical  report]  that
         would satisfy the burden [the appellant] is under to show that  she
         is unable to learn another language.  The memory loss  referred  to
         appears to be linked to the epileptic fit she suffered and  coupled
         with the evidence of the sponsor appears to be short lived."

 7.  The judge declined to draw the inference urged upon her by Counsel for
    the appellant that the appellant was, as a consequence of  her  medical
    condition, unable to satisfy the English language test requirement.

 8. The judge went on to consider Appendix FM and in particular  EX.1.   He
    acknowledged that the EX.1 did not apply in the case of leave to  enter
    the United Kingdom (as opposed to leave  to  remain).   Correctly,  the
    judge found that the appellant could not rely upon EX.1.

 9. The judge then considered Article 8 ECHR.  At [32] the judge set out  a
    number of factors which he considered rendered the decision  to  refuse
    entry clearance disproportionate.  He noted that the sponsor could  not
    live in Afghanistan, a country from which he had fled as a refugee.  He
    noted that the sponsor could visit the family if he were to  travel  to
    Pakistan, that he could do so "without too much trouble."

10. Although the judge has considered in detail the difficulties  currently
    facing this family, he has, in my opinion, attached  inadequate  weight
    to the public interest concerned with the refusal of this  application.
    As regards the public interest, he says  nothing  more  at  [32]  that,
    "maintaining effective immigration control is a very important factor."
     He then brushes aside the public interest by noting that "however  one
    has to look here at the overall effect of not  allowing  the  appellant
    into the UK for settlement with her children."  Part of  that  "overall
    effect" is the effect of allowing the appellant  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom when she was unable to comply  with  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  As in all cases, the  public  interest  engaged  in
    this appeal should have been be particularised and considered in detail
    in a manner specific to the facts of the case.  The judge has failed to
    do that.  Further, guidance is now offered by the Court of Appeal in SS
    (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387.  The judge in the First-tier Tribunal  did
    not, of course, have regard to SS (Congo) which has only recently  been
    decided.  However, the legal principles which it contains are  relevant
    here, in particular what is said at [40]:

         "In the light of these authorities, we consider that the state  has
         a wider margin of appreciation in determining the conditions to  be
         satisfied before LTE is granted, by contrast with the  position  in
         relation to decisions  regarding  LTR  for  persons  with  a  (non-
         precarious) family life already established in the United  Kingdom.
         The Secretary of State has already, in effect,  made  some  use  of
         this wider margin of appreciation by excluding section  EX.1  as  a
         basis for grant of LTE, although it is available  as  a  basis  for
         grant of LTR. The LTE Rules therefore maintain, in general terms, a
         reasonable relationship with the requirements of Article 8  in  the
         ordinary run of cases. However,  it  remains  possible  to  imagine
         cases where the individual interests at stake are of a particularly
         pressing nature so that a good claim for  LTE  can  be  established
         outside the Rules. In our view, the appropriate general formulation
         for this category is that such cases will arise where an  applicant
         for LTE can show that compelling circumstances exist (which are not
         sufficiently recognised under the new Rules) to require  the  grant
         of such leave."

11. There is nothing to  indicate  that  the  judge  identified  compelling
    circumstances in this instance or  that  he  properly  considered  that
    public interest concerned with denying the appellant  entry  clearance.
    The judge also failed to have any regard to the provisions  of  Section
    117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002:

         '(2) It is in the public interest, and in particular the  interests
             of the economic wellbeing of the United Kingdom, that  persons
             who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able  to
             speak English, because persons who can speak English -

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.'

12. In the circumstances, I consider the judge's analysis to be inadequate.
     I therefore set aside his determination.

13. Mr Avery, for the ECO, did not seek to cast any doubt upon  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's summary of the various problems currently  facing  this
    family.  However, the family remain separated essentially  because  the
    appellant is unable to speak English.  Not only is speaking  English  a
    requirement of the  Rules  it  is  also,  as  I  have  noted  above,  a
    requirement in meeting the public interest  in  all  cases  as  is  now
    outlined in Section  117B.   I  agree  with  Judge  Kershaw  that  this
    appellant has no excuse for failing to learn to speak English.  She has
    had a brief medical episode which the First-tier Tribunal quite rightly
    decided did not exempt her from taking and passing the English language
    test.  There appears to be  no  medical  or  other  impediment  to  her
    studying English and passing the required test.  The fact that  success
    or failure in a future application for leave to enter rests entirely on
    the  appellant's  own  hands  is,  in   my   opinion,   a   significant
    consideration in this case.  She has not been asked  to  overcome  some
    insuperable obstacle nor are there financial hurdles  which  might,  in
    practical terms, be impossible to overcome.  Whilst I fully acknowledge
    both the difficulties currently faced by this family and the obligation
    on the United Kingdom Government to respect (as opposed  to  refraining
    from interfering with)  family  life,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    decision  to  refuse  her  entry  clearance  is  disproportionate.    I
    therefore re-make the decision by  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer.

DECISION

14. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 20  January
    2015 is set aside.  I re-made the  decision.   The  appellant's  appeal
    against the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer dated 2 May 2014 is
    dismissed both under the Immigration Rules and on human rights  grounds
    (Article 8 ECHR).



Signed   Date 5 May 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

