
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06038/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2015                    |On 21 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L MURRAY


                                   Between

                                RABEYA BEGUM
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bashir, Bashir Consultancy
For the Respondent:    Mr Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is Bangladeshi national. She was born on 17 May 1991. She
    appealed against the decision of an entry clearance  officer  dated  16
    April 2014 refusing her a certificate of entitlement to  the  right  of
    abode under section 2 of the Immigration Act 1971. Her appeal was heard
    on 18 February 2015 and dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge T  Jones
    in a decision promulgated on 31 March 2015. The matter now comes before
    the Upper Tribunal to  determine  whether  the  decision  involved  the
    making of a material error of law and if so what to do.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by  First-tier  Judge  Heynes  on  the
    basis that it was arguable that inadequate reasons had  been  given  by
    the First-tier Tribunal for the findings reached.  The first ground  of
    appeal argues that given that the First-tier Tribunal  found  that  the
    DNA evidence supported the fact that the Appellant was the child of the
    UK sponsor; that he was domiciled in Bangladesh and that he  was  in  a
    polygamous marriage at the time of the  Appellant's  birth  the  appeal
    should have been allowed. The remaining grounds of appeal set  out  law
    and policy in relation to domicile and polygamous marriages and  assert
    that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take this into account.

 3. The Respondent argues in the  Rule  24  response  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal directed itself appropriately and applied the correct standard
    of proof. The Respondent further argues that the grounds have no  merit
    and merely disagree with the adverse  outcome  of  the  appeal  without
    identifying an error of law.

 4. The First-tier's conclusions  are  set  out  at  paragraph  10  of  the
    decision. The First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    discharge the burden of proof and rely on the  findings  of  First-tier
    Judge Elvidge in a  previous  determination  in  respect  of  the  same
    Appellant. In that determination  Judge  Elvidge  found  that  the  DNA
    evidence supported the claimed parentage; that the Appellant's  father,
    Mr Kolomdor Ali, was domiciled in Bangladesh  and  that  he  was  in  a
    polygamous marriage (permitted  in  Bangladesh)  at  the  time  of  the
    Appellant's birth. First-tier Judge T Jones  adopted  the  findings  at
    paragraph 23 of Judge Elvidge's determination that  the  Appellant  was
    not recognised as legitimate at birth and as she was born before 1 July
    2006  did  not  benefit  from  the  provisions  of  section  9  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

Error of law

 5. Mr Jarvis informed me at the hearing that the  Respondent  agreed  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had made a material error of law.  In  deciding
    that the Appellant was not a legitimate child, the First-tier  Tribunal
    had failed  to  consider  the  validity  of  the  Appellant's  parent's
    marriage by reference to the country of her  father's  domicile,  which
    had been found by the First-tier Tribunal to be Bangladesh. He  invited
    me to set aside the decision and remake  it  allowing  the  Appellant's
    appeal. Mr Bashir had no objection to this course.

 6.  By  virtue  of  Regulation  6  of  the  Immigration  (Certificate   of
    Entitlement to Right of Abode in the United Kingdom)  Regulations  2006
    one of the conditions for the issue of a certificate of entitlement  is
    that the applicant has a right of abode in the UK under section  2  (1)
    of the Immigration Act 1971, which provides that a person  is  to  have
    the right of abode in the UK if she is a British Citizen. The basis  of
    the Appellant's claim to be a British Citizen rests on section 2 (1) of
    the British Nationality Act which provides that

         'A  person  born  outside  the  United  Kingdom   ...   after   the
         commencement shall be a British citizen if at the time of the birth
         his father or mother -

             (a) is a British citizen otherwise than by descent ...'

 7. The Appellant's claim is on the basis of descent from  Mr  Komodor  Ali
    who, as was accepted by Judge Elvidge, was  properly  registered  as  a
    British citizen in 1971 and became a British citizen under  section  11
    (1) of the British Nationality Act 1981. The definition of  father  for
    the purposes of section 2 (1) of the British Nationality Act  is  found
    in section 50 (9) of the 1981 Act prior to its amendment. The amendment
    only applies to children born after 1 July  2006  and  hence  does  not
    apply to the Appellant.

 8. In its pre-amended form, under the heading 'Legitimacy of  child',  the
    section read "... (b) subject to section 47, the relationship of father
    and child shall be taken to exist only between a man and any legitimate
    child born to him; and the expressions  "mother",  "father",  "parent",
    "child" and "descended" shall be construed accordingly."

 9. The Appellant, in order to succeed in her appeal, had to prove that she
    was a legitimate child of Mr Ali. The First-tier  Tribunal  found  that
    she  was  not  legitimate  at  birth  because  the  marriage  with  the
    Appellant's mother was a polygamous one and was not recognised  by  the
    law of the UK. However, the First-tier Tribunal failed to take  account
    of the effect of section 11 of the Matrimonial Causes  Act  1973  which
    states that a polygamous marriage entered into outside the UK  is  void
    under English law  if  either  of  the  parties  to  the  marriage  was
    domiciled in England and Wales at the time of the marriage. The  First-
    tier Tribunal found at paragraph  10  that  Mr  Ali  was  domiciled  in
    Bangladesh. The First-tier Tribunal made this finding on the  basis  of
    the findings of Judge Elvidge that Mr Ali left the UK in 1988  to  live
    in Bangladesh, married in 1989 and only returned to the UK in  1991  to
    renew his passport. In the light of these findings, and as acknowledged
    by Mr Jarvis for the Respondent, the First-tier  Tribunal  should  have
    allowed the appeal as the marriage was a valid one  and  the  Appellant
    therefore the legitimate child of Mr Ali.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005  and  on  the
evidence before me there are no grounds for making such an order.


Signed      Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray
