
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06653/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral decision given immediately following    |                              |
|the hearing on                               |                              |
|20 June 2016                                 |04 August 2016                |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG
                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                      Bahy Mohamed Fathallah badreldin
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Hurley, Counsel instructed by Biscoes
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a national of Egypt who was born  on  7  August  1945.
    He applied for entry clearance on the basis of  his  relationship  with
    his daughter, a British national and that application was considered by
    the Respondent under paragraph  317  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    application was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer  ("ECO")  on  17
    March 2015 on the basis that he was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant
    had demonstrated that he was wholly or mainly dependent on  a  relative
    present  and  settled  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  he  was  still  in
    employment.

2.   The Appellant appealed that decision under s82 (1) of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  requested  that  his  appeal  be
    determined without an  oral  hearing.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox
    dismissed his appeal in a decision promulgated on  23  September  2015.
    The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    and permission was granted on 18 May 2016 by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Grant-Hutchinson  on  the  grounds  that  the  Respondent  should  have
    considered the application under Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules
    and not paragraph 317 of the Rules. In granting permission Judge Grant-
    Hutchinson found that it was arguable that had the correct  application
    of the  Immigration  Rules  been  considered  by  the  Respondent,  the
    Appellant could have submitted relevant documents for consideration and
    not the evidence relied upon by the Judge in reaching his decision. She
    considered that it was arguable that this made a material difference to
    the outcome or fairness of the proceedings.

     The Grounds

3.   The grounds contend that the First-tier Tribunal  acknowledged  in  its
    decision that the Respondent should  have  considered  the  application
    under Appendix FM  but  that  the  mistake  had  not  been  taken  into
    consideration. Had the application been considered under  Appendix  FM,
    any additional  relevant  documents  would  have  been  submitted.  The
    Appellant claims to need daily family care after the death of his  wife
    and that he  requires  long-term  care  to  do  everyday  personal  and
    household tasks due to his age and health conditions.  He  states  that
    his family in the UK are able to look after him and that  he  struggled
    to do his job and that the fact that he was working did not  mean  that
    he was capable of living alone after the death of his wife.

     The Hearing

4.   Mr Hurley relied on his skeleton argument. He  sought  to  rely  on  an
    unreported case in relation to the construction of the adult  dependent
    relative provisions  of  Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  We
    reminded him of paragraph  11.1  of  the  Practice  Directions  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chambers of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
    Upper Tribunal which provides that  a  determination  of  the  Tribunal
    which has not been reported may not be cited in proceedings before  the
    Tribunal unless the Tribunal gives permission. He had not complied with
    the formalities of that paragraph and identified  the  proposition  for
    which  the  determination  was  to  be  cited  or  certified  that  the
    proposition was not to be found in any reported determination  and  had
    not been superseded by higher authority. Paragraph 11.3  provides  that
    permission will only be given where  the  Tribunal  considers  that  it
    would be materially assisted by the citation of the  determination,  as
    distinct from the adoption in argument of the reasoning to be found  in
    the determination. Such instances are said to be likely to be rare  and
    that it will be rare for such an argument to be capable of  being  made
    only by reference to an unreported determination.   Mr  Hurley  decided
    that he could make his argument without  reference  to  the  unreported
    decision.

5.   He submitted that the key point was that there was  a  technical  error
    of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The ECO had  applied
    the wrong Rule and the appropriate course of action should have been to
    remit the matter to the Secretary of State for a proper decision to  be
    made.  There was no  assessment  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal of what amounted to care and no application of Appendix FM.

6.   Mr Jarvis submitted that paragraph 317 of  the  Immigration  Rules  had
    limited applicability  and  the  correct  route  was  Appendix  FM  and
    Appendix FM-SE which set out demanding Rules. There seemed to have been
    some communication between the Appellant and ECO  before  the  decision
    was made. The Appellant could not meet the requirements  of  the  adult
    dependent relative route.  The Appellant had to show that there was  no
    one who could provide care. The Judge was entitled to apply the correct
    rule.  Judge Fox had gone on to look at the correct  Rule  under  which
    the application could never have succeeded. His application  was  based
    on potential future needs. In other words it was  made  too  soon.  The
    Rules were clear. The Appellant did not take the fullest advice and the
    only conclusion that the Judge could have reached was that the case was
    not made out. The grounds did not engage with Appendix FM-SE  and  show
    that the evidence was there. There was a  procedural  disadvantage  but
    the Appellant knew what the  appropriate  route  was.  He  should  have
    produced the documentary evidence and where there  was  any  unfairness
    that could have been remedied.  No  material  evidence  produced.   The
    Appellant would have been in the same position in any event. He was not
    aware of the requirements of Appendix FM-SE but there was an absence of
    materiality.

7.   Mr Hurley replied that the care could only be provided by  his  family.
    What this Appellant needed was  his  family  and  the  Judge  did  have
    medical evidence and evidence of the depression.

8.   We invited submissions on whether the matter should be remitted to  the
    Respondent or reheard if we were to find an error of  law.   Mr  Hurley
    submitted that the matter should be remitted to the Respondent  and  Mr
    Jarvis argued that the matter  should  be  reheard  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Discussion and Findings

9.   We find that there is an error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for the following  reasons.  The  Appellant  applied  for
    entry clearance as the dependant of his daughter.  His  application  is
    dated 18 January 2015 and therefore the ECO should have considered  the
    application under Appendix  FM  of  the  Immigration  Rules  which  was
    introduced in July 2012. The First-tier Tribunal noted that the ECO had
    applied the wrong rule at paragraph 8 of the decision.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal's reasoning and conclusions are set out at paragraphs 10 to 13
    of the decision:

    "10. Upon the available evidence  the  appellant  does  not  appear  to
         satisfy the ADR criteria. He lives alone and the  sponsor  and  her
         brother are both in full-time employment in the  UK.  It  therefore
         follows that the appellant's relatives do not provide care for  his
         daily needs and  there  is  no  reliable  evidence  to  demonstrate
         whether any individual, other than the appellant, provides care for
         the appellant's daily needs.
    11.   The  appellant  maintains  employment  status  to  preserve   his
         residency and entitlements to health  care.  It  is  reasonable  to
         conclude that the appellant's application is based  upon  potential
         future needs as demonstrated  by  the  undated  letter  written  by
         Doctor S Badreddin.
    12.  The appellant's son confirmed in his letter  dated  2  March  2015
         that  the  appellant  withheld  material   information   from   his
         application and that the appellant's son also wishes  to  volunteer
         information in a surreptitious manner. This  does  not  assist  the
         respondent to make a  reasoned  decision  based  upon  the  limited
         evidence made available to her.
    13.  There remains the anomaly of the  respondent's  requests  for  the
         appellant to withdraw the application. This is outside my remit and
         I confine myself to the evidence appertaining to the relevant date.
         If I am wrong to find that  the  appellant  does  not  satisfy  the
         Immigration Rules in accordance with ADR I direct that  the  matter
         is returned to the respondent  to  reconsider  the  application  in
         accordance with the appropriate Immigration Rule."

10.  In CP (Section86 (3) and (5); wrong rule) Dominica [2006]  UKAIT  00040
    the Upper Tribunal held that where an Entry Clearance  Officer  applies
    the wrong rule,  the  resulting  immigration  decision  is  technically
    unlawful.  However,  subject  to  the  requirements  of  fairness,   an
    immigration officer should apply the  correct  rule  when  deciding  an
    appeal. If the appellant satisfies  the  requirements  of  the  correct
    rule, the appeal will be allowed in full under s 86  (3)  of  the  2002
    Act. If any (or all) of the requirements are not satisfied, the  appeal
    will be dismissed in substance under s 86 (5). However, the appeal will
    be allowed in part under s 86  (3)  to  the  limited  extent  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law.

11.  The Upper Tribunal in CP explored the circumstances where the  Tribunal
    would be unable or could not fairly proceed to determine the appeal  on
    the basis of the correct immigration rule at paragraph 22:

         "It  may  be  that  because  of  the  decision-making  process  the
         Immigration Judge lacks the relevant evidence upon  which  to  make
         his decision. For example, recourse to  evidence  relevant  to  the
         correct rule - particularly where its requirements differ from  the
         rule actually applied - may  be  impossible  in  an  out-of-country
         appeal where the appellant is not represented or where there is  no
         appeal hearing because it is a 'paper case'......In cases  of  this
         sort, the only proper course of action for  the  Immigration  Judge
         will be to allow the appeal as not being  in  accordance  with  the
         law. The appeal will be allowed to the effect that the  appellant's
         application remains outstanding and there will be a direction  that
         the decision-maker considers it correctly under the Rules. This  is
         because, in contrast to the situation in paragraph 20 above (and in
         this case), the fault cannot be cured by the  findings  within  the
         appellate process."

12.   We  consider  that  this  is  precisely  the   situation   here.   The
    requirements of section EC-DR are  stringent  and  without  doubt  more
    onerous and difficult to satisfy than the requirements of paragraph 317
    of the Immigration Rules. The applicant is required to demonstrate that
    he or she requires as a result of age, illness or disability  long-term
    personal care to perform everyday tasks. Further,  the  applicant  must
    demonstrate that he or she is  unable,  even  with  the  practical  and
    financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care  in
    the country where they are living because it is not available and there
    is no person in that country who can reasonably provide it or it is not
    affordable.  Those  requirements   are   supplemented   by   evidential
    requirements set out at paragraphs 33 to 37  of  Appendix  FM-SE  which
    require inter alia evidence of the applicant's inability to obtain  the
    required level of  care  in  his  own  country  to  be  from  a  health
    professional.

13.  It is clear from the grounds of appeal  that  the  Appellant,  although
    unrepresented, knew that the ECO had applied the wrong  rule  and  that
    the correct one was  EC-DR.  He  makes  reference  to  the  application
    guidelines on the Respondent's website in his grounds  of  appeal.   He
    submitted medical evidence in the form of a letter from a Professor  of
    Medicine and from a consultant radiologist as well as a record  of  his
    treatments. He was clearly not aware however, of the entire case  under
    EC-DR that he would have to meet as the evidence does  not  address  or
    purport to address the requirements of Appendix  FM-SE.  The  Appellant
    was not represented and this was a paper case. In the circumstances  we
    conclude that the First-tier Tribunal should have found that he  lacked
    the relevant evidence in relation to the Appellant through no fault  of
    the Appellant. We consider that the error was material. The Appellant's
    case under EC-DR was not unarguable. We therefore  conclude  that  this
    was a fault that was not capable of being cured by findings within  the
    appellate process and the First-tier Tribunal therefore erred in law in
    failing to allow the appeal as being not in accordance with the law.

Notice of decision


    We set aside the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  and  remake  the
    decision. This appeal is allowed to the  extent  that  the  application
    remains outstanding before the ECO and we  direct  that  the  decision-
    maker considers it properly under section EC-DR of Appendix FM.

    No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Dated 27 July 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L Murray
