

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number: OA/06122/2013
                                                               OA/06118/2013
                                                               OA/06125/2013
                                                               OA/06121/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 March 2014                              |On 19 May 2014               |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - HAVANA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    AGDP
                                C De Las MMT
                                    ALMG
                                     OMG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms C Grubb instructed by Hoole & Co Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order made  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal pursuant to rule  45(4)(i)  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
      Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 (SI 2005/230).  Neither party  invited
      us to rescind the order and we continue it pursuant to rule 14 of  the
      Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698).

Introduction

   2. This appeal raises the issue of  whether  under  the  'refugee  family
      reunion' rule in para  352D  of  the  Immigration  Rules  (HC  395  as
      amended) the second appellant can properly be described as having been
      "part of the family unit" of the sponsor, her father at the time  that
      he left Cuba to claim asylum in the UK.

   3. Although this is  an  appeal  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  for
      convenience we will refer to the parties in this determination as they
      appeared before the First-tier Tribunal.

   4. The background to this appeal is as follows.  The first  appellant  is
      the partner of the sponsor.  The third and fourth appellants are their
      children.  They are all citizens of Cuba.  The second appellant is the
      child of the sponsor but not of the first appellant.  She was born  on
      21 September 1999 as a result of a  casual  relationship  between  the
      sponsor and her mother.  She is also a citizen of Cuba.

   5. The sponsor, who is also a citizen of Cuba, arrived in the  UK  on  21
      February 2007 in transit to Russia. He remained in the UK and in  2010
      he  was  arrested  by  immigration  officers  whilst  working   in   a
      restaurant.  He successfully made an  asylum  claim  and  was  granted
      refugee status on 20 May 2012.

   6. All four appellants made applications for entry clearance to join  the
      sponsor as a refugee in the UK under para 352AA (in the  case  of  the
      first appellant) and para 352D (in the case of the second,  third  and
      fourth  appellants).   On  23  January  2013,  the  ECO  refused  each
      appellant's application.  They appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

The First-tier Tribunal's Decision

   7. In a determination promulgated on  26  November  2013,  Judge  Harries
      allowed all four  appellants'  appeals.   In  relation  to  the  first
      appellant, she was satisfied that the relationship between her and the
      sponsor was a genuine one and that their relationship  existed  before
      the sponsor left Cuba to claim asylum. In relation to  the  third  and
      fourth appellants, Judge Harries accepted that they had lived together
      with the sponsor and first appellant as part of the sponsor's  "family
      unit" at the time that he left Cuba to claim asylum.

   8. In relation to the second appellant, Judge Harries also found that she
      was part of the sponsor's "family unit" before he left Cuba  to  claim
      asylum despite her not living full-time with the sponsor.   She  lived
      with her mother although she spent  weekends  and  holidays  with  the
      sponsor, first appellant and their two children.  The Judge's  reasons
      for allowing the second appellant's  appeal  are  at  paras  26-28  as
      follows:

           "26.  ...I have taken full account of the  submissions  for  the
                 respondent in relation to the second appellant.  I am asked
                 to dismiss her appeal  because  she  has  been  part  of  a
                 separate family unit and not within that of the sponsor.  I
                 reject this submission.   I  find  the  sponsor's  evidence
                 credible and accept that he has  taken  responsibility  for
                 the second appellant from the outset  supporting  her  both
                 emotionally and financially as  her  father.   The  sponsor
                 gives evidence of how close this appellant is to his  other
                 daughters, who are very close in age to  her,  and  of  her
                 inclusion in his family unit in Cuba.

           27.   I  am  satisfied  that  the  sponsor  gives  a  reasonable
                 explanation for the second appellant wishing to unite  with
                 him in the United Kingdom, leaving her mother and  siblings
                 in Cuba.  I find that the ECO has not  properly  approached
                 this appellant's application by refusing it because she had
                 not been residing with the sponsor at any point  before  he
                 left the country.  That is not the requirement of the Rule;
                 the issue is whether she was part of the  sponsor's  family
                 unit at the relevant time and I am satisfied that she  was.



           28.   There is case law which  establishes  that  the  issue  of
                 whether a child was the member of the refugee's family unit
                 is a question of fact and does not necessarily depend  upon
                 them having ever lived together.   I  take  account  of  BM
                 (Columbia)   [2007]   UKIAT   in   adopting   a   purposive
                 construction of the Rules having regard to the principle of
                 refugee family unity.  The appeal of the  second  appellant
                 succeeds..."

   9. The Entry Clearance Officer accepted the Judge's decision  in  respect
      of the first, third and fourth appellants.  However,  the  ECO  sought
      permission to challenge the Judge's decision in respect of the  second
      appellant on the basis that she erred  in  law  in  finding  that  the
      second appellant was "part of the family unit" of the sponsor prior to
      him coming to the UK.

  10. On 18 December 2013, the First-tier Tribunal (DJ J  M  Lewis)  granted
      the Entry Clearance Officer permission to appeal.   Thus,  the  appeal
      came before us.

Paragraph 352D

  11. The applicable  Immigration  Rule  is  para  352D  which  provides  as
      follows:

           "352D.      The requirements to be met by a person seeking leave
           to enter or remain in the United Kingdom in  order  to  join  or
           remain with the parent who is currently a refugee granted status
           as such under the immigration rules in the  United  Kingdom  are
           that the applicant:

                  i) is the child of a parent who is  currently  a  refugee
                     granted status as such under the immigration rules  in
                     the United Kingdom; and

                 ii) is under the age of 18, and

                iii) is not leading an independent life, is  unmarried  and
                     is  not  a  civil  partner,  and  has  not  formed  an
                     independent family unit; and

                 iv) was part of the family  unit  of  the  person  granted
                     asylum at the time that the person granted asylum left
                     the country of his habitual residence in order to seek
                     asylum; and

                  v) would not be excluded from  protection  by  virtue  of
                     article  1F  of  the  United  Nations  Convention  and
                     Protocol relating to the Status of Refugees if he were
                     to seek asylum in his own right; and

                 vi) if seeking  leave  to  enter,  holds  a  valid  United
                     Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this capacity."

The Issue

  12. The primary facts as found by Judge Harries are not in dispute.

               i) the second appellant has never lived full-time  with  the
                  sponsor in Cuba.  She principally lived with her mother;

              ii) the sponsor and the appellant's mother have  never  lived
                  together;

             iii) the sponsor  has  supported  the  second  appellant  both
                  financially and emotionally since she was born;

              iv) the second appellant has a close  relationship  with  the
                  sponsor and also the other  appellants.   The  third  and
                  fourth appellants - the daughters of the first  appellant
                  and sponsor -  are  very  close  in  age  to  the  second
                  appellant;

               v) the second appellant always spent weekends  and  holidays
                  with the sponsor and other appellants in Cuba;

              vi) since the sponsor left Cuba,  the  second  appellant  has
                  continued to spend weekends and holidays with  the  other
                  appellants.

  13. The crucial issue concerns para 352D(iv) and whether Judge Harries was
      entitled to conclude on these accepted facts that the second appellant
      was "part of the family unit" of her father before  he  left  Cuba  to
      claim asylum in the UK.

The Submissions

  14. On behalf of the ECO, Mr Richards submitted that a distinction had  to
      be drawn between "family" and a "family unit".   He  relied  upon  the
      decision of the AIT in BM and AL (352D(iv); Meaning of "Family  Unit")
      Colombia [2007] UKAIT 0055, especially at [28].  He submitted  that  a
      purposive interpretation of the Rules would militate against  a  grant
      of entry clearance because it could not be a purpose of the  Rules  to
      take a young child away from a mother who had had her care when  there
      was no evidence  of  her  inability  to  look  after  the  child.   He
      submitted that it cannot be a purpose of  the  family  unity  rule  to
      apply it so as to divide a family.

  15. On behalf of the second appellant, Ms Grubb submitted  that  the  rule
      should be given its ordinary and natural meaning and  that  a  "family
      unit" meant precisely what it said,  namely  it  was  a  family  which
      formed a unit.  She submitted that that issue was a  factual  question
      which the Judge had determined in the second appellant's  favour.   It
      was relevant, she  submitted,  to  take  into  account  financial  and
      emotional support,  contact  time,  the  extent  of  integration  into
      another family unit and the extent of integration into the family that
      is claimed to form a unit.  She submitted that there was evidence from
      the second appellant's mother (at page  99  of  the  original  bundle)
      supporting the second appellant travelling  to  the  UK  to  join  her
      father.  She submitted that the parents were in the best  position  to
      determine who should bring up  the  second  appellant  and  where  she
      should reside and  there  was  nothing  in  the  material  before  the
      Tribunal to suggest that it was not in  the  second  appellant's  best
      interests to join the sponsor.  She submitted that there  was  nothing
      in para 352D requiring the Tribunal to look beyond the wording of  the
      Rule when it said nothing about the need for parental consent  or  the
      issue of the best interests of the child.

Discussion

  16. The only authority to which we were referred on  the  meaning  of  the
      phrase "part of the family unit" was the AIT's decision in BM and  AL.
      In that case, the children of the sponsor, who was a  refugee  in  the
      UK, sought entry clearance under para 352D  on  the  basis  that  they
      formed part of his "family unit"  before  he  left  Colombia  to  seek
      asylum in the UK.  The facts of that case have some  similar  features
      to the present one.  There, the sponsor  lived  with,  and  eventually
      married, a woman and together they had a son and  daughter  who  lived
      with them.  The appellants were  the  sponsor's  children  born  as  a
      result of extra-marital  affairs.   They  had  never  lived  with  the
      sponsor either together with their  respective  mothers  or  with  the
      sponsor's wife.  There was, however, evidence that there was  a  close
      relationship between the sponsor and the appellants.  The  AIT  upheld
      the Immigration Judge's finding that the appellant had not lived  with
      the sponsor, their father as part of his "family unit".   In  reaching
      that decision, the AIT offered some guidance as to the meaning of  the
      phrase "part of the family unit".

  17. First, the AIT, having referred to the UNHCR Handbook stated that  (at
      [23]):

           "The policy of these provisions  is  indeed  to  promote  family
           reunion."

  18. At [25], the AIT rejected the argument that in order to form  part  of
      an individual's "family unit" it was necessary that they  should  live
      in the same household.  Hodge J  (President)  concluded  that  whether
      individuals formed a "family unit" was a factual question.   At  [25],
      Hodge J said this:

           "We accept that if the phrase "family unit" were to  be  limited
           to children who were living in the same household as  an  asylum
           seeker prior to his leaving his country  of  habitual  residence
           then the Rules could have said  so.   We  acknowledge  that  the
           concept of a family is very wide and depends  crucially  on  the
           context in which the word  is  used.   Ascendant  or  descendant
           relatives, uncles, aunts and cousins are  always  likely  to  be
           regarded as members of the same family.  Whether they form  part
           of a family unit will depend very much on the facts.... "

  19. Hodge J then went on to consider the situation where, perhaps  arising
      out of divorce, a child's time was split between his parents.  He said
      this (again at [25]):

           "... a so-called nuclear family is highly likely to be a  family
           unit.  The child of divorced parents who spends the bulk of  his
           time with his mother and otherwise has regular contact with  his
           father is certain to  be  part  of  the  mother's  family  unit.
           Whether at the same time he  can  be  regarded  a  part  of  the
           father's family unit will depend very  much  on  the  particular
           facts of the case".

  20. Hodge J returned to the situation where the parents of a  child  lived
      apart at [27]-[28] as follows:

           "27.  We regard the issue as to what is a "family unit" for  the
                 purposes of para 352D(iv) as a question of fact.   In  many
                 cases it will be clear that a child was part  of  a  family
                 unit with an asylum  seeker  in  his  country  of  habitual
                 residence.  The child  will  have  lived  with  the  asylum
                 seeker and perhaps another partner.  Alternatively if there
                 has been separation the reason for that separation may well
                 be associated with the claim of  persecution  and  a  child
                 might still remain part of the family unit from  which  the
                 potential refugee had been temporarily separated.  Here  no
                 such claim is made.

           28.   If on the other hand  the  separation  is  the  result  of
                 social choice by the parties and  a  separate  family  unit
                 based  upon   the   mother   is   created,   it   will   be
                 correspondingly harder to establish  that  a  child  is  in
                 reality a part of two different family units.  This will be
                 especially so if the child is  young  and  the  consequence
                 will be separation from the mother rather than family unity
                 as envisaged by the UNHCR handbook."

  21. Mr Richards, on behalf of the ECO relies, in particular, on [28] of BM
      and AL.

  22. Finally, the AIT again expressed concern about the situation where the
      effect of para 352D would be to separate a child from a mother in  the
      country of origin in order to join the father in  the  UK.   At  [26],
      Hodge J said this:

           "In this  case  the  purpose  of  preserving  family  unity  was
           promoted and implemented by the decision at the request  of  the
           sponsor father to allow [his wife and their two sons] with  whom
           the appellant had co-habited in Colombia to come to  the  United
           Kingdom  as  part  of  his  family  unit.   There  was  no  such
           application at that time in respect of the  two  appellants  who
           were held by the Immigration Judge  to  have  lived  with  their
           mothers.  The Immigration Rules  are  understandably  silent  on
           whether it is right to promote a position where a  child  leaves
           one undeniable family unit with his mother to join his father in
           the United Kingdom simply on the  basis  that  the  child  is  a
           minor.  Wide ranging child care and child protection issues  are
           likely to arise  where  a  decision  to  grant  entry  clearance
           potentially lead to the break up  of  a  different  pre-existing
           family unit in the country of origin."

  23. We have not found this issue to be an easy  one.   In  principle,  the
      correct approach to the  construction  of  para  352D  is  clear.   In
      Odelola v SSHD [2009] UKHL 25, Lord Hoffmann at [4]  stated  that  the
      correct interpretation of a rule:

           "...depends upon the language of the rule, construed against the
           relevant background.   That  involves  a  consideration  of  the
           Immigration Rules as a whole and the function which  they  serve
           in the administration of policy."

  24. In Mahad v ECO [2009] UKSC 16, Lord Brown said at [10]:

           "The Rules are not to  be  construed  with  all  the  strictness
           applicable to the construction  of  a  statute  or  a  statutory
           instrument but, instead, sensibly according to the  natural  and
           ordinary meaning of the words used, recognising  that  they  are
           statements  of   the   Secretary   of   State's   administrative
           policy....The court's task is to discover from the words used in
           the Rules what the Secretary of State  must  be  taken  to  have
           intended."

  25. In ZN (Afghanistan) v Entry Clearance Officer  [2010]  UKSC  21,  Lord
      Clarke dealing with the interpretation of paras 352A and 352D  of  the
      Rules said (at [36]):

           "The question is what policy is encapsulated in the Rules, which
           is essentially a matter of construction of the language  of  the
           Rules."

  26. As the AIT recognised in BM and AL, the  underlying  purpose  of  para
      352D is that of family reunion  with  the  refugee  in  the  UK.   The
      difficulty is how to apply that purpose when reunion may  also  result
      in a separation of a child from one part of its family in the  country
      of origin.  Again, as the AIT made clear at [25] of its determination,
      what forms a family unit may  be  clear  where  there  is  a  "nuclear
      family" but where circumstances have resulted in a child, for  example
      through divorce, living with one parent but spending periods  of  time
      (including period of residence with) the other parent, the concept  of
      a "family unit" may be difficult to apply to any particular  facts  or
      situation.

  27. We agree with the AIT in BM and AL (at [25]) that to form part  of  an
      individual's "family unit" it is not necessary for a person to live in
      the same household as that individual although  periods  of  residence
      may be a powerful indicator  of  integration  within  an  individual's
      family unit such that it can be said that the  person  forms  part  of
      that family unit.

  28. We also agree with the AIT in BM and AL that where there is separation
      as a result of "social choice" by the parties - as in a  situation  of
      divorce - it will be more difficult for a child to  be  said  to  form
      part of two different family units.  That said, such a  situation  may
      well arise in a particular case.  We see no reason why  a  child,  for
      example of divorced or separated parents, cannot be part of two family
      units.  It is a matter of common experience that in such situations  a
      child may live with one parent (who may have  remarried)  and  clearly
      form part of that parent's  "family  unit"  but,  nevertheless,  spend
      periods of time and maintain a close connection with the other  parent
      who may also have remarried and have other children  whether  of  that
      second marriage or as step-children living them.  In  that  situation,
      the relationship with the second parent's "family unit" may well  make
      it possible to conclude that the  child  has  sufficiently  integrated
      into that family unit so as to form part  of  it.   In  our  judgment,
      whether that is so is quintessentially a factual question taking  into
      account all the circumstances relevant  to  the  integration  of  that
      child into the second "family unit".  Relevant  factors  will  include
      the closeness of relationship between the child and the second parent,
      but also between the child and the  other  members,  if  any,  of  the
      parent's 'new' family unit such as partners and  other  children;  the
      frequency and duration of contact and periods of residence as part  of
      the second parent's family unit.

  29. Whilst it may be that para 352D and the  policy  of  'family  reunion'
      which it embodies was premised on a single, nuclear family unit in the
      country of origin, para 352D has to take account of  situations  where
      that paradigm has broken down in situations of separation, divorce or,
      as in this case, potentially two family units  have  formed  from  the
      social circumstances surrounding the  child's  birth  and  upbringing.
      Although we do not regard the matter as entirely free from doubt,  the
      AIT's decision in BM and AL is authority for the  proposition  that  a
      child may be a member of more than  one  family  unit.   Mr  Richards'
      submissions do not enable us to conclude that BM and AL  was  to  that
      extent wrongly decided.  In this case, the Judge found that there  was
      a closeness not only between the sponsor and the second appellant  but
      also between the second appellant and the sponsor's partner and  their
      two children.  The second appellant spent weekends and holidays living
      with what was undoubtedly the sponsor's family unit.   That  closeness
      continued even after the  sponsor  came  to  the  UK  and  the  second
      appellant continued to spend weekends and holidays with the  sponsor's
      partner and their children even when he was absent.  That  integration
      with the sponsor's family unit is  a  distinguishing  feature  between
      this case and the facts  of  BM  and  AL.   On  these  facts,  in  our
      judgment, it was open  to  Judge  Harries  to  find  that  the  second
      appellant formed part of the "family unit" of the sponsor prior to his
      departure from Cuba to claim asylum in the UK.

  30. For these reasons, the Judge did not err in law in allowing the second
      appellant's appeal under para 352D of the Immigration Rules  and  this
      appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer must accordingly  be  dismissed.
      The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no direction and we make none.

  31. It is important to note that para 352D does not have  embedded  within
      it any requirement to have regard to the best interests of the  child.
      That is the concern which was expressed by the  AIT  in  [26]  of  its
      determination which we set out above.   Of  course,  some  Immigration
      Rules are drafted in such a way that a  child's  best  interests  form
      part of the requirements of  the  rule  itself  either  explicitly  or
      implicitly, for example, para 297(i)(f) requires there to be  "serious
      and compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion  of
      the child undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for the
      child's care"  (see Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) DRC [2013]  UKUT
      88 (IAC)).  Paragraph 352D has no such requirement within it and we do
      not see how the "natural and ordinary" meaning of the  phrase  "family
      unit" can  embed  a  consideration  of  a  child's  "best  interests".
      Equally,  we  do  not  see  how  the  absence  of  words  embedding  a
      consideration of a child's best interests  in  para  352D  could  lead
      necessarily to a conclusion that para 352D should  be  interpreted  so
      that every child could only have one "family unit" in the  country  of
      origin rather than contemplating the possibility of  there  being  two
      such family units.  A particular child's best interests may point in a
      contrary direction.

  32. Like the AIT before us, we have struggled to see how  a  child's  best
      interests can easily be factored into an  application  of  para  352D.
      Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  which
      imposes upon a decision  maker  carrying  out  a  function  under  the
      Immigration Acts  an  obligation  to  have  "regard  to  the  need  to
      safeguard  and  promote  the  welfare  of  children"  is,  of  course,
      restricted  to  situations  where  a  child  is  "in  the   UK"   (see
      s.55(1)(a)).  No doubt, as a matter of  policy  derived  from  the  UK
      Government's obligations under the UN Convention on the Rights of  the
      Child, even out of country decision makers  would,  and  should,  have
      regard to a child's best interests  before  granting  entry  clearance
      (see Mundeba).  That duty would, of course, be directly  imposed  upon
      an immigration officer allowing a child entry into the UK on the basis
      of any entry clearance granted abroad.  In our judgment,  it  must  be
      through those mechanisms rather than through any interpretation of the
      ordinary and natural meaning of  the  words  of  para  352D  that  the
      welfare and best interests of children  are  taken  into  account  and
      protected.

  33. As we pointed out at the hearing, whether entry  clearance  should  be
      granted in this case raises a number of issues not  directly  governed
      by the Immigration Rules.  The  decision  that  the  second  appellant
      should leave her mother (probably realistically thereby being deprived
      of any further contact with her mother) and be  looked  after  by  her
      father in the United Kingdom is not one that can be  taken  simply  on
      the basis of compliance with those Rules.  Where there is, as in  this
      case, another family unit to which the child certainly belongs,  there
      should in our view be  investigation  at  both  ends  of  the  child's
      journey to ensure that the move from one family  unit  to  another  is
      both in the child's best interests and has the consent of the  members
      of the other unit.  In the  present  case  the  Cuban  social  service
      authorities have been closely involved with the second  appellant  and
      we think it would be desirable for them to  confirm  that  the  second
      appellant would be best served by leaving Cuba and settling in the UK;
      further, the authorities in the UK ought to be asked whether  all  the
      children (including the two children who are  undeniably  entitled  to
      admission) are best served by the admission of another  child  of  the
      father to live with them on a full-time basis  in  the  UK  given  the
      limited financial resources which may be available to the family.  The
      UK authorities may also have a view on  whether  it  is  in  the  best
      interests of the second appellant to remove her from her mother.

  34. At the moment, because the emphasis has understandably been on whether
      the requirements of the Immigration Rules are met, there has  been  no
      investigation of these issues.  In the circumstances  of  the  present
      case, however, the question whether the  second  appellant  should  be
      removed from Cuba and brought to the UK for settlement  raises  issues
      not wholly answered by those Rules and in  our  view  entry  clearance
      should not issue until decisions have been made along  the  lines  set
      out above.

Decision

  35. The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal to this Tribunal is dismissed.




                               Signed






                               A Grubb
                               Judge of the Upper Tribunal


                               Date:
