
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/06523/2014
                                                               OA/06522/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th September 2015               |On 18th September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                              ms mariama sanneh
                             master lamin jammeh
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms S Iqbal of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr K Norton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The Appellants are citizens of Gambia born on  17th  January  1976  and
    27th November 1997 respectively.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidson
    dismissed their appeals against the refusal of entry clearance on  18th
    February 2015.

2.    Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Nicholson on 5th May 2015 on the following grounds:

    (i)   The  judge  erred  in  proceeding  under  paragraph  281  of  the
         Immigration Rules;

    (ii) The judge erred in finding that the marriage was  not  valid  when
         the Respondent did not raise this issue;

    (iii)    The judge failed to take into account relevant evidence; and

    (iv) The judge erred in rejecting paternity given  that  there  was  an
         explanation for the late registration of the Second Appellant.

3.   At the hearing it was agreed by all  parties  that,  given  the  issues
    involved and the lack of clarity in the documentary evidence which  was
    on the court file, the application should be remitted to  the  Tribunal
    for a re-hearing.

4.   I find that the judge was apparently unaware  of  the  Entry  Clearance
    Manager's concession that the Appellants met the financial requirements
    and he made findings on a matter not raised in the notice of refusal.

5.   I am of the view that the judge erred in law  in  failing  to  consider
    relevant evidence in relation to  his  finding  that  the  relationship
    between the First Appellant and the Sponsor was not subsisting and  the
    parties had failed to show they intended to live together  permanently.



6.   I have decided  in  accordance  with  paragraph  7.2  of  the  Practice
    Statements of 25th September 2012 that the decision dated 18th February
    2015 should be set aside and the  appeal  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

                                 DIRECTIONS

    (i)  The  Tribunal  is  directed  pursuant  to  section  12(3)  of  the
         Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 to reconsider the appeal
         at a hearing before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Davidson.

    (ii) I direct that the Appellants  serve  on  the  Respondent  and  the
         Tribunal not less than 7 days before the hearing a fully  paginated
         and indexed bundle of documents on which they intend to rely.

    (iii)    No interpreter is required. Time estimate two hours.


Signed   Date 17th September 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
