
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06431/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke-on-Trent        |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 23rd January 2015                          |On 30th January 2015         |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                   MR S A
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Draycott (instructed by Paragon Law)
For the Respondent:  Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  by  the  Appellant,  with
    permission, against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Colyer promulgated on 18th October  2013  by  which  he  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal to revoke a
    deportation order. Permission was granted by a Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis that the Judge may have made an error of  law  in
    that he may have failed to take into account all of the  evidence  with
    regard to the best interests of the Appellant's child and may have gone
    behind concessions made by the Respondent concerning the nature of  the
    family life of the Appellant.

2.   The circumstances of this appeal  are  somewhat  unusual  in  that  the
    Appellant has already been deported to Nigeria.

3.   The Appellant was born on 22nd September 1984. He came  to  the  UK  in
    February 2004 using a forged South African passport in somebody  else's
    name. He applied for leave to enter as a  businessman.  When  that  was
    refused he claimed asylum but then withdrew the  claim.  He  was  given
    leave to enter but required to report the following  day  for  removal.
    He absconded. He was  then  arrested  in  February  2010  and  on  26th
    February 2010 convicted at Nottingham Crown Court of  possession  of  a
    false identity  document  with  intent  (the  false  passport)  and  of
    dishonestly making false representations (attempting  to  use  a  store
    card that did not belong to him in 2009  while  pretending  to  be  the
    owner).

4.   The Appellant was sentenced to 8 months and 12 months imprisonment,  to
    be served concurrently.

5.   On 13th August 2010 the  Appellant  was  released  from  his  custodial
    sentence but detained by the immigration authorities.  On  27th  August
    2010 he was released from detention subject to reporting conditions. In
    December 2010 a deportation order was signed. He appealed  against  the
    deportation and his appeal was heard by Judge Frankish and Mrs  Schmitt
    on 14th February 2011. They dismissed the appeal and the Appellant  was
    in fact deported to Nigeria on 14th September 2011 after  a  number  of
    unsuccessful applications for leave to remain  which  were  treated  as
    applications to revoke the deportation order.

6.   Further submissions were made on the Appellant's  behalf  once  he  had
    been removed leading to a decision on 13th  May 2013 refusing to revoke
    the deportation order.

7.   Prior to the conviction and subsequent appeal against  the  deportation
    order heard in 2011, the Appellant had formed  a  relationship  with  a
    British citizen and they had a child together born shortly  before  his
    imprisonment. The child was born on 26th January 2010.  Judge  Frankish
    heard conflicting evidence from the Appellant and his partner as to the
    duration  of  their  relationship  such  that  he  concluded  that  the
    relationship was not as long-standing  and  settled  as  the  Appellant
    claimed,  particularly  noting  that  the  child's  birth   certificate
    contained false information as to the Appellant's place of  birth  (the
    USA) and also gave  different  addresses  for  the  Appellant  and  his
    partner. In the concluding paragraph of Judge Frankish's  determination
    he found that the evidence indicated that it was a far from settled and
    stable relationship. A witness, a friend of the Appellant, had referred
    to ups and downs in the relationship which had to be patched up and the
    Judge found that cohabitation had been of  far  shorter  duration  than
    claimed and even then only of a  partial  nature.  He  noted  that  the
    Appellant and his partner should have known that he had no right to  be
    in the UK and that the Appellant had been found to be,  while  not  the
    cleverest, a willing and active fraudster. The Judge commented that the
    Appellant expected his  child  to  be  a  trump  cared  to  secure  his
    remaining in the UK; which he was not. He found that the  interests  of
    the Appellant's  partner  and  child  were  overridden  by  the  public
    interest in his deportation.

8.   The Appellant did not appeal against that decision.

9.   It is not the decision  to  deport  him  nor  is  it  Judge  Frankish's
    determination which is before me.  This  is  an  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in relation to the decision of Judge  Colyer  to  dismiss  the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision not  to  revoke  the  deportation
    order.

10.  I heard detailed and lengthy  submissions  from  Mr  Draycott  on  that
    point.

11.  Mr Draycott submitted that this  was  a  finely  balanced  appeal.  The
    First-tier Tribunal had not given  sufficient  attention  to  s.55  and
    neither had Judge Frankish in the earlier decision. He quoted from  the
    President of the Upper Tribunal's decision in  JO  &  Ors  (section  55
    duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC) from January 2012 indicating that
    section 55 had to be grappled with.

12.  Where the judge referred to the case of a A D Lee [2011] EWCA Civ  348,
    he argued that he erred because it is quite clear  from  ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4 and other cases that a child cannot be  held  responsible
    for his parents offending behaviour and he argued  that  the  Judge  in
    this case had done precisely that.

13.  He  then  argued  that  in  terms  of  the  Article  8  proportionality
    assessment, the Judge had incorrectly stated where the burden of  proof
    lay. He also argued that the Judge had  incorrectly  referred  to  this
    Appellant's serious criminal offending, which he  argued  it  was  not,
    particularly when the sentencing Judge had not referred to it  being  a
    very serious offence when he was in the best position to  assess  that.
    I pause at this  stage  to  indicate  that  these  are  not  attractive
    submissions.  It is clear that the Judge did not  misstate  the  burden
    and standard of proof and it ill behoves an Appellant or  his  advocate
    to minimise the offences.  They  were  significant  enough  to  attract
    immediate custodial sentences for a first  time  offender  and  serious
    enough to merit deportation.  Such issues were dealt with in the  first
    appeal in 2011.

14.  Mr Draycott then referred to paragraph 93 of  the  determination  where
    Judge Colyer said that the Appellant, by his criminal  activities,  had
    damaged the lives  of  a  number  of  innocent  victims  including  the
    Appellant's partner and his young child.  Mr Draycott suggested that it
    was an error of law to  say  this  without  explaining  who  the  other
    victims were and he submitted that the public had not suffered  by  his
    behaviour.  Again, I find this a  singularly  unattractive  submission.
    It is not simply offences of violence that damage society.   Fraud  and
    document offences do also.  They damage the whole  fabric  of  society;
    that is why they attract custodial sentences.

15.  Mr Draycott referred to paragraph 64 of the determination  where  Judge
    Colyer stated that the Appellant had been in prison from February  2010
    when the child was six weeks old until August  2012.  In  fact  he  was
    released in August 2010 and he thus made a factual error  in  assessing
    that the couple had only lived together for a matter of  weeks  between
    his release from prison and deportation. Mr Draycott  referred  to  the
    Letter of Refusal which accepted that he had been released in 2010  and
    that they had lived together for 11  months.   That  however,  while  a
    factual error cannot be material given all the other issues and  it  is
    still, at 11 months, a very short time living with a very  young  child
    who was less than two years of age when the Appellant was deported.

16.  Mr Draycott then argued that comparing this appeal with  the  facts  of
    MF (Nigeria); MF had committed grave offences and yet won  the  appeal.
    He argued that the extant case is a finely balanced case and  the  best
    interests of the child required this Appellant to succeed. He  referred
    to the two witnesses who gave evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    submitting that insufficient weight was given  to  their  evidence  and
    also that insufficient weight was given to the expert evidence  of  the
    independent social worker, Christine Brown.

17.  He argued that the damage to the child was ongoing in this case  as  it
    was more than three years since the Appellant  had  been  deported  and
    thus the disproportionate interference in the Appellant  and  his  wife
    and child's family life was continuing.

18.  Finally he argued that the  delay  by  the  Respondent  in  making  the
    decision should also have been taken into account.

19.  In his submissions Mr McVeety argued that  this  was  a  case  where  I
    should be looking  at  the  big  picture  not  picking  out  peripheral
    matters. This was not an appeal against  the  decision  to  deport  the
    Appellant. That had been found to be in  the  public  interest,  not  a
    disproportionate interference in any of the family's Article  8  rights
    and deportation  had  taken  place.  Those  matters  had  already  been
    adjudicated on in 2011. Similarly, any argument by Mr Draycott that the
    Appellant had not committed any further offences was irrelevant  as  he
    was not even in the UK.

20.  In relation to section 55 he argued that case law had moved on from  ZH
    (Tanzania); Lady Hale herself had said herself in Zoumbas  [2013]  UKSC
    74  particularly, that ZH (Tanzania) was regularly being misquoted.

21.  This case was about the effect on the child of the  refusal  to  revoke
    the deportation order not the effect  on  the  child  of  the  original
    decision to deport. He submitted that the Judge had considered all  the
    facts in this case in considerable detail; had not misdirected  himself
    in law and had made no error of law material to the outcome.
22.  In response Mr  Draycott  argued  that  the  matters  relating  to  the
    original conviction must be relevant to a decision whether  or  not  to
    revoke the deportation order.

23.  I have read the determination, the  subject  of  this  appeal  and  the
    earlier determination together with the Letter of Refusal with care and
    find very little attractive in Mr Draycott submissions.

24.  Judge Colyer's determination is lengthy and  detailed.  He  conducts  a
    thorough examination of the relevant law and case law as  well  as  the
    facts of the case. He correctly refers to the previous determination of
    Judge Frankish which has not been appealed  and  therefore  stands.  He
    correctly refers to that as his starting point and looks  to  see  what
    has changed since then. Looking at the big picture, and I agree with Mr
    McVeety that that is what must be done, this is a case where a criminal
    was deported having had the opportunity  to  appeal  and  lost  despite
    having a partner and child back in 2011. The child in question was less
    than two years of age when his father was deported. Since that time, in
    the intervening three years the child has lived with his mother and she
    has brought him up as a single parent.  Judge  Colyer  refers  at  some
    length to the evidence, recommendations and conclusions reached by  the
    independent social worker. It is rather surprising that she  felt  able
    to accept a three-year-old child's voiced opinions. However,  she  does
    say and the judge recites from her report, that  although  he  is  only
    three years of age his self presentation and articulation is that of an
    older and self-assured child. He can articulate  his  thoughts  to  the
    extent that it is easy to engage with him and hold  a  conversation  in
    which he clearly stated his views, as young as he is. Elsewhere  it  is
    said that the child is doing very well.  Clearly,  given  her  comments
    about him he has thrived in the three years in the  sole  care  of  his
    mother since his father was deported. The reality of this case is  that
    this child's father left his life when he was less than two.  He  would
    have no meaningful relationship with his father. At most he is a  voice
    at the end of a telephone. In the intervening three years he  has  seen
    his father only once when he and his mother travelled to  Nigeria  when
    she married the Appellant.

25.  The fact that the Appellant's wife  chose  to  travel  to  Nigeria  and
    marry him knowing that he was subject to a deportation  order  and  had
    been deported and may therefore not be  allowed  to  come  back  was  a
    choice that she made. It is trite law that a British  citizen  has  the
    right to marry but not a right to bring in the spouse of  their  choice
    if the spouse does not meet the Immigration Rules.  In  this  case  she
    knew full well that he was subject to a deportation order and  that  he
    had already lost his appeal against that. If she does not wish to  live
    with him in Nigeria then she has to face the prospect of conducting her
    marriage across continents.

26.  Taking the determination of Judge Colyer as a whole it is  quite  clear
    that a great deal of attention was given in the  determination  to  the
    situation of the child, his best interests, section 55 and the contents
    of the independent social worker's report. However, it  is  also  clear
    that the evidence in this case did not permit  a  conclusion  that  the
    child is suffering by being deprived of  his  father  in  his  everyday
    life.
27.  UK legislation and  the  Immigration  Rules  specifically  provide  for
    foreign national criminals to be removed from the United Kingdom. It is
    now well established that it is in the public interest that they should
    be removed and not  permitted  to  return  for  a  long  time.  Foreign
    nationals know when they choose to commit crimes in the United  Kingdom
    that there is every chance that they will be deported and be unable  to
    come back. That is the price they pay for criminality. While it is true
    that a child cannot be held responsible for the actions of  its  parent
    that does not mean that the child's best interests will hold  sway.  As
    has been said repeatedly, and indeed was  said  by  Judge  Frankish  in
    2011, the best interests of a child are a primary consideration not the
    paramount consideration.  They are not a trump card. In  this  case  it
    was acknowledged by Mr McVeety  that  a  child's  best  interests  are,
    absent countervailing factors, to be brought up by  two  parents  in  a
    loving household. However, those best interests can and  are  regularly
    outweighed in deportation proceedings  where  the  public  interest  in
    deportation outweighs the child's  best  interests.  There  is  nothing
    particular about the child's best interests in  this  case  beyond  the
    general premise that it is better for a child to be brought up  by  two
    parents. There was no evidence whatsoever that this child has  suffered
    harm as a result of his father's deportation, indeed the evidence is to
    the contrary. He has clearly thrived  and  his  mother  must  take  the
    credit for that.   Furthermore, it is significant that  any  harm  that
    would flow from deportation, in terms of the grief that might flow from
    separation is harm that would occur on or shortly after deportation. In
    a case like this, where the child is an  infant,  such  emotional  harm
    would be minimal and would fade with the passage of time.  The  way  in
    which this child has thrived is testament to the absence of harm.   Any
    detrimental effect therefore, particularly to a very young  child  does
    not increase as time passes, rather it decreases.

28.  This appeal is against a decision to refuse  to  revoke  a  deportation
    order and like the original  appeal  against  the  decision  to  deport
    itself is wholly without merit. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not
    make an error of law which could have led to a different outcome.

29.  While the Judge made an error in  terms  of  the  length  of  time  the
    Appellant had lived with his child after his release and before he  was
    deported, the fact is he still only lived with him for11 months and the
    child was an infant.  That error was not material to the outcome  given
    the child's age at the time.

30.  The delay by the Respondent, if indeed there was a delay, is  also  not
    relevant as no effect flowed from it.  Indeed,  it  was  Mr  Draycott's
    case that the ongoing separation was the harm and in that  respect  the
    delay would have strengthened his case had it had merit, which it  does
    not.

29.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      Direction  regarding  anonymity  -  rule  14(1)(b)  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

     Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant,
    his wife and the child  are  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them. This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.




Signed                 Dated 26th January 2015





Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
