
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/06568/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Sheldon Court, Birmingham            |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 17 June 2015                               |On 2 July 2015               |


                                   Before

               DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL M ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, ACCRA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              ALHASSAN KUYATEH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Bakshi, Counsel, instructed by Samuel Ross,
Solicitors.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. Although the Entry Clearance Officer is the Appellant before me I  will
    for ease of reference refer to him as the  Respondent  as  he  was  the
    Respondent before the First-tier Tribunal at the hearing on  9  January
    2015. Similarly I will refer to Mr Kuyateh as the Appellant as  he  was
    the Appellant before the First-tier Judge.

 2. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge V A Cox, who dismissed the Appellant's appeal
    under the Immigration Rules and allowed it under Article 8 ECHR.

 3. In the grounds of application, the Respondent submits that:

          a. In finding that the Appellant does not  meet  the  suitability
             requirements of Appendix FM  but  allowing  the  appeal  under
             Article 8 ECHR the Judge gave insufficient weight to  material
             matters (these being that the  Appellant  does  not  meet  the
             Rules,  the  public  interest  in  immigration  control,   the
             Appellant's poor immigration history, past deception and  poor
             conduct whilst in the UK); and

          b. He failed to give adequate reasons for his decision  to  allow
             the appeal under Article 8 ECHR.  The  only  reason  that  the
             Appellant was not granted entry clearance was because  of  the
             suitability requirements and if these requirements can  simply
             be sidestepped there is a danger that these requirements  will
             rendered redundant. Therefore the Judge should have given more
             detailed reasons for why the  suitability  requirement  should
             not apply equally under the Article 8 assessment.

 4. Permission was granted on the basis that "The grounds do not  refer  to
    Nagre or Gulshan but they are relevant as the Judge does not appear  to
    identify what features of  the  Appellant's  case  are  not  adequately
    considered by the Immigration Rules."

 5. As taken from the documentary evidence before me, by way of background,
    the Appellant made his application on  2  October  2012  and  this  was
    initially refused on 30 January 2013  and  the  appeal  listed  for  10
    December 2013. This was adjourned to 28  March  2014,  with  the  Judge
    directing the Respondent to provide the  previous  notice  of  refusal,
    which was issued on a previous application made on 26 April  2012,  and
    supporting  documents.  On  28  March  2014,  the  Respondent  was  not
    represented and the previous notice of refusal and supporting documents
    were not provided. Furthermore, the Notice of decision dated 30 January
    2013 was withdrawn and a further notice of  decision,  relying  on  the
    same grounds, was issued on 23 April 2014 (the Notice). A supplementary
    notice of decision was issued on  8  October  2014  (the  Supplementary
    Notice), in which the ECO accepted that it  was  established  that  the
    Appellant and the Sponsor were in a genuine and subsisting relationship
    and that they intended to live together  permanently.  The  refusal  of
    entry clearance was  based  solely  on  the  suitability  criteria,  at
    paragraph EC-P.1.1(c) of Appendix FM, with reference  to  paragraph  S-
    EC.1.5 and S-EC.2.5(b), These provide as follows:

         'S-EC1.1 The applicant will be refused entry clearance  on  grounds
         of suitability if any of the paragraphs S-EC.1.2. to 1.8. apply

         .....

         .....

         S-EC.1.5. The exclusion of the applicant from the UK  is  conducive
         to the public good or because, for example, the applicant's conduct
         (including convictions which do not fall with paragraph E-EC.1.4.),
         character, associations or other reasons, make  it  undesirable  to
         grant them entry clearance.

         S-EC.2.1. The applicant will normally  be  refused  on  grounds  of
         suitability if any of paragraphs S-EC.2.2 to 2.5 apply

         .....

         .....

         S-EC.2.5. The exclusion of the applicant from the UK  is  conducive
         to the public good because:

             (a)....

             (b)(i)...

             (b)(ii) the person  is  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law.

 6. The Judge found as fact that exclusion of the Appellant  was  conducive
    to the public good because it was established that the Appellant was  a
    persistent offender pursuant to paragraph  S-EC.2.5  (b)(ii).  He  then
    went onto consider the Appellant's appeal under Article 8 at [38 -  53]
    and allowed the appeal.

 7.  In  submissions,  Mr  Mills  essentially  relied  on  the  grounds  of
    application. He submitted that having found that the Rules could not be
    met, the Judge went straight on to  an  Article  8  assessment  without
    first establishing compelling circumstances as for  doing  so.  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [201] UKUT 640 (IAC)  and  R
    (Nagre) SSHD [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) were referred  to  in  SS  (Congo)
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387  and it was accepted  that  Article  8  was  not  a
    complete code but that the Immigration Rules in Appendix  FM  were  the
    Respondent's attempt to ensure that the Rules dealt  with  most  issues
    that could be raised under Article 8 and where there was a  failure  to
    meet the Immigration Rules, compelling circumstances would need  to  be
    established. The Judge  had  not  identified  which  issues  could  not
    adequately be considered under the Immigration rules.

 8. Mr Mills further submitted that in the Notice, the ECO  relied  on  the
    suitability  requirements  set  out  in  paragraph  S-EC.2.2(b),  which
    provided that a failure to disclose facts which were  material  to  his
    application was a discretionary ground for refusal. However,  when  the
    Supplementary Notice was issued, the ECO was also relying  on  S-EC1.5,
    that is that exclusion of the Appellant from the UK  was  conducive  to
    the public good because his conduct, character and associations made it
    undesirable to grant them entry clearance, which was a mandatory ground
    for refusal. The Judge  found,  at  [34],  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    persistent offender who had shown a particular disregard for  the  law.
    He stated that because of this finding, the Judge  must  have  had  the
    Supplementary Notice before him.

 9. Mr Mills submitted that in terms of Article 8, he  could  not  in  fact
    take the grounds any further than as drafted. The  fact  remained  that
    the Appellant's immigration history was poor and it was  accepted  that
    he had practised deception. The Judge then went on to deal with Article
    8 and family life without properly considering what  weight  should  be
    given to the public interest. If the Judge was right,  the  suitability
    requirements could simply be sidestepped. The Judge mentioned that this
    matter had in fact been on-going as the Appellant had only left the  UK
    in 2012, and his conduct was therefore no more than two to three  years
    ago.

10. Miss Bakshi submitted that there was no error of law when the  decision
    was read as a whole because whilst it was accepted that the  Judge  did
    not specifically mention 'compelling circumstances', he  was  aware  of
    the case law as stated at [35], and that the Immigration Rules were not
    a complete code. At [29-34] he identified factors which  could  not  be
    considered under the Immigration Rules. She stated that the  compelling
    factors were set out at paragraph 7 of  her  skeleton  argument,  these
    being that the Sponsor and the child of the Appellant and  the  Sponsor
    were British citizens, the marriage was  genuine  and  subsisting,  the
    Sponsor had a successful career in the UK and was able  to  financially
    support the Appellant, the Appellant's  child  would  lose  educational
    opportunities in the UK to which he was entitled if he had to leave the
    UK, and the Judge considered the best interests of the children. In all
    this he took into account that the weight that could be  given  to  the
    relationship between the Appellant and the Sponsor had  to  be  reduced
    because of the provisions of S117B of the 2002 Act at [40] but that  he
    could not come to a conclusion which unfairly  punishes  the  child  at
    [46].

11. She submitted that the Judge did give  sufficient  weight  to  material
    matters and sufficient reasons for his decision  to  allow  the  appeal
    under Article 8 and these issues could  not  be  considered  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

12. In reply, Mr Mills submitted that the Judge makes reference to  s  117B
    (4) of the Nationality, Asylum and Immigration Act 2002 at [40] but  he
    misapplies it. He states that the weight to be given to a  relationship
    between the Appellant and the Sponsor had to be reduced  where  it  was
    formed when the Appellant was in the  UK  unlawfully  but  s  117B  (4)
    provides that little weight should be attached to a relationship with a
    qualifying partner that is established by a person at a time  when  the
    person is in the UK unlawfully. He submitted that it was clear from his
    decision that he goes on to give the relationship significant weight.

Decision and Reasons

13.  It  was  not  argued  that  the  Judge's  findings  were  perverse  or
    irrational; the submissions on behalf of the Respondent were  based  on
    weight that was  attributed  to  the  evidence  and  lack  of  adequate
    reasons.

14. It was not in issue before  me  that  the  Judge  had  before  him  the
    Supplementary Notice or that he made insufficient findings in  relation
    to the  provisions  of  S-EC.1.5.  Whilst  the  Judge  does  not  refer
    specifically  to  S-EC.1.5,  it  appears  to  be   accepted   by   both
    representatives (as neither made submissions to the contrary) that  his
    findings were sufficient to  establish  that  he  had  considered  both
    provisions. This must be right because if he had  only  considered  the
    provisions of paragraph S-EC.2.5(b)(ii), he  would  also  have  had  to
    consider whether discretion should have been exercised differently  and
    he does not do so. It can be inferred that he  did  not  consider  this
    aspect  of  the  appeal  under  S-EC.2.5(b)(ii)  because  there  was  a
    mandatory refusal of the Appellant's application under S-EC.1.5.

15. This inference is supported by [34] in which the Judge finds

         "...the appellant is a person who has  shown  particular  disregard
         for the law and he has a caution and  has  entered  United  Kingdom
         under a false visa. He did not immediately draw  attention  to  the
         error he says was made on the use of his  brother's  name.  He  has
         worked illegally, he  has  produced  his  twin  brother's  identity
         documents on a number of occasions. He must have done  so  to  work
         and has disregarded the law and used a false identity for a  period
         of years on his own account. There is no  numerical  definition  of
         persistence and I find that his conduct is  that  of  a  persistent
         offender and he has shown a particular disregard for the law";

         And at [53]  he  found  that  the  conduct  of  the  Appellant  was
         "reprehensible".

16. It is also clear  that  the  provisions  of  paragraph  EX.1  were  not
    available  to  the  Appellant  because   these   provisions   are   not
    freestanding (Sabir (Appendix FM - EX.1 not free standing) [2014]  UKUT
    00063 (IAC)). As the Appellant had in fact met all the other provisions
    of the Immigration Rules, the provisions of EX.1 were not available  to
    him and there was therefore the need to consider elements of the appeal
    that could not be adequately considered under the Immigration Rules  by
    applying Article 8 directly.

17. Within the Article 8 assessment, it is  difficult  to  argue  that  the
    Judge gave insufficient weight  to  material  matters;  the  matter  of
    weight is for the Judge (FK (Kenya) [2010] EWCA Civ 1302, at para  23).
    It is clear that the factors that weighed heavily against the Appellant
    were that he was a persistent offender, with a poor immigration history
    and a reprehensible character. I cannot find, as submitted by Mr Mills,
    that the Judge misapplied the provisions  of  s  117B(4)  because  that
    section provided for little weight to  be  given  to  the  relationship
    because the Judge stated that the weight that could be given to it  was
    'reduced'. This is merely a difference in terminology.

18. Again, contrary to the submissions of Mr Mills, there is nothing within
    the decision from which it can be inferred that the Judge  went  on  to
    give  the  relationship  between  the   Appellant   and   the   Sponsor
    considerable weight. In line with EU jurisprudence, the Judge took into
    account that the Sponsor did not know of the  Appellant's  status  when
    the relationship was formed but did know of it before they were married
    and their child was born. When  the  Judge  thereafter  refers  to  the
    Sponsor, he is evaluating the character  of  the  Sponsor  in  her  own
    right, for example, he states that she has lived  in  the  UK  all  her
    life, has a successful career and is a lecturer at  a  university  [45]
    and that her character is impeccable [47].    Any  reference  to  their
    relationship thereafter is a  reference  to  what  will  occur  in  the
    future, not what has occurred in the past; for example,  he  refers  to
    the choice the Sponsor has made to remain in the UK having considered a
    move to Sierra Leone because of education and employment prospects  and
    the need to attach weight  to  it  [44],  that  the  Sponsor  has  made
    considerable efforts to ensure that the child met  his  father  outside
    the UK [43], that both the child and the Sponsor were British  citizens
    and that the child should not be punished for the faults of the  father
    [46]. The Judge also took into account that there had been a consistent
    and genuine attempt by the Appellant to gain entry to the  UK  lawfully
    and that this has taken many years [49] and gave  weight  to  the  fact
    that the relationship had endured, whilst the Appellant was out of  the
    UK, not during his period of  unlawful  residence.  Although  Mr  Mills
    submitted that the Judge found that the Appellant's conduct  was  'some
    time ago' but it was in fact no more than two or three years, the  fact
    remains that the Appellant's first application was made in May 2012 and
    refused in June 2012. His next application was made on 2 October  2012,
    and has been ongoing since then, the Supplementary  Notice  not  having
    been issued until 8 October 2014, some two years later. On the evidence
    before him, the Judge was entitled to find that the Appellant's conduct
    in the UK was some time ago [53].

19. It is clear that the compelling factors in this case  were  that  there
    had  been  a  genuine  and  prolonged  attempt  to  gain  lawful  entry
    clearance, that weight was given to the relationship subsisting  whilst
    the Appellant was out of the UK (and therefore not on the basis of  the
    relationship whilst he was in the UK unlawfully), that the Sponsor  had
    decided to stay in the UK having considered  a  move  to  Sierra  Leone
    which is unsurprising in the context of the Ebola  crisis  (see  [14]),
    and still had gone to great lengths to ensure that their child met  his
    father but it was likely that the decision to  refuse  the  application
    would result in long term separation of the child from his father,  and
    particularly during the child's early years  when  bonding  occurs.  He
    made sufficient findings for his decision to allow the appeal under the
    Immigration Rules and he did not merely side-step the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  The Judge's findings of  fact  were  sufficient
    for him to find that there were  compelling  reasons  to  consider  the
    application outside the Immigration Rules [35]; his  findings  are  not
    irrational or  perverse.  Whilst  another  Judge  may  have  reached  a
    different conclusion on the facts, the Judge's conclusion was  open  to
    him on the evidence before him and no arguable material errors  of  law
    are disclosed.

20. The Respondent's grounds are no  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the Judge and his decision must therefore stand.

Decision

21. There are no material errors of law in the determination of  Judge  Cox
    such that the determination falls to  be  set  aside.  This  appeal  is
    dismissed.

Anonymity

22. The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I see
    no reason why an order should be  made  pursuant  to  Rule  14  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed   Date

M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT

In light of my decision, I have considered  whether  to  make  a  fee  award
under Rule 23A (costs) of the Asylum  and  Immigration  Tribunal  (procedure
Rules 2005 and section 12(4) (a) of the  Tribunals  courts  and  enforcement
Act 2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As the appeal has been  dismissed,  the
fee award of Judge Cox is confirmed.


Signed   Dated

M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
