








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06733/2015



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9th January 2019                |On 23rd January 2019               |
|                                   |                                   |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                     JUA

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Asanovic instructed by DJ Webb & Co Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Greasley promulgated on the 9th April 2018  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's application for entry clearance as
    an adopted child of sponsors present and settled in the UK  and  claims
    based on Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances including  the  fact
    that the proceedings concern the interests and  status  of  a  child  I
    consider it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge  Gill  on  22nd  November  2018.  In  granting  leave  to  appeal
    permission had not been granted in respect of certain  of  the  grounds
    raised. Thus the case appeared before me to determine  whether  or  not
    there was a material error of law in the decision on the basis  of  the
    limited grounds granted.

 4. I note that this appeal has been previously before the  Upper  Tribunal
    and was remitted for hearing afresh. It was on that basis that the case
    came before Judge Greasley.

 5. At the commencement of the hearing with regard  to  the  error  of  law
    issue before me the appellant's representative sought  leave  to  amend
    the grounds of appeal. The amendment primarily concerned the status  of
    the adoption documentation from the Nigerian courts and  what  approach
    should be taken in respect of such documentation in accordance with the
    case of Buama [2012] UKUT 00146.

 6. At the time of the original application and  decision  Nigerian  Courts
    were a competent administrative authority or court for the purposes  of
    the Immigration  Rules,  specifically  with  regard  to  paragraph  310
    (vi)(a). Whilst subsequently the  position  had  changed  and  Nigerian
    Courts were no longer competent courts, the statutory instrument making
    that variation did not have retrospective effect.

 7. Where there was an adoption order from a competent court Buama had  set
    down in paragraph 17:-

         "In relation to the order of the Ghanaian court it is on  the  face
         of the  order  valid.  The  immigration  rules  do  not  appear  to
         contemplate refusal to accept  the  validity  of  the  order  of  a
         competent court. Further, any challenge  to  the  validity  of  the
         order had to be by expert evidence in my view. Simply  setting  out
         the provisions of the statute is not sufficient......

 8. The effect is clear when one is dealing with the order from a competent
    court expert evidence is required to bring into question  the  validity
    of that court order. The order from the courts in Nigeria were  from  a
    competent court and therefore to challenge their validity it would have
    been necessary to obtain expert evidence. There was no expert evidence.

 9. Mr Tarlow on behalf of the respondent objected to a very late change to
    the grounds of appeal in part on the grounds that  it  would  prejudice
    the respondent. I do not  see  that  there  is  any  prejudice  to  the
    respondent. Any issues that arise  can  be  dealt  with  by  given  the
    respondent time to consider the issues raised, check the  documentation
    submitted and consider the evidence.

10. I note that otherwise further documentary evidence has  been  submitted
    to answer the issues that have been raised in this appeal. Whilst  such
    additional evidence does not impact upon the assessment of whether  the
    judge on the evidence before her has erred in  law,  such  evidence  is
    highly material to the issues in the case.

11. I am concerned  with  the  interests  and  rights  of  a  child.  These
    proceedings have become prolonged the original application having  been
    made in 2015. Whilst the issue should  have  been  raised  earlier,  it
    appears to me in the interests of justice that the amendment  ought  to
    be allowed.

12. In the circumstances I  permitted  the  amendment  of  the  grounds  to
    include the challenge to the  decision  that  as  the  order  from  the
    Nigerian Court was from a competent court, expert evidence was required
    to challenge the validity of the order.

13. The judge cannot be criticised as the issue was not raised before  her.
    However it is a matter of law and clearly it is a matter that ought  to
    have been taken into account.

14. In light of the amendment Mr Tarlow accepted that the approach  to  the
    court order from a  competent  court  may  be  in  error.  He  accepted
    therefore that the appropriate course was for the present  decision  to
    be set aside and the case would have to be heard again.   Whilst  given
    the history of this matter I would have  preferred  to  deal  with  the
    case, Mr Tarlow submitted that the respondent required time to consider
    the evidence now submitted and to review the file.

15. Given the circumstances I therefore decided that the  best  course  was
    for this case to be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    hearing afresh.

    Notice of Decision

16. For the reasons set out there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I set the decision aside and remit
    the case to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 9th January 2019





Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings



Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure     Date 9th January 2019

