
[pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/06396/2014
     OA/06397/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Centre City Tower at Birmingham      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th April 2016                            |On 11th May 2016              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH

                                   Between

                            Bhavik Ram Karavadra
                          Hitesh Rambhai Karavadra
                         (ANONYMITY ORDERS NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                           ON BEHALF OF ECO MUMBAI

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Z H Jafferji of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of India  whose  mother,  resident  in  the
    United Kingdom, is a British Citizen.  She  was  previously  a  British
    Overseas Citizen, having been born in Uganda.  The Appellants, together
    with their younger brother, applied for entry clearance to come to  the
    United Kingdom to join their mother.  At the time  of  application  the
    two current Appellants were marginally over the age of 18 years but the
    younger brother was under 18.  The  applications  of  the  two  current
    Appellants were refused although that of  their  younger  brother,  now
    sadly deceased, was granted.  The refusal  decisions  stated  that  the
    Appellants did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Appellants' appeals against  those  refusal  decisions  were  heard
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Obhi on 7th  January  2015.   At  that
    hearing it  was  accepted  that  the  Appellants  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules and they relied upon  Article  8,
    ECHR.  In her decision, promulgated on 14th  January  2015,  the  judge
    found the Appellants' parents, who had both  given  evidence,  to  have
    been credible witnesses.  She  accepted  that  there  was  family  life
    between the Appellants and their parents.  She noted (at  paragraph  21
    of her decision) that

         "The Appellants were born in and have resided in  India  throughout
         their lives.  I am not persuaded therefore that the fact  of  their
         mother being a former east African Asian and the withdrawal of  the
         SV (special voucher) scheme and the 'historical wrongs' referred to
         are an additional factor to weigh into the balance when considering
         Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules.   I  am  not  satisfied
         that there are any circumstances in this particular case which take
         it out of the ordinary or make the case exceptional  such  that  it
         should be considered outside of the Immigration Rules."

 3. She continued in the following paragraph (22)

         "However even if I were to do so, as I have stated earlier,  whilst
         I accept that there is a family life  between  the  Appellants  and
         their parents the decision of the ECO has not interfered with  that
         family life.  The Appellants' parents chose to come to  the  UK  in
         search of a better life and whilst the Appellants' mother  had  the
         option of coming to the UK she was not forced or coerced into doing
         so.  In making her decision to do so she will have had to take into
         account the circumstances of the whole of her family, including her
         children  and  in  the  context   of   that   consideration   chose
         nevertheless to do so.  There is no obstacle to  her  returning  to
         India to be with her sons if she  chooses  to  do  so.   I  am  not
         therefore satisfied that there is an  interference  caused  by  the
         decision of the ECO and for these reasons the appeals must fail."

 4. The Appellants applied for permission to appeal those adverse decisions
    relying on the judgment of the Court of  Appeal  in  Patel,  Modha  and
    Odedra v ECO (Mumbai) [2010] EWCA Civ 17. That judgment indicated  that
    the historical background was a matter of significance weighing in  the
    Appellant's favour and it was contended that the  judge  had  erred  in
    failing to take  it  into  account  as  an  additional  factor  in  the
    proportionality balance.  The grounds referred also to the judgment  of
    the Court of Appeal in ECO v NH (India) [2007] EWCA Civ 1330 which also
    identified the "historical injustice" and in which  Lord  Justice  Pill
    expressly rejected the concept of a Sponsor (who  had  been  a  British
    Overseas Citizen) being required to leave the United Kingdom and return
    to India to reunite  with  the  family  left  behind.   Permission  was
    granted on these grounds on 1st April 2015.

 5. At the commencement of the hearing before  me  Mr  Mills  said  it  did
    appear that the judge at first instance had not considered  the  impact
    of the historical wrong as described in Patel, Modha and Odedra and  in
    parallel terms, regarding the children of former Ghurkha  soldiers,  in
    Ghising and Others (Ghurkhas (BOCs):  historic  wrong;  weight)  [2013]
    UKUT 00567 (IAC).  The fact that  the  Sponsor  was  a  former  British
    Overseas Citizen brought into play the historic wrong which was  to  be
    afforded significant weight.  He said it appeared that the  Appellants'
    arguments were correct.  Once Article 8 was engaged (and there had been
    no challenge to the judge's finding that family life  existed)  such  a
    claim was not easy to resist.  He accepted that the judge had erred  in
    failing to take  those  points  into  account  and  accepted  that  her
    decision to dismiss the appeal should be set aside.

 6. I agreed with that view.  The cases referred to did indicate the weight
    to be afforded to the "historic wrong".  To be fair to  the  judge  she
    does not appear to have been referred to those cases in the  course  of
    the hearing.  Nonetheless they were binding upon her.  Whilst it  might
    be argued that there had been no active interference with  family  life
    as this is an entry clearance case, that might be expressed differently
    in that there had been a lack of respect for family life.  Such a  lack
    of respect would come equally within the ambit of Article 8.

 7. I was in a position to remake the decision.  Mr Mills,  to  whom  I  am
    grateful for his practical approach, noted  that  the  Appellants  were
    only in their early twenties.  There had been a finding of family life.
     The ECO had raised no issue of them having any adverse  history  which
    might weigh against the grant of entry clearance.  Having regard to the
    weight to be afforded to the historic wrong he accepted that the appeal
    should be allowed.

 8. Mr Jafferji naturally agreed with those comments and mentioned the very
    sad circumstance  that  the  one  child  who  had  been  granted  entry
    clearance had unhappily died before being able to come  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  He requested that the  appeals  be  allowed  and  that  entry
    clearance be granted as soon as possible.

 9. I allow the appeals accordingly and trust that once  this  decision  is
    communicated to the  ECO  in  Mumbai  entry  clearance  for  these  two
    Appellants will be issued without delay.

Notice of Decisions

10. The making of the decisions in these  two  appeals  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of material  error  on  a  point  of  law.
    Those decisions are set aside.

11. I have remade the decisions and for the reasons  set  out  above  these
    appeals are allowed under Article 8, ECHR.

12. There was no request for the making of an anonymity order and  none  is
    made.

    For the reasons given below I make no fee award.




Signed                              Dated 6 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the Appellants have now succeeded in  their  appeals  I  have  considered
whether to make a fee award but have decided not to do so.  In  reaching  my
decision I note that in their applications the  Appellants  had  not  placed
specific reliance upon their mother's former status as  a  British  overseas
citizen, a critical factor, nor was the relevant case  law  put  before  the
judge at first instance.





Signed                              Dated  6 May 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French
