
G[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/06395/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 August 2015                    |On 15 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                        Miss Jody Ann Georgina GORDON
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Adophy, Rana & Co solicitors


                             DECISION & REASONS

1.    The Respondent is a national of Jamaica born on  10  April  1996.  She
made an application for entry clearance as a dependent  child  in  order  to
join her parents in the United Kingdom. This application was refused  on  24
April 2014 on the basis that  neither  parent  was  settled  in  the  United
Kingdom and the sole  responsibility  requirement  was  not  satisfied.  The
Respondent appealed and her appeal came before  First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
McWilliam for hearing on 27 February 2015. In a decision promulgated  on  26
March 2015, the Judge allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  and
under Article 8 of ECHR.

2.    The Secretary of State for the Home Department  sought  permission  to
appeal on 1 April 2015. The grounds of appeal asserted inter alia  that  the
Judge erred materially in fact at [31] in  taking  into  consideration  that
both the sponsor and her husband have been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for  a
considerable period of time and  "throughout  that  period  have  been  here
lawfully." Home Office records show that  the  sponsor  entered  the  United
Kingdom as a visitor for 6 months in  1999  and  was  then  given  leave  to
remain as a student until October 2002 but she then overstayed and was  next
encountered over 5 years later on 17 December 2007. The Judge's  finding  at
[24] that the sponsor was an impressive witness does not take  into  account
that the sponsor and her husband have a history of deceit  and  the  Judge's
finding  at  [28]  in  respect  of  the   Appellant's   mental   health   is
unsustainable as it was made without any medical evidence.

3.    Permission to appeal  was  granted  on  20  May  2015  by  First  Tier
Tribunal Judge Lambert on the basis that it was clearly  both  arguable  and
material to the  ground  that  the  Judge  erred  materially  in  fact  that
documentary evidence establishing lengthy periods of unlawful  residence  of
both parties. The Judge commented that there is  "...  an  absence  of  much
reasoning sustaining the positive credibility findings made" and  that  "...
the alternative  findings  under  Article  8  depend  on  those  credibility
findings and therefore cannot be sued to sustain the decision reached."

4.    At the hearing before me, Mr Whitwell sought to rely  on  the  grounds
of appeal. He acknowledged that the Judge may have made a drafting error  in
light of her findings at [2] [13] and [18] of the determination  which  show
that she was aware of the  gap  in  lawful  status.  He  asserted  that  the
Judge's findings at [31] did impinge on her  findings  under  the  Rules  at
[26] and [28] and the decision with regard to the Rules  and  Article  8  of
ECHR stand or fall together. He further clarified that the  reference  to  a
"history of deceit" in the grounds of appeal referred only to the  sponsor's
immigration history. In response, Mr Adophy submitted  that  the  Judge  was
entitled to find  as  she  did.  The  sponsor  had  not  misrepresented  her
situation and had been lawfully present from 1990 to 2002 and  had  been  on
temporary admission from 2007 to 2011 when she was granted leave to  remain.
He accepted that there was no medical evidence before  the  Judge  but  drew
attention to the fact that a letter from the sponsor dated 7  February  2014
which made reference to  the  Appellant's  suicide  attempts  pre-dated  the
decision letter and the Judge was entitled to take this into  account.  Both
parties agreed that paragraph 301 of the Rules was the  applicable  rule  in
this case, given that the sponsor was not settled in the United Kingdom.

5.    Having carefully considered the submissions of both  parties  and  the
documentary evidence I find that the First Tier Tribunal Judge did  not  err
materially in law. Whilst it is the case that at [31]  the  Judge  erred  in
fact in finding that the sponsor and her husband  had  resided  lawfully  in
the United Kingdom throughout, I consider that this finding is  confined  to
the Article 8 consideration as is clearly indicated by  the  heading  before
[30]. I do  not  consider  that  this  finding  infects  the  Judge's  clear
findings that the Appellant satisfied the requirements of paragraph  301  of
the Immigration Rules. As Mr Whitwell acknowledged, at [18] the Judge  noted
the sponsor's evidence that: "She was unable to make  an  application  until
she herself had been granted limited leave  in  2011.  She  was  waiting  to
receive a second period of leave before making an application." Clearly  the
Judge was aware that the sponsor was not lawfully resident  until  2011.  At
[24] the Judge found the sponsor to be an impressive witness having had  the
benefit of hearing her give oral evidence. Whilst the sponsor  may  have  an
adverse immigration history this does not mean  that  nothing  she  says  is
true and, unlike the Entry Clearance Officer, the Judge had the  opportunity
to assess the sponsor's oral evidence, including cross-examination  and  was
entitled to find that she was a credible witness. The Judge  was  also  well
aware of the absence of medical evidence as this was expressly drawn to  her
attention by the Home Office Presenting Officer at  [26]  but  she  accepted
the sponsor's evidence, which was supported by a letter from  the  Appellant
as to her mental health problems. The Judge was  entitled  to  find  on  the
evidence before her that, at the date of decision, there  were  serious  and
compelling  family  or  other  considerations  that   make   her   exclusion
undesirable and that the requirements of paragraph 301  of  the  Rules  were
met [29]. Her finding in respect of Article 8 was in the alternative.

6.    For the reasons set out above, I do  not  find  that  Judge  McWilliam
erred materially in law in allowing the appeal under paragraph  301  of  the
Immigration Rules and her decision in  this  respect  is  upheld,  with  the
effect that entry clearance should be granted to the Appellant.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

10 September 2015
