
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: OA/06182/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields              |Determination Promulgated   |
|On 29 April 2016                    |On 10 May 2016              |
|Prepared on 30 April 2016           |                            |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    C. U.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER SHEFFIELD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Mr Johnson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Nigeria.  His  wife  was  granted
           entry clearance as a Tier 4  (general)  student,  and  leave  to
           enter as such from 29 September 2014 until 30 January 2016.  His
           first application for entry clearance as  her  dependent  spouse
           was refused on 20 January 2015 as a result of a lack of evidence
           of adequate funds. His second  application  was  refused  on  16
           March 20154 by reference to paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration
           Rules.
        2. The Appellant duly appealed against the decision to  refuse  his
           second application. His appeal was heard on the  papers  at  his
           request and dismissed by Judge Cox in a decision promulgated  on
           10 September 2015.
        3. The Appellant's application  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
           permission to appeal was granted by First  Tier  Tribunal  Judge
           Parkes on 3 March 2016.
        4. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 response on 14 March 2016 stating
           simply that the Judge directed himself appropriately,  and  that
           there  was  ample  evidence  to  establish  that   the   company
           registration number claimed  for  the  corporation  said  to  be
           sponsoring the Appellant and his wife, actually  belonged  to  a
           quite different corporation.
        5. Thus the matter comes before me.

      The hearing


        6. The Appellant was  not  represented  at  the  hearing,  and  his
           sponsor did not attend it. He had  offered  no  explanation  for
           this, and he had not requested an adjournment of the hearing. No
           evidence has been served in support of the  appeal  beyond  that
           which was before the First Tier Tribunal.
        7. The appeal was of course determined by the First  Tier  Tribunal
           upon  the  papers  at  the  Appellant's  request.  Moreover  the
           sponsor's leave had expired  on  30  January  2016,  and  I  was
           informed by Mr Johnson that the Respondent's records  show  that
           she has not applied for a variation of it.
        8. I was satisfied that notice of the hearing was served  upon  the
           Appellant at the address  he  had  given  for  service.  In  the
           circumstances I was satisfied that I should proceed to determine
           the appeal, and that there was no proper purpose to be served by
           my adjourning the appeal of my own motion.


      The decision under appeal


        9. In support of the application the Appellant submitted  a  letter
           dated 23 December 2014. The author was not identified,  but  the
           letter purported to be written on behalf of  a  company,  Divine
           Roziks NIG Ltd ["DRN"]. The letter heading gave  details  for  a
           head office in Lagos, and a telephone number there. It also gave
           details for a branch office in China and two email addresses. In
           the text of the letter it  was  claimed  that  the  company  was
           incorporated on 22  March  2002  under  registration  number  RC
           44640.
       10. The  ECO  made  enquiries  of  the  Nigerian  Corporate  Affairs
           Commission and was told that whilst a company  did  exist  which
           was incorporated with registration number 44640, it was not NRG,
           but rather a company that had been registered on 6  April  1982.
           It was not  suggested  that  a  company  of  the  name  NRG  was
           incorporated or registered.
       11. The ECO attempted to make enquiries of NRG itself, but telephone
           calls to the number given on the letter head of the letter dated
           23 December 2014 were not answered or returned.
       12. As a result the ECO concluded  that  false  representations  had
           been made in the application  and  a  false  document  had  been
           produced in support of it.


      The appeal to the First Tier Tribunal


       13. In support of his appeal the Appellant produced a document  that
           was  said  to  be  a  genuine  copy  of   the   certificate   of
           incorporation of DRN, which was said to record its incorporation
           on 22 March 2002 with registration number 446405. There was also
           an Affidavit from an individual who claimed to be a director  of
           DRN, and who confirmed that DRN had never been contacted by  the
           ECO. This Affidavit  was  deficient  in  a  number  of  material
           respects. It did not identify who had written the letter  of  23
           December 2014,  their  position  within  DRN,  explain  how  the
           telephone calls of the ECO had not been  answered  or  responded
           to, or, offer an explanation as to how the author had failed  to
           give the accurate registration number for DRN.
       14. By inference the Appellant's case as put in  the  Affidavit  was
           (a) that a typographical error had been made by the author, and,
           (b) either that the ECO had lied about trying to make  telephone
           contact with DRN, or, that the ECO must have repeatedly  made  a
           mistake with the telephone number when trying to contract DRN.
       15. Judge Cox was satisfied that the Respondent had  discharged  the
           burden of proof that lay upon her, and that she had  established
           on the balance of probabilities that false representations  were
           made because DRN did not have the registration number 44640, and
           thus the letter of 23 December 2014 contained false information.
           He went on to conclude that there had been no innocent  mistake,
           and that there had been deliberate deception.


      Conclusion


       16. The grounds of appeal assert that Judge Cox failed  to  consider
           all of the evidence provided by the  Appellant,  and  failed  to
           take account of the document which is said to be the certificate
           of incorporation of NRG. Thus it is said the Judge erred in  law
           in finding that DRN  was  not  a  registered  company,  and  the
           Appellant  demanded  the  Upper  Tribunal  direct  the  ECO   to
           undertake further enquiries into the status of DRN.
       17. As such the grounds are no more than  a  disagreement  with  the
           Judge's assessment of the weight that  could  be  given  to  the
           various documents placed before him. The findings that  he  made
           were well open to  him  on  the  evidence  and  were  adequately
           reasoned. The reality was that the Appellant had accepted that a
           false statement had been made. He offered an  excuse  for  that,
           asserting that an innocent mistake had been  made,  but  he  had
           failed to offer any  cogent  evidence  to  explain  how  such  a
           mistake had come to be made, or even who had  made  it.  Indeed,
           given the allegation he faced, the evidence that DRN existed and
           was registered under the number he claimed for it, was  limited.
           Nor did the evidence produced offer an explanation as to how the
           ECOs telephone calls to the number provided had gone unanswered.


       18. Accordingly the grounds disclose no arguable error of law in the
           Judge's decision, and it follows  that,  despite  the  terms  in
           which the grant of permission to appeal was framed,  this  is  a
           challenge that must be dismissed.


   DECISION


      The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated  on
      10 September 2015 did not involve the making of an error of law in the
      decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to  be  set
      aside and remade. The decision to dismiss the  appeal  is  accordingly
      confirmed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008


    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
        indirectly  identify  her.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the
        Appellant and to  the  Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to proceedings being brought for  contempt  of
        court.










Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated: 30 April 2016
