
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
OA/06754/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                      |    Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 6th December 2017                     |On: 3rd January 2018             |
|                                          |                                 |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     AIO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                   ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, SHEFFIELD HUB
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:           Miss Akalezi (friend)
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Nigeria, born in 1994.  She appeals with
    permission[1] the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lever)  to
    dismiss her entry clearance appeal on human rights grounds.








    Anonymity


 2. This case turns on the presence in the United Kingdom of four  children
    who are the subject of care orders by the Family Courts. I am concerned
    that  the  identification  of  the  Appellant   could   lead   to   the
    identification of those children.  Having had regard to Rule 14 of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  and  the  Presidential
    Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders I  therefore  consider  it
    appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"





    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. This is a matter with a complex  background,  set  out  with  admirable
    clarity by the First-tier Tribunal Judge. In short,  the  case  history
    can be summarised as follows. The Appellant came to the United  Kingdom
    in 2006 and lived here until 2013. During that period  she  was  living
    with her partner, and the father of her four children, who were born in
    2002, 2006, 2007 and 2009.   She was subjected to domestic violence  by
    her  partner,  including  rape,  physical  assault  and  coercive   and
    controlling behaviour.   In 2013 the Appellant  travelled  to  Nigeria,
    accompanied by the three children who had been living with her  in  the
    United Kingdom. At some point thereafter her former partner brought all
    four children back here, without her consent, leaving her  in  Nigeria.
    She has not seen them since.

 4. Within a few months of the children's arrival  in  the  UK  the  eldest
    daughter reported her father to social  services  for  physical  abuse.
    Care proceedings were instituted and the children were removed from his
    care. Final care orders were made in respect of  the  children  by  HHJ
    Jenkins in July 2014, Judge Jenkins being satisfied that the children's
    allegations of regular physical abuse and neglect by their father  were
    true. They are now in long-term foster  care  provided  by  Leeds  City
    Council (adoption has been ruled out).  Their father was sent to prison
    upon conviction for child cruelty. He was released from his sentence in
    mid-2015. He remains in the  UK  and  has  repeatedly  sought,  without
    success, to have the care orders rescinded or amended.

 5. The Appellant has remained in Nigeria. She has however not given up  on
    her children.  Since 2014 she has sought various orders from the family
    court. She has asked for the children to be returned to her in  Nigeria
    and when that failed has sought to gain entry clearance so that she may
    be with them here. She has sought to increase the  Skype  contact  that
    she currently enjoys with them.  As Judge Lever notes her  progress  in
    these legal endeavours has been severely hampered by the fact that  she
    has not instructed specialist lawyers, either in the family proceedings
    or in respect of her immigration  appeals.   She  has  been  repeatedly
    refused entry clearance for lack of evidence.    The  application  that
    led to the present appeal is a  good  illustration  of  the  perils  of
    proceeding without such legal advice.    Made  in  2015  the  Appellant
    sought entry as a 'family member' within the meaning of Regulation 7 of
    the Immigration (European Economic Area)  Regulations  2006,  asserting
    that she should be given entry clearance to  enable  her  EEA  sponsors
    (the children)  to  exercise  their  treaty  rights.  As  I  think  the
    Appellant now understands, that was an application  doomed  to  failure
    since her children are not, for the purpose  of  the  Regulations,  EEA
    nationals exercising treaty rights. They are  British  and  have  never
    lived anywhere else in Europe. There was however another  limb  to  her
    application: an assertion that  it  would  be  a  disproportionate  and
    therefore unlawful interference with the Article 8 family life of  both
    her and the children if the ECO continued  to  exclude  her  from  this
    country. It is that element of the decision that is the subject of  the
    appeal before me.




    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


 6. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that there was a family  life  between
    the Appellant and all  four  children,  arising  from  their  past  and
    present relationship and the fact that she is their biological  mother.
     There had in the past been some doubt about that matter, since  for  a
    period at least the Appellant had participated in a  concerted  attempt
    to deceive the family court by agreeing that only two of  the  children
    were hers. The children's father had insisted (she says by threat) that
    she do so, he hoping that the two other children would be released from
    the  custody  of  the  local  authority  into  the  care  of  his  then
    girlfriend, whom he falsely claimed to be their natural  mother.   That
    fiction came to an end with the  production  of  DNA  test  results  in
    November 2014.


 7. The Tribunal further accepted that  the  continuing  refusal  to  grant
    entry clearance amounted to an interference with - or lack  of  respect
    for - that family life. The question remained: was the refusal of entry
    clearance disproportionate?

 8. In answering that question the First-tier Tribunal conducted  a  review
    of the material before it and the procedural history of the matter.  It
    noted that the father of the children has  proved  to  be  a  vexatious
    litigant who has dominated the proceedings in  the  family  court,  and
    that this had perhaps led to something of a  neglect  of  the  mother's
    position. This has been exacerbated by social services and  the  family
    courts apparently failing to understand the difficulties that she faces
    in terms of her immigration status (or rather lack of it). The Tribunal
    found however that the Appellant has been her own worst enemy. She  has
    made multiple applications to  the  family  courts  and  without  legal
    advice has repeatedly failed to understand the  true  position,  namely
    that her prospects of having  any  kind  of  direct  contact  with  the
    children are nil unless she cooperates with an assessment conducted  by
    social  services.  Such   an   assessment   could   be   conducted   by
    Skype/telephone but so far attempts to do so  have  been  unsuccessful.
    The  Tribunal's  conclusion  is  set  out  at  paragraph  44   of   its
    determination:


         "I find when looking at  matters  carefully  that  refusal  is  not
         disproportionate in  this  case.  The  Appellant  currently  enjoys
         indirect contact with her children via Skype and potentially  other
         means, such as telephone, emails, letters etc. I have  referred  to
         paragraph 34 of the judgement where  the  judge  upon  hearing  the
         mother recorded that she sought unlimited and unsupervised indirect
         contact. It appears that she has largely  got  presently  what  she
         requires, namely the indirect  contact  and  therefore  refusal  of
         entry does not breach any specific desire or wish that  she  raised
         before the judge. If such indirect contact is spasmodic because  of
         the failings identified by the guardian then that can be  rectified
         through correspondence.


         I accept that she may also desire direct contact  and  indeed  such
         may be beneficial to the children. However it is  abundantly  clear
         such can only follow  an  assessment  by  the  local  authority  or
         suitability  and  circumstances.  That  has   been   the   position
         throughout  these  proceedings  and  appears   understandable.   An
         assessment of the mother with  a  view  to  increasing  contact  is
         something that has been supported by the guardian and also referred
         to in the judgement. Indeed the judge made himself reference to the
         desirability of an increased involvement of the mother but the need
         for an assessment. It is clear therefore that the mechanics  of  an
         assessment and the timetabling of such needs to be put in place  as
         the first priority. There may be the need to make an application to
         the court in view of the Section 94(1)  ruling  to  begin  such  an
         assessment and further to be clear what is proposed by  the  mother
         to be the end product of an assessment if it should be  successful.
         All of those  essential  matters  can  be  put  in  motion  by  the
         Appellant from Nigeria. Again I would stress that she  should  seek
         legal aid assistance if available to get experienced legal advisors
         to assist in that matter. If she is able to get an  agreement  from
         the local authority for an assessment to be done  and  a  timetable
         for such an assessment  then  that  would  be  cogent  evidence  to
         support an application to come to the UK for the purposes of  such;
         she would also have that written evidence to place before an  Entry
         Clearance Officer in making such an application. Not only are those
         matters that can be put in motion by legal representatives  in  the
         UK but the Appellant herself has already demonstrated an ability to
         communicate from Nigeria with both the court and local  authorities
         and no doubt would have  a  similar  ability  to  communicate  with
         lawyers. She was represented before me by [MacKenzie  Friend]  Miss
         Akalezi and  therefore  a  refusal  of  entry  clearance  does  not
         restrict her rights and ability in this matter".


 9. For the benefit of the Appellant I can summarise that part of the First-
    tier Tribunal's determination as follows:


              i) The Appellant already has what she  last  sought  from  the
                 family courts, namely indirect contact by Skype etc;


             ii) That contact cannot increase - even if she were present  in
                 the UK - without further Order by the family court;

            iii) The family court will not alter  the  present  arrangements
                 unless there is an assessment of the Appellant;

             iv) Everyone agrees that this would be a good thing;

              v) An assessment could take place over  Skype  and  telephone.
                 That this is so  is  demonstrated  by  the  fact  that  the
                 Appellant  has  managed  to  maintain  contact   with   the
                 children, speak  to  Ms  Akalezi,  the  courts  and  social
                 services via such means;

             vi) In order to obtain entry clearance with a  view  to  having
                 direct contact  with  her  children  the  Appellant  should
                 participate in a Skype assessment.  If  the  assessment  is
                 positive she would then be able to use written evidence  of
                 this to make a new, Article 8 based, application for  entry
                 clearance.





    The Appeal


10. As I have noted the Appellant does not have  legal  representatives  in
    the UK. She does have the benefit of  assistance  from  Ms  Akalezi,  a
    woman who has sought over a number of  years  to  help  the  Appellant,
    notwithstanding the fact that  she  has  never  actually  met  her.  Ms
    Akalezi was, ironically, introduced to the case by the Appellant's  ex-
    partner, who asked her to 'speak to the Appellant', ie  to  participate
    in his plan to pressurize her. Once Ms Akalezi  heard  the  Appellant's
    version of events she immediately switched sides and has been assisting
    her ever since.   Although  she  is  a  qualified  lawyer  she  has  no
    expertise in either family or immigration law and  is  not  practising.
    It was Ms Akalezi who drafted the  grounds  of  appeal.   I  intend  no
    disrespect to her if I do not deal with each point  made  individually.
    As she agreed during the course of the hearing before me the  strongest
    ground is this: in its assessment  of  proportionality  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to make clear findings on the  best  interests  of  the
    children, contrary to s.55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
    Act 2009.


    Discussion and Findings


11. Given the history of this matter it is perhaps  unsurprising  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal focused on the proceedings thus far in  the  family
    court.  It  was  working  with  limited  information  and  was  rightly
    concerned that it did not have all  of  the  available  information  to
    hand.   Reading the determination as a whole it appears to me that  the
    Tribunal conducted a reasonableness review of the  ECO's  decision.  It
    was clearly not unsympathetic to the position of the Appellant, or  her
    children, and in the passage I cite  above  the  Tribunal  offers  some
    clear recommendations to the Appellant on how she might proceed.   What
    it did not do was to make findings on whether it would be in  the  best
    interests of these children to allow their mother  into  this  country.
    For the reasons I set out below the answer to  that  question,  on  the
    evidence before the Tribunal, was clearly  affirmative;  I  am  further
    satisfied that in the circumstances of this case, that should have been
    a finding determinative of the question of proportionality.




    A Primary Consideration


12. Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights provides:


         "1. Everyone has the right to respect for his private and family
         life, his home and his correspondence.


         2. There shall be no interference by a public authority with the
         exercise of this right except such as is in accordance with the law
         and is necessary in a democratic society in the interests of
         national security, public safety or the economic well-being of the
         country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the
         protection of health or morals, or for the protection of the rights
         and freedoms of others."


13. In Beoku-Betts [2008] UKHL 39 the House of Lords held that in decisions
    affecting the family life of migrants, decision-makers had to  consider
    the Article 8 rights of all family members involved.  Thus  a  decision
    directly impacting upon a mother would also have to take  into  account
    the indirect impact upon her children.




14. The relevant parts of  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 read:


    "(1)   The Secretary of  State  must  make  arrangements  for  ensuring
         that -


            a) the functions mentioned in  sub-section  (2)  are  discharged
            having regard to the need to safeguard and promote  the  welfare
            of children who are in the United Kingdom ....




      2) The functions referred to in sub-section (1) are -


           a) any function  of  the  Secretary  of  State  in  relation  to
              immigration, asylum or nationality;
           b) any function conferred by or by  virtue  of  the  Immigration
              Acts on an Immigration Officer ...


       (3)       A  person  exercising  any  of  those  functions  must,  in
exercising the function,
                  have regard to any guidance given to  the  person  by  the
Secretary of State for
                      the purpose of sub-section (1).




15. The duty imposed by this section was to be applied in this case  within
    the context of Article 8. The best interests of the child was  to  rank
    as a primary consideration in the proportionality  balancing  exercise.
    This required the Tribunal to consider that matter first,  to  consider
    all information relevant to the  question,  and  to  place  significant
    weight on its own conclusions in the balancing exercise: ZH  (Tanzania)
    [2011] UKSC 4,  AJ (India) [2011] EWCA Civ 1191,  E-A (Article 8  -best
    interests of child) Nigeria [2011] UKUT 00315 (IAC), MK (best interests
    of child) India [2011] UKUT 00475 (IAC),  JO  and  Others  (section  55
    duty) Nigeria [2014] UKUT 00517 (IAC).




    The First-tier Tribunal's Approach


16. The First-tier Tribunal did not ignore the position of the children. It
    had close regard to the various materials before  it  relating  to  the
    family court proceedings.   The determination refers inter alia to  the
    evidence of the Children's Guardian Catherine Hanlon,  to  the  CAFCASS
    review notes and to the judgement of David Salter, a Judge  sitting  in
    the Family Court at Leeds.  It makes reference to direct  contact  with
    their mother being potentially  beneficial  to  the  children,  to  her
    increased involvement in their lives being supported by  the  Guardian,
    and to the fact that the  Judge  in  the  family  court  regarded  that
    outcome as desirable.    The determination also refers, repeatedly,  to
    the importance of the Appellant instructing specialist  solicitors  who
    can assist her.  In its final analysis of proportionality, however, the
    determination contains no  global  assessment,  or  clear  finding,  on
    whether it would be in the best interests  of  the  children  to  admit
    their mother now. Instead the conclusion is reached that because it  is
    possible for her to pursue her case - and contact with her  children  -
    from Nigeria, the decision  cannot  be  said  to  be  disproportionate.
    Instead of placing the  evaluation  of  what  would  be  best  for  the
    children at the centre of its reasoning, the Tribunal  focused  on  the
    adequacy of the status quo. I am satisfied that that was  an  error  in
    approach.    In  omitting  to  conduct  a  discrete  'best   interests'
    assessment the Tribunal overlooked the  primary  consideration  in  the
    proportionality balancing exercise: was it better for the  children  if
    their mother were to be granted entry clearance?




    Best Interests


17. The Tribunal is not being asked to decide whether it would  be  in  the
    children's best interests to be returned to their  mother.  That  is  a
    question that can only be answered by the  family  court.  Instead  the
    Tribunal is asked, as a preliminary matter, to decide a  much  narrower
    question. Would it be in their best interests if she were  given  leave
    to enter the UK?


18. If the Appellant were to be given leave to enter the UK, for a  limited
    period defined by the Entry Clearance Officer, it would enable  her  to
    do three things.

19. First and foremost it would enable her to meaningfully engage with  the
    assessment process rightly identified by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as
    being the largest obstacle to family reunification.  This was  a  point
    repeatedly  emphasised  by  Ms  Akalezi.  The  assessment  process  was
    something which was possible using 'modern means of communication'  but
    would obviously be far easier, and preferable, to  perform  in  person.
    The children's guardian  Catherine  Hanlon  had  already  recorded  the
    difficulties that social workers had encountered in trying  to  conduct
    their assessment  'on-line'.  The  connection  was  difficult  and  the
    Appellant had apparently become frustrated  and  afraid  that  she  was
    being misunderstood.  In observing the interaction between  mother  and
    children in Skype contact it was apparent  that  the  younger  children
    were easily distracted and that they found it difficult to sit and talk
    using this medium. If the Appellant were physically present that  would
    dramatically change the nature of the contact, and social workers would
    - importantly - have the opportunity to see  the  children  interacting
    with their mother naturally. If the assessment could  be  conducted  in
    person it would have the twin benefits of  being  more  practical,  and
    more valuable.


20. Second, although this is a more marginal consideration, it  would  make
    it far easier for the Appellant to instruct solicitors. It is  apparent
    from the Judgement of Judge Salter that the  Family  Court  would  have
    been   greatly   assisted   by   the   Appellant   having    specialist
    representation. It is in that context that this factor plays some  role
    in the assessment of the children's welfare. It  is  plainly  in  their
    best interests  that  the  Family  Court  have  the  benefit  of  clear
    evidence, and instructions, from their Mother.

21. Third, it would mean that it would be possible for  direct  contact  to
    resume. The First-tier Tribunal rightly identified that  there  was  at
    present a barring order in place by the family court to the effect that
    neither parent can make an application to alter the terms of  the  care
    orders without the consent of the  court  (the  's91  (14)  ruling',  a
    reference to s91 of the Children Act  1989).    It  would  appear  from
    Judge Salter's judgement that this has been put in place to prevent any
    further vexatious litigation from father, and misguided applications by
    mother (for which see above).  It is however clear  that  the  children
    themselves would like to see their mother, and on the  evidence  before
    the Tribunal it is very difficult to see that this would be opposed  by
    either the Local Authority or the family court. The Children's Guardian
    Catherine Hanlon supports their wishes; indeed she wrote to the ECO  to
    that effect. As the First-tier Tribunal determination notes such direct
    contact was regarded  as  desirable  by  Judge  Salter.    I  note  the
    guidance given by Lady Hale in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4  at paras 34-
    38:  where children are old enough to express their views, these are an
    important indicator of where their best interests lie.

22. Conversely it is difficult to see the downsides for the children of her
    being granted entry.  The only potential difficulty I  can  foresee  is
    that they might be confused, and thereby distressed,  by  the  contact,
    but that would be a matter for children's services.  Any  contact  with
    their mother will  remain  regulated  by  the  local  authority,  whose
    careful management of their cases will continue under  the  supervision
    of the family court. It may be that in the final analysis the  children
    are not returned to her care,  but  surely  it  must  be  in  the  best
    interests of the children that they are given a  realistic  opportunity
    to reunite their family.




    Proportionality


23. In my assessment of proportionality I must start with  the  Immigration
    Rules, in particular Appendix FM and the provisions for 'family life as
    a parent'. It is common ground  that  the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the
    requirements therein, primarily because  of  paragraph  E-ECPT.2.4  (a)
    which requires her to  either  have  sole  parental  responsibility  or
    direct access agreed by the full-time carer or the family court.      I
    start with those Rules because they are  an  expression  of  where  the
    Secretary of State, and parliament, considers that the  balance  should
    be struck.  It is in the public interest that persons who  cannot  meet
    the requirements of those rules should be refused entry.


24. Applying the other public interest factors set  out  at  s117B  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, I find that the Appellant
    can speak English, a factor that would better aid  her  integration  (I
    have no formal confirmation of her ability to speak  English  but  note
    that communication with Ms Akalezi, the children and social workers has
    all taken place in English). I am told that she has very little  money.
    She would therefore be entirely reliant on the support  of  others  (or
    the state) should she be come to the UK  and  that  is  a  matter  that
    weighs against her in the balancing exercise, since she is plainly  not
    financially independent.

25. In her submissions Mrs Aboni asked me to consider  that  the  Appellant
    may have ulterior motives in seeking entry clearance: she  may  not  be
    interested in seeing her children at all, and  could  simply  be  using
    them as a vehicle to gain entry to the UK. There was absolutely nothing
    in the evidence before me to support such a contention.  The  Appellant
    has, since 2014,  made  multiple  and  continual  efforts  to  maintain
    contact with her children. She  spent  at  least  one  year  trying  to
    persuade the family courts to return the children to  her  in  Nigeria.
    Her admission would be entirely discretionary and obviously it would be
    open to the Secretary of State to refuse to extend  her  stay,  and  to
    remove her from the United Kingdom, in  the  event  that  her  parental
    relationship with the children should cease.


26. It is trite immigration and human rights law that  a  'best  interests'
    finding  will   not   necessarily   demonstrate   an   action   to   be
    disproportionate or otherwise. In this case however I am satisfied that
    it assumes such significance that it outweighs the public  interest  as
    summarised above.  This is a paradigm case in which the UK's Article  8
    obligations can only  be  fulfilled  'outside  of  the  rules'.   These
    British children have been through what must  have  been  an  extremely
    difficult time. They have witnessed  domestic  violence  against  their
    mother, endured forced separation from her, had direct violence visited
    upon them by their father, and have been taken  into  foster  care  and
    separated (in twos) from each other.   The Appellant  herself  was  the
    victim of a prolonged campaign of domestic abuse. She was,  it  is  now
    not in issue, under the coercive control  of  her  former  partner  who
    deliberately returned the family to Nigeria with the express  intention
    of separating the Appellant from her children. It is possible  for  the
    Appellant to pursue her case from Nigeria, but I  have  found  that  it
    would be preferable, that is to  say  in  the  best  interests  of  the
    children for her to be granted entry clearance in order that she can be
    assessed in person by social services, and better  participate  in  the
    family proceedings with  a  view  to  resuming  direct  contact.  I  am
    satisfied,  having  given  due  weight  to  the  public   interest   in
    maintaining immigration control and protecting the economy, that in the
    exceptional circumstances of this case it would be appropriate to allow
    the Appellant's human rights appeal. To refuse her entry  would  be  to
    show a disproportionate lack of respect for the family  life  that  she
    shares with her British children.

    Decision


14. The making of the First-tier Tribunal decision  involved  an  error  in
    approach  such that the decision is set aside.


15. The decision is remade as follows:  "the appeal  is  allowed  on  human
    rights grounds".

16. There is an order for anonymity.







                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                          29th December 2017


                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 15th September 2017 by First-tier
Tribunal Judge MJ Gillespie




