
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/06767/2013
     OA/06770/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 30 June 2014                                 |On 11 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NICOSIA
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                LARISA KELLER
                                 MILNA KELLER
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr I Ahmed, Bankfield Heath, Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the respondent in this appeal as the "appellants"  and
    to the appellant as the "respondent" (as they were  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal).  The appellants Larisa Keller and  Milna  Keller,  were
    born respectively on 19 November 1969 and 8  October  2003.   They  are
    citizens of Russia and are currently residing in Cyprus.   The  sponsor
    is Mr Kevin Bowen,  a  British  citizen  currently  residing  with  the
    appellants in Cyprus.  On 30 January 2013, the Entry Clearance  Officer
    (ECO) Nicosia refused the applications of the appellants for  a  family
    permit confirming their right to reside in  the  United  Kingdom  as  a
    family member of an EEA national (the sponsor).  Their application  was
    made subject to the  provisions  of  paragraph  9  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006 (the 2006 Regulations).   The
    sponsor is the partner of the first appellant and the second  appellant
    is the natural daughter of the first appellant.

 2. The appellants appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Grimshaw)
    which, in a determination promulgated on 5 February 2014,  allowed  the
    appeal.  The respondent now appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  There are two grounds of appeal.  The first  ground  asserts
    that the judge failed to make  findings  of  fact  in  respect  of  the
    intentions (as regards her relationship with the sponsor) of the  first
    appellant.  Mr Diwnycz, for the respondent, told me that he  no  longer
    sought to pursue that  line  of  argument.   Secondly,  the  respondent
    asserts that the judge failed to provide adequate reasons  for  finding
    that the relationship between the sponsor and the first  appellant  was
    durable, especially in light of the  "less  than  positive  immigration
    history" of the first appellant.  The third ground of appeal refers  to
    the second appellant.  The respondent asserts that the second appellant
    does  not  fall  to  be  considered  under  paragraph  7  of  the  2006
    Regulations because she is not a family member of the  sponsor.   Judge
    Grimshaw found that the second appellant was entitled to an EEA  family
    permit as a family member under paragraph 7  of  the  2006  Regulations
    [25].

 3.  Judge  Grimshaw  summarised  the  reasons  for  the  refusal  of   the
    appellants' applications as follows:

    The Respondent refused the Appellants' applications for an  EEA  family
    permit after applying the provisions of Regulations 7 and 8 (5) of  the
    EEA Regulations.

    The reasons for refusal are set out in the refusal notices. In  essence
    the Respondent had considered if the first Appellant could qualify  for
    a family permit under Regulation 8 as an 'extended family member'. This
    Regulation allows an applicant to demonstrate that they are an extended
    family member of an EEA national by proving that they are in a  durable
    relationship with their sponsor.

    The Respondent noted that the first Appellant had met  her  sponsor  in
    2012. The documentation she had submitted showed that her  relationship
    with the sponsor had subsisted since 2012. However, the first Appellant
    had stated that she was separated  from  her  spouse  but  provided  no
    evidence that she had pursued divorce proceedings. It  was  unclear  if
    she was still in a marriage when she met the  sponsor.  The  Respondent
    concluded that the first Appellant had not provided sufficient evidence
    of  a  durable  relationship  in  line  with  paragraph  295A  of   the
    Immigration Rules.

    It followed that because the first Appellant had not shown she was in a
    durable relationship the second Appellant could not  be  treated  as  a
    family member under Regulation 7. She was not entitled to an EEA family
    permit.




 4. The judge found the sponsor to be a "clear and credible witness."   She
    recorded that the sponsor and first appellant met in  January  2012  at
    the time when the first appellant was a failed  asylum  seeker,  having
    exhausted her appeal rights  by  2011.   She  had  separated  from  her
    husband after a marriage which had lasted less than four  months.   The
    sponsor and first appellant began to cohabit  soon  after  their  first
    meeting and the judge records that "the second appellant  was  part  of
    their household." [17]  The appellants were removed to Russia in  April
    2012.  Thereafter, the sponsor and the appellants relocated  to  Cyprus
    where the sponsor obtained work.  Judge Grimshaw  recorded  that  "[The
    sponsor] has now been  offered  a  good  job  in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Understandably, he seeks to return with  the  appellants  as  a  family
    unit."

 5. Judge Grimshaw found that the first appellant  had  obtained  a  decree
    absolute in her divorce in January 2014 thereby dispelling "the  doubts
    that have been raised by the respondent in relation to  the  steps  she
    has taken to sever her ties with her husband and her  marital  status."
    [19] The judge noted  [21]  that  "the  first  appellant's  immigration
    history is unlikely to excite much public sympathy.   ...  her  request
    for asylum was refused on the  grounds  that  she  was  not  a  genuine
    refugee and there was no risk on her  return  to  Russia."   The  judge
    noted that the sponsor and first appellant had lived  together  in  the
    United Kingdom and in Cyprus for a total of two years by  the  date  of
    the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal.   She  found  that  "the  first
    appellant cannot erase her immigration history.  It is for the  sponsor
    to make of it what he will."  She found that it was unlikely  that  the
    sponsor (described by the judge as "a gentleman of  mature  years")  is
    unlikely to have exercised  poor  judgment  in  his  dealing  with  the
    appellant.  She found it unlikely that  the  sponsor  would  have  been
    manipulated into a relationship by the first appellant.   At  [24]  the
    judge concluded:

         On the totality of the evidence before me I am satisfied  that  the
         first appellant and the sponsor are in a durable relationship.  The
         first appellant meets the conditions of Regulation 8(5) of the  EEA
         Regulations.  She is entitled to an EEA family permit.

 6. Granting permission, Judge Simpson wrote:

         ... As this relationship has only endured for a  period  of  twelve
         months at the date of decision it is arguable that  this  does  not
         amount to a "durable relationship".

 7. Mr Diwnycz did not argue  that  Judge  Grimshaw  was  not  entitled  to
    conclude that the relationship between the sponsor and first  appellant
    was not durable because it had lasted for a period  of  less  than  two
    years before the date of the ECO's decision.   As  the  Upper  Tribunal
    concluded in Dauhoo (EEA Regulations - Regulation 8(2)) [2012] UKUT  79
    (IAC) "the concept of a durable relationship is a term of EU  law  and,
    as such, it does  not  impose  a  fixed  time  period."   The  European
    Commission has also issued guidance concerning with the  implementation
    of Directive 2004/38 (Communication COM (2009) 313 final):

         The requirement of durability of the relationship must be  assessed
         in the light of the objective of  the  Directive  to  maintain  the
         unity of the family in a broad sense.  National rules on durability
         and partnership can  refer  to  a  minimum  amount  of  time  as  a
         criterion for whether a partnership can be considered  as  durable.
         However, in this case national rules would  need  to  foresee  that
         other relevant aspects (such as for example a joint mortgage to buy
         a home) are also taken  into  account.   Any  denial  of  entry  or
         residence must be fully justified in writing and open to appeal.

 8. There was, therefore, no black letter law  requirement  for  the  first
    appellant and sponsor to prove that they have been cohabiting or  in  a
    durable relationship for a specified period of time.   What  the  first
    appellant and sponsor were required to show was that they continued  to
    be engaged in a durable relationship.  The determination of that  issue
    was purely a question of fact and  Judge  Grimshaw  made  a  clear  and
    unequivocal finding that the first appellant and the  sponsor  continue
    to engage in a durable relationship with each other.  In reaching  that
    finding, the judge took account of  all  the  relevant  evidence.   She
    certainly did not underplay the first appellant's  immigration  history
    but gave clear and cogent reasons for finding that, notwithstanding her
    poor immigration history, both the first appellant and the sponsor were
    in  a  genuine  relationship  which  they  intended  should   continue.
    Importantly, the judge found that the  sponsor  had  entered  into  the
    relationship fully aware of the first appellant's immigration  history;
    there is no suggestion in her findings of naivety or wishful  thinking.
    I cannot identify any error in Judge Grimshaw's approach to analysis of
    the evidence and I find that her conclusion was available  to  her  and
    was fully supported by adequate reasoning.

 9. I find, however, that the judge did err in concluding that  the  second
    appellant, the non-EU child of an unmarried partner of an EEA national,
    was entitled  to  a  family  permit  under  paragraph  7  of  the  2006
    Regulations.  The second appellant is not, as  the  grounds  of  appeal
    state, either "a  child  of  an  EEA  national  or  their  spouse/civil
    partner" because the sponsor and the first appellant were  not  married
    at the date of the decision.  Further, paragraph  8  ("Extended  Family
    Members") does not, on the face of the Regulation, appear to offer  the
    second appellant any assistance since it refers to "a  relative  of  an
    EEA national, his spouse or civil partner [who]  is  a  member  of  his
    household."  However, I accept that there appears to  be  some  tension
    between the provisions of the 2006 Regulation and  Article  3(2)(a)  of
    Directive 2004/38 which provides:

    Without prejudice to any right  to  free  movement  and  residence  the
    persons concerned may have in their own right, the  host  Member  State
    shall, in accordance with its national  legislation,  facilitate  entry
    and residence for the following persons:
    (a) any other family members, irrespective of their nationality, not
    falling under the definition in point 2 of Article 2 who, in the
    country from which they have come, are dependants or members of the
    household of the Union citizen having the primary right of residence,
    or where serious health grounds strictly require the personal care of
    the family member by the Union citizen;

10. The European Court of Justice in case C-83/11 (Rhaman) found  that  the
    Directive concerns "persons who are family members, in the broad sense,
    dependent on a Union citizen [21].  The  course  also  noted  that  the
    preamble of the Directive [6] recorded one of  the  objectives  of  the
    Directive as the maintenance of "the unity of the family in  a  broader
    sense ... taking into consideration [the non-EU  citizen]  relationship
    with the Union  citizen  or  any  other  circumstances  such  as  their
    financial or physical dependence on the Union citizen."  The court  had
    already found  [case  C-127/08  Metock]  that  the  provisions  of  the
    Directive should not be "interpreted restrictively and must not, in any
    event, be deprived of their effectiveness." [84] In the present appeal,
    it would appear that the application of the 2006 Regulations (paragraph
    8) does not serve  to  promote  the  objective  of  the  Directive  "to
    maintain the unity of the family in a broader sense" since paragraph  8
    applies only to the relatives of an EEA national, his spouse  or  civil
    partner; the first appellant does not fall into  any  of  those  latter
    categories being the partner of the sponsor but not his spouse.

11. National courts within the EU are obliged to interpret domestic law "so
    far as possible, in the light of the wording and  the  purpose  of  the
    Directive concerned in order to  achieve  the  results  sought  by  the
    Directive" (see case C-212/04 Adeneler  [108]).   I  find  that,  on  a
    proper  construction,  Directive  2004/38  does  apply  to  the  second
    appellant who is the non-EU relative (daughter) of the partner  of  the
    sponsor.  Insofar as she does not fall  within  the  definition  of  an
    "extended family member" for the purposes of paragraph 8  of  the  2006
    Regulations, she is entitled to the issue of a  family  permit  by  the
    application of Directive 2004/38.

12. I find that (i) Judge Grimshaw did not err in law in finding  that  the
    first appellant and the sponsor are in  a  durable  relationship;  (ii)
    whilst she did err in law in  finding  that  the  second  appellant  is
    entitled to a family permit under the provisions of paragraph 7 of  the
    2006 Regulations, the second appellant is entitled to  receive  such  a
    permit  by   a   correct   application   of   Directive   2004/38   and
    notwithstanding  the  provisions   of   the   2006   Regulations.    In
    consequence, I exercise my discretion by refraining from setting  aside
    the First-tier Tribunal determination.   Accordingly,  this  appeal  is
    dismissed.

DECISION

13. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 20 July 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

