
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/07439/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 August 2015                    |On 27 August 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL


                                   Between

                                     TSL
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Johnrose Solicitor for the Ellen Court
Partnership
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. I have considered whether any parties  require  the  protection  of  an
    anonymity direction. No anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
    respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and
    evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bruce promulgated on 16 March 2015 which  dismissed  the
    Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 8 April 2014
    to refuse to grant him entry clearance as an adult dependent relative.

Background

 3. The Appellant was born  on  5  November  1993  and  is  a  national  of
    Zimbabwe. He is the son of PL a recognized refugee who has lived in the
    UK since 2000 and is the sponsor in  the  application  made  for  entry
    clearance dated 24 February 2014.

 4. On 8  April  2014  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
    application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons: the Appellant
    did not meet the relationship requirements of E-ECDR.2.4, the  personal
    care requirements, as an adult dependent relative.

The Judge's Decision

 5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal. First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bruce ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal against the Respondent's
    decision. The Judge found :

      a) It was conceded before her that the Appellant could  not  meet  the
         requirements of the Rules as an adult dependent relative and relied
         solely on Article 8 outside the Rules.

      b) The Sponsor left Zimbabwe  when  the  Appellant  was  7  years  old
         leaving him in the care  of  relatives  but  they  have  maintained
         contact by telephone, email and online social messaging.

      c) The Appellant was at the time of hearing 21  years  old,  attending
         college and 'no doubt able to care for himself'.

      d) PL is a refugee and cannot return to Zimbabwe and  fears  she  will
         not see her son again unless he comes to live with her.

      e) She remarked that  although  there  was  no  medical  evidence  she
         accepted that PL was  HIV  positive  and  was  receiving  treatment
         although she accepted that she had been very sick  between  2002  -
         2004.

      f) She has been working as a carer  but  has  been  off  work  due  to
         suffering epileptic seizures. They were managing her medication and
         once they had the balance right she would return to work.

      g) By reference to Article 8 she accepted that there was a  subsisting
         family life between the Sponsor and her son  and  the  decision  to
         refuse entry clearance would  interfere  with  it.  The  legitimate
         purpose of the refusal was the protection of the economy.

      h) The Appellant did not meet any of the  requirements  of  the  Rules
         that would allow him entry clearance.

      i) She had sympathy for the Appellant and the sponsor  as  they  would
         like to be together.

      j) However she found that she could only allow the appeal on Article 8
         grounds  if  she  found  some  compelling  reason,  not  adequately
         reflected in the Rules, to do so.

      k) She found that there had been no disadvantage to the  Appellant  in
         the way that the Sponsor's refugee claim had been dealt with by the
         Respondent as the delay was largely that of the Sponsor.

      l) The Judge considered whether the situation of a woman with  a  life
         threatening illness was a reason why her son should be  allowed  to
         join her but found that the medical evidence submitted  in  support
         of the application said nothing about the sponsor's  current  state
         of health or how she might benefit from her son  joining  her.  She
         commented that it did not even confirm that she was  HIV+  although
         she accepted that to be the case for the purpose of the appeal.

      m) She concluded that there  was  no  humanitarian  reason  why  entry
         clearance should be granted.

 6. Grounds of appeal were lodged arguing that the Judge had erred  in  her
    assessment of the humanitarian reasons for allowing the  appeal  having
    accepted that the sponsor was HIV+; the medical evidence did state that
    the sponsor was HIV+  contrary  to  what  the  Judge  said;  there  was
    evidence of the sponsors  current  medical  condition  in  her  witness
    statement; those factors in s.117B that the Judge had to consider would
    all be answered favourably.

 7. On 16 June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth gave  permission
    to appeal.

 8. At the hearing I heard submissions from Ms Johnrose on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant that:

      a) She accepted that the Rules were not met and this appeal could only
         ever have succeeded under Article 8 outside the Rules.

      b) The judge had been referred to page 6 of  the  Appellant's  bundle,
         the letter from the Doctor dated 28 January 2015  and  this  letter
         confirmed that the Sponsor was HIV+ and had chronic health problems
         and recommended that she lived with another individual.

      c) The Judge indicated that if she had that evidence  she  would  have
         allowed the appeal.

 9. On behalf of the Respondent, Ms Johnson submitted that :

      a) There was no indication by the Judge in paragraph 16 that she would
         have allowed the appeal if there had been other medical evidence.

      b) The medical evidence does not support the argument that  there  are
         compelling reasons to allow entry clearance.

      c) The evidence was not before the Judge that  the  Sponsor  needed  a
         carer and the Appellant was the only carer that would do.

Legal Framework

10. It is now generally accepted that Immigration Rules do not  provide  in
    advance for every nuance in the application of Article 8 in  individual
    cases. At para 30 of Nagre, Sales J said:

         "30.     ... if, after the process of applying the  new  rules  and
             finding that the claim for leave to remain under  them  fails,
             the relevant official or tribunal judge considers it is  clear
             that the consideration under the Rules has fully addressed any
             family life or private life issues arising under Article 8, it
             would be sufficient simply to say that; they would not have to
             go on, in addition, to consider the case separately  from  the
             Rules. If there is no arguable case that  there  may  be  good
             grounds for granting leave to  remain  outside  the  Rules  by
             reference to Article 8, there would be no point in introducing
             full separate consideration of Article 8  again  after  having
             reached a decision on application of the Rules."

11. This was also endorsed by the Court of Appeal in Singh and Khalid where
    Underhill LJ said (at para 64):

         "64.      ...  there  is  no  need  to  conduct  a  full   separate
             examination of article 8  outside  the  Rules  where,  in  the
             circumstances of a particular case, all the issues  have  been
             addressed in the consideration under the Rules."

12. More recently the Court of Appeal in  SS  Congo  [2015]  EWCA  Civ  387
    stated in paragraph 33:

         "In our judgment, even though a test  of  exceptionality  does  not
         apply in every case falling within the scope of Appendix FM, it  is
         accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of
         special contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances
         would need to be identified to support a claim  for  grant  of  LTR
         outside the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  In  our  view,  that  is  a
         formulation which is not as strict as a test of exceptionality or a
         requirement of "very compelling reasons"  (as  referred  to  in  MF
         (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to  foreign
         criminals), but which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
         consideration of public interest factors as finds expression in the
         Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in  Appendix  FM.
         It also reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which  has
         been tested and has survived scrutiny in  this  court:  see,  e.g.,
         Haleemudeen at [44], per Beatson LJ. "

Finding on Material Error

13. Having heard those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
    Tribunal made no material errors of law based on  the  evidence  before
    the Tribunal at the date of hearing.

14. It was conceded quite properly by Ms Johnrose who appeared in the First-
    tier that the Appellant's appeal could only ever succeed under  Article
    8 outside the Rules as he could not meet any  of  the  provisions  that
    would allow entry clearance under the Rules.

15. It was argued that the Judge erred in law in failing to take account of
    the medical evidence at page 6 of the bundle in her assessment  of  the
    argument that in this case there were compelling reasons to grant leave
    outside the Rules.  I am satisfied that it cannot be  argued  that  the
    Judge  did  not  take  into  account  the  medical  evidence   as   she
    specifically referred to it at paragraph 16 of her  decision.  What  is
    clear from a reading of the decision is that the Judge  concluded  that
    the medical evidence (an 8 line letter from her GP Dr Kamutasa) did not
    sustain the argument that Ms Johnrose sought to make.

16. I am satisfied that the Judge had before her both a  witness  statement
    and the Sponsor's oral evidence (paragraph  7)  in  which  the  sponsor
    stated:

         "She has been working as a carer but at the moment is off work  due
         to having suffered some epileptic seizures. They are  managing  her
         medication and once they have the balance right she will return  to
         work."

17. The Judge was factually correct to state that the brief letter from  Dr
    Kamutasa did not confirm she was HIV+ as it does not: it uses the  term
    'immunodeficiency from a chronic retroviral infection'  but  the  Judge
    accepts that for the purpose of the  appeal  she  is  HIV+.  There  was
    nothing before the Judge to suggest that the fact of being  HIV+  alone
    and under the care of  specialists  who  were  managing  her  condition
    without more was sufficient to find compelling reasons for allowing the
    appeal.

18. The Appellant relies on the final comment of Dr Kamara which is :

         "With her medical conditions it is recommended that she lives  with
         at least another individual who may offer help in  the  event  that
         help is urgently needed."

19. The Judge however carefully focussed on  the  principal  issue  of  the
    relevance of the medical evidence to the issue she has to assess  where
    she concluded that the :

         "... medical evidence that she has says nothing about  her  current
         state of health, or how she might benefit from having her son  join
         her."

20. I am satisfied that this  was  a  finding  open  to  her:  the  medical
    evidence stated that she had chronic ,that is enduring  conditions  and
    listed epilepsy , dermatitis and reflux in addition to being  HIV+  and
    she was being treated by specialists. There was nothing in  the  report
    to make clear in what way the presence of her son would benefit her.  I
    also note that this was against a background  of  clear  oral  evidence
    that her medications were being 'balanced'  and  she  then  anticipated
    returning to work as the problems that had  caused  her  to  stop,  the
    epileptic seizures, would stop.

21. Paragraph 7 of the grounds argue that the Judge failed to take  into  s
    117B of the Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  and  that  is
    correct. However I am satisfied that this was not a material  error  as
    the significance of these factors is hat where they are not present the
    public interest is fortified. They do not give positive rights.

22. I was therefore satisfied that the Judge's determination when read as a
    whole set out findings that were sustainable and sufficiently  detailed
    and based on cogent reasoning.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established and  that
    the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed      Date 26.8.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell
