
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07274/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 November 2016                         |On 21 December 2016              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - Islamabad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Sellwood, Counsel instructed by Rashid & Rashid
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant in these  proceedings  is  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    ("ECO").  However, for convenience I refer to the parties as they  were
    before the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on  17  May  1990.   She
    applied for entry clearance  as  a  spouse  but  that  application  was
    refused in a decision dated 17 March 2015.

 3. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Fletcher-Hill ("the FtJ") at a  hearing  on  26  January
    2016.  She allowed  the  appeal  under  Article  8  of  the  ECHR,  but
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 4. The respondent's grounds of appeal in relation to her decision  contend
    that the FtJ was wrong to allow the appeal in circumstances  where  the
    appellant did not meet the Immigration Rules, and where she could  only
    have undertaken an Article 8 assessment  where  there  were  compelling
    circumstances not recognised by the Rules.   The  decision  in  Gulshan
    (Article 8 - new Rules - see correct Approach) [2013] UKUT 00640  (IAC)
    is relied on.  It  is  argued  that  the  FtJ  did  not  identify  such
    compelling circumstances.

 5. It is further argued that the appellant had a further remedy which  was
    to re-apply for  entry  clearance  with  the  appropriate  evidence  in
    support of the application.  This was a matter that the FtJ had  failed
    to explore.  It is  argued  that  there  were  no  circumstances  which
    required consideration outside the Rules.  Article 8 should not be used
    to circumvent the requirements of the Rules.

 6. In submissions Mr Tufan also referred to the decision in AS (Somalia) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 32 to the effect
    that it was  the  date  of  decision  that  needed  to  be  applied  in
    consideration of the evidence, even under Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   In
    addition, I was referred to Secretary of State for the Home  Department
    v SS (Congo) & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387, and what is said to be the need
    for a higher threshold for compelling circumstances in entry  clearance
    appeals.  Although at [70]  the  FtJ  had  referred  to  the  need  for
    compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised under  the  Rules,
    her conclusions in that respect are not reasoned.  Furthermore, she had
    not taken into account the fact that the issue  was  to  be  judged  by
    reference to the date of decision.

 7. Mr Sellwood accepted that it was the date of  decision  which  was  the
    relevant date for  consideration.   However,  the  respondent  has  not
    pointed to any post-decision facts which the FtJ took into account  and
    which she should not have done.  Apart from the fact that  the  sponsor
    had now changed his employment, and  that  any  new  application  would
    probably succeed the FtJ said, she had  already  concluded  that  there
    were compelling circumstances such  as  to  enable  her  to  allow  the
    appeal.  Those compelling  circumstances  were  that  family  life  was
    unsustainable in Afghanistan, in the light of the evidence to which she
    had earlier referred.  The sponsor had been working as  an  interpreter
    in Afghanistan and threats had been made.  There was also the fact that
    the appellant and the sponsor have a child who is  a  British  citizen.
    Even if the FtJ had failed  to  recognise  that  it  was  the  date  of
    decision which was the relevant date even for Article 8  purposes,  any
    error of law in that respect was not material because the outcome would
    have been the same.

 8. It was further submitted that the criteria for entry clearance are  not
    as exhaustive as the requirements for leave to remain under Article  8.
    The Article 8  assessment  is  therefore  more  at  large.   The  entry
    clearance Rules are "less of a complete  code".   The  decision  in  SS
    (Congo) does not therefore assist the respondent's arguments.

 9. Mr Tufan referred to the fact that the sponsor had gone to  Afghanistan
    and he and the appellant were living together until he returned to  the
    UK in 2015.  Furthermore, it was only the appellant that said that  she
    had received threats.  That was not something that  the  sponsor  could
    know about.

    Conclusions

10. The application for entry clearance as a partner  was  refused  because
    the appellant was not able to meet the English language requirement  of
    the Rules, because the ETS language certificate was not valid  in  that
    ETS certificates at the time of the  appellant's  application  were  no
    longer  licensed  by  the  Home  Office  to  award   English   language
    certificates.

11. Furthermore, the sponsor was not present and settled in the UK  at  the
    time of the application.  He had been working in  Afghanistan  since  2
    May 2012.

12. It was accepted on behalf of the appellant  before  the  FtJ  that  the
    appellant was not able to meet the requirements of the Rules because at
    the date of the decision the sponsor was not present and settled in the
    UK and the English language test was not valid.

13. The evidence from the sponsor before the FtJ was that he had previously
    worked in Afghanistan, since November 2011,  at  army  bases  and  that
    during his work he needed to live on the army base rather than with his
    wife but that on annual leave he was able to visit her.  She lived with
    his parents in Kabul initially, but after  their  son's  birth  in  May
    2014, she moved to live with her mother, also in Kabul.   His  evidence
    was also that sometimes he went to meet his wife in Dubai,  and  tended
    to see her once every three to six months.  His evidence  was  that  he
    did not believe that he would be able to live as a family with his wife
    in Afghanistan because his work there had been risky and his  wife  had
    received some threatening phone calls from unknown people.

14. His further evidence was that it would not be possible to have his  son
    to come and live with him in the UK unless his wife came  too,  as  the
    child was very young and needed to be with his mother.  He agreed  that
    he, his wife and child had all lived together in Afghanistan  until  he
    relocated to the UK at the beginning of September 2015,  but  that,  he
    said, was only on a temporary basis.  It is not entirely clear,  to  me
    at least, what the sponsor meant by that evidence.  He also  said  that
    his wife and son lived in rented accommodation in Kabul,  both  at  the
    time of the application and of the decision, and had  not  subsequently
    needed to move because of any threats.  In answer to a point about what
    was said on the Visa Application Form  in  terms  of  them  all  living
    together, the sponsor's evidence was that that was not the case and  he
    stayed at army bases for his work but during his leave he was  able  to
    stay with his wife.  He had seen his child five or six times.

15. The FtJ stated at [16] and [60] that she found  the  sponsor  to  be  a
    credible witness.  She found that they had lived together  after  their
    marriage in 2011 when the sponsor had  leave  from  his  work  on  army
    bases, and  after  the  sponsor's  termination  of  his  employment  in
    Afghanistan in August 2015 until his return  to  the  UK  in  September
    2015.

16. It was noted that the  appellant,  although  initially  having  sat  an
    English language exam that was not from  an  accredited  provider,  had
    subsequently, in late April 2015, after the date of the  decision,  sat
    and passed an accredited English language examination.

17. It is not entirely clear that the FtJ recognised that it is the date of
    decision that is the relevant date even for Article 8  purposes  in  an
    entry clearance appeal.  Nevertheless, on close examination, it is  not
    apparent that the FtJ did take into account matters arising  after  the
    date of the decision in her Article 8 assessment.  Perhaps, it could be
    said that there was a failure to recognise that principle at [72] where
    she said that it would be likely  that  any  future  application  would
    succeed under the Immigration Rules (the sponsor now being  present  in
    the UK and the appellant having passed an accredited  English  language
    test).  However, she went on to state in that  paragraph  that  it  was
    correctly decided by the ECO that the appellant could not succeed under
    the Rules at that time,  and  there  was  no  evidence  then  that  the
    appellant's child was a British citizen.

18. On behalf of the appellant I was referred to R (on the application  of)
    Sunassee  v  Upper  Tribunal  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)   and
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2015]  EWHC  1604  (Admin)
    which is a decision by Edis J on an application for permission to apply
    for judicial  review.   It  was  released  as  a  'reported'  judgment,
    notwithstanding that it was a permission application, in the  light  of
    the review of the relevant authorities in  relation  to  the  interface
    between the Article 8 Rules and Article 8 proper.   It  is,  if  I  may
    respectfully say, a useful and clear distillation of the authorities.

19. The FtJ in the appeal before me was entitled  to  conclude  that  there
    were compelling circumstances not recognised within the Article 8 Rules
    and  which  required  consideration  under  Article  8   proper.    She
    concluded, and was entitled to conclude on the  evidence,  that  family
    life between the appellant and the sponsor could not be  maintained  in
    Afghanistan, for the reasons she gave, there having been threats to the
    appellant's wife, and taking into account  that  they  have  a  British
    citizen child who was  born  prior  to  the  date  of  application  and
    decision.  Although Mr Tufan suggested that the evidence of threats  to
    the appellant's wife was not something that the sponsor could  reliably
    give evidence about because he was not present at  the  time,  the  FtJ
    concluded that he had given credible evidence  about  his  wife  having
    received some threatening phone calls.  That his evidence on this issue
    was plainly hearsay, does  not  make  it  inadmissible  in  immigration
    (tribunal) proceedings.

20. Whilst it may be said that the FtJ could  have  concluded  that  rather
    than allowing the appeal under Article 8 the  appellant  could  make  a
    further application for entry clearance, she was entitled  to  conclude
    that  refusal  of  entry  clearance  amounted  to  a   disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's Article 8 rights.  It would also have
    been legitimate for her to take into account the Article  8  rights  of
    their son, who although very young, was separated from his father.

21. In all the circumstances, I am not satisfied that there is any error of
    law in the decision of the FtT.  Its decision to allow the appeal  must
    therefore stand.

    Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  Its decision to allow the appeal therefore
    stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            21/12/16
