
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07386/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th February 2016                |On 26th February 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 FAIDA HUDA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Uppal, Glen Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision made by the Secretary of State on 21st  May
    2014 to remove him from the UK under Section 10 of the Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 1999 after having voluntarily left the UK on 29th May  2014.
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Adio allowed  the  Appellant's  appeal
    and the  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals  with  permission  to  this
    Tribunal.

Background

 3. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant was  granted  leave
    to enter the UK as a student on 15th March  2006  until  31st  December
    2008 and then leave to remain on 18th  March  2009  until  31st  August
    2010.  He was granted further leave to remain in the UK  as  a  Tier  1
    (Post-Study Work) Migrant on 10th September 2010 until  10th  September
    2012.  His subsequent application for leave  to  remain  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) was refused on 25th March 2013.  The Appellant  appealed
    against that decision and in a decision dated 30th July 2013 First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Devittie dismissed  the  appeal  under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Appellant's application for permission  to  appeal  against
    that decision was refused in the First-tier Tribunal  and  his  renewed
    application for permission to the Upper Tribunal was refused  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Spencer on 13th September 2013.

 4. The Appellant made a fresh application for leave to remain as a Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) on 1st October 2013.  On 24th April 2014 the  Respondent
    refused that application.  The  Respondent  noted  at  page  6  of  the
    reasons for refusal letter that the Appellant made  an  application  on
    1st October 2013 but that he did not have leave to remain at  the  time
    of that application and therefore had no right of appeal  against  this
    decision.   The Appellant did not challenge that decision.

 5. The Appellant was served with Form IS151A on 21st May 2014 and he  made
    a voluntary departure from the UK on 29th May 2014.   The  IS151A  form
    advised the Appellant that a decision had been taken to remove him from
    the UK and that he was entitled to appeal against that  decision  under
    Section 82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 after
    he had left the UK on the grounds, inter alia, that the decision is not
    in accordance with the Immigration Rules and/or  that  it  was  not  in
    accordance with the law. The Appellant lodged Notice of Appeal on  26th
    June 2014.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted that the  appeal  was  against  the
    decision to remove the Appellant  and  considered  the  detail  of  the
    Reasons for Refusal letter of 24th April 2014 and  paragraph  245DD  of
    the Immigration Rules.  He noted that when  the  Appellant  signed  the
    voluntary departure form he signed a disclaimer  to  say  that  he  was
    withdrawing any outstanding applications but considered  that,  as  the
    last application made by the Appellant  had  been  determined  at  that
    point, he could not have withdrawn that application.

 7. The judge noted that the Appellant had Section 3C leave up  until  13th
    September 2013, when his application for permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal was refused, that he made a  fresh  application  on  1st
    October 2013 and that he  was  therefore  an  overstayer  between  13th
    September 2013 and 1st October 2013.   However the judge noted that, as
    that application was made within 28 days of the expiry of  leave,  that
    period of overstaying should be disregarded [7].

 8. The judge went  on  to  examine  the  requirements  of  the  Rules,  in
    particular in light of the interview the Appellant  had  in  connection
    with his Tier 1 (Entrepreneur) application. The judge accepted that the
    Appellant met the requirement of paragraph 276DD (e)  in  that  he  was
    last granted leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work) Migrant. The
    judge concluded that the Appellant had given a satisfactory explanation
    to the points raised by the  Respondent  in  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter of 24th April 2014 and found  that  the  reasons  given  in  the
    reasons for refusal letter are 'basically flawed' because they  do  not
    reflect the findings from the entrepreneur interview recommendation[9].
     The judge finds on the balance of  probabilities  that  the  Appellant
    meets the requirements of paragraph 245DD of the Immigration  Rules  in
    relation to the attributes under Appendix A  and  in  relation  to  the
    genuineness and viability of the business.

Error of Law

 9. In the Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal the Secretary  of  State
    contends that the judge made a material misdirection in law in relation
    to Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971 in that the Appellant's leave
    expired on 13th September 2013 and that the period of  overstaying  did
    not cease on 1st October 2013 but in fact  ceased  when  the  Appellant
    left the UK voluntarily on 29th May 2014.  It  is  therefore  contended
    that the period of overstaying was a period of over eight  months.   It
    is further contended that the judge erred by grossly miscalculating the
    Appellant's period of overstaying and by reaching  a  decision  in  the
    appeal that was irrational and legally flawed on the evidence and facts
    found.

10. Permission to appeal was  granted  on  the  basis  that  there  was  an
    arguable error of law in relation to the relationship  between  Section
    3C and the provisions governing the points-based system applications in
    the context of the disregarding of the 28 day period.

11. The Grounds of Appeal in this case are unclear. The grant of permission
    expresses the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal more  clearly  and
    succinctly.  Mr Whitwell did his best to cast light on the grounds  but
    had to diverge from them somewhat in  order  to  make  sense  of  them.
    Despite his best efforts I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    did not make any error of law.

12. The real issue in this appeal is the judge's consideration of paragraph
    245DD (g) of the Immigration Rules which  applied  to  the  Appellant's
    application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Post-Study Work)  Migrant.
    Paragraph 245DD (g) provides:

         'To qualify for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur)  Migrant
         under this Rule, an applicant must  meet  the  requirements  listed
         below. If the applicant meets these requirements, leave  to  remain
         will  be  granted.   If  the  applicant  does    not   meet   these
         requirements, the application will be refused.

         Requirements ...

          g) The applicant must not be in the UK in breach  of  immigration
             laws except that any period of overstaying for a period of  28
             days or less will be disregarded. ... '

13. Mr Whitwell submitted that,  as  the  Appellant  became  appeal  rights
    exhausted on 13th September 2013 but did not leave the  UK  until  29th
    May 2014,  his  period  of  overstaying  therefore  exceeded  28  days.
    However Mr Uppal submitted that this interpretation could not be  right
    as it would mean that if an Appellant had overstayed by  even  one  day
    when an application was made the application would have to  be  refused
    if it was not decided by the Secretary of State within a period  of  28
    days.

14. When I put it to him Mr Whitwell accepted that the requirements imposed
    by the Rules  governing  applications  under  the  points-based  system
    related to the time of the application. He accepted  that,  unless  the
    Rules say  otherwise,  the  relevant  date  for  consideration  of  the
    requirements of the Rules is the date of application.

15. Mr Whitwell relied on page 9 Home Office guidance on applications  from
    Overstayers of 24th October 2014 which says that, following  submission
    of an application made within  28  days  of  overstaying,  a  migrant's
    previous leave is not reinstated or extended  but  that  the  applicant
    continues to be an overstayer from the point their  leave  expired  and
    throughout the period their application is pending. The guidance states
    that, as the applicant has no leave during the period their application
    is pending, they have no permission to work in the UK.    However  this
    guidance covers the practical implications of being an overstayer which
    is a different issue from that of  determining  the  date  at  which  a
    period of overstaying is calculated for the purposes of  245DD  (g)  of
    the Rules.

16. So, in my view, although the Appellant in this case was  an  overstayer
    at the date of the application on 1st October 2013, he had not exceeded
    the 28 day period at that point.  He  continued  to  be  an  overstayer
    until he left the UK on 29th May 2014 but this is not relevant for  the
    purposes of consideration  of  the  applicability  of  245DD  (g).  The
    judge's interpretation of this provision of  the  Rules  was  therefore
    right in law.

17. I accept  Mr  Uppal's  submission  that,  although  the  Appellant  was
    challenging his removal from the UK, among the grounds open to him were
    the grounds that the decision to remove him was not in accordance  with
    the Immigration Rules and that the decision to remove him  was  not  in
    accordance with the law.  I therefore accept his  submission  that,  in
    finding that the decision of 24th April 2014 was flawed, the judge  was
    effectively finding that it was not in accordance with the law and that
    the judge was entitled to make that finding  in  terms  of  the  appeal
    before him. This view is  further  confirmed  by  the  failure  of  the
    Secretary of State to challenge the judge's finding that  the  decision
    of 24thApril 2014 was 'flawed'.

18. Mr Whitwell further submitted that in signing  the  disclaimer  in  the
    context  of  his  voluntary  departure  the  Appellant   withdrew   any
    outstanding claims or applications  but  I  find  that  the  judge  was
    correct to conclude that the Appellant did  not  have  any  outstanding
    applications because the last application he had made had already  been
    determined.

19. Mr Whitwell also submitted that paragraph 245DD (e) provided  that  the
    Appellant must show that he was last granted entry clearance  or  leave
    to remain in certain categories and that the Appellant here did not  do
    so.  However I agree with the judge's conclusion that the Appellant was
    last granted leave to remain as a  Tier  1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant
    which is one of the categories under paragraph 245DD(e).

20. In all of the circumstances of this case I am satisfied that First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Adio  did  have  jurisdiction  to  consider  the  appeal
    against the removal directions, the Appellant having left the UK.  I am
    satisfied that the judge did have jurisdiction to consider whether  the
    decision to remove the Appellant was in accordance with the Immigration
    Rules and in accordance with the law.  I am satisfied  that  the  judge
    was therefore entitled to consider the basis for  the  refusal  of  the
    Appellant's application for leave to remain as a Tier 1 (Entrepreneur).
    The judge was right to interpret paragraph 245DD(g) to  conclude  that,
    at the date of application, the Appellant was within the 28 day  period
    of overstaying which was to be  disregarded  in  accordance  with  that
    paragraph.

21. I therefore find that the judge reached conclusions open to him on  the
    basis of the evidence before him.  I find that the  grounds  of  appeal
    have not been made out.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  discloses  no  material
    error of law and shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 24th February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The fee award made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge shall stand.


Signed   Date: 24th February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
