
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  OA/07151/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st July 2015                    |On 21st July 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                   The Entry Clearance Officer - Islamabad
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                             Mr SHahzeeb saleem
                        [NO Anonymity Direction Made]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Nasim, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent, Mr Shahzeeb Saleem date of birth the 9th January  1984,
    is a citizen of Pakistan.  Having considered all the circumstances I do
    not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant in the present proceedings is the ECO  -  Islamabad.  The
    respondent had applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as the
    spouse of a British citizen under the Immigration  Rules.  By  decision
    taken on 9 June 2014 the ECO refused that application. There  had  been
    an EC Manager's review of  that  decision  and  the  reason  given  for
    maintaining the refusal was  that  the  UK  Decree  (absolute)  divorce
    certificate submitted with the application did not contain the stamp of
    the UK Family Court to authenticate the decree and to confirm  that  it
    was genuine. In the  light  of  that  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    sponsoring wife was free to marry is therefore not  accepted  that  the
    respondent and the sponsoring wife had entered into a valid marriage.

 3. The respondent appealed the decision to refuse  entry  clearance  as  a
    spouse to the First-tier Tribunal and the appeal was  heard  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hopkins on 19 January 2015. By decision promulgated
    on  29  January  2015  Judge  Hopkins  allowed  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

 4. This is an appeal by the ECO against the decision Judge Hopkins.

 5. The sole issue in the appeal relates to the  validity  of  the  Divorce
    Decree from the UK Family Court produced  by  the  sponsoring  wife  as
    evidence of the fact that she  had  been  divorced  and  that  she  was
    accordingly free to marry the appellant on 29 March 2013.

 6. Whilst a decree of divorce from the Family Court in the United  Kingdom
    had been submitted with the application, it was being asserted  by  the
    ECO that the divorce decree produced was not in proper  form  as  there
    was no authenticating stamp. Judge Hopkins looked at the  documentation
    and was satisfied that there was an authenticating stamp,  although  it
    was faint [see paragraph 13 of the Decision].

 7. Further the judge has carefully set  out  the  circumstances  in  which
    properly stamped and  authenticated  documents  were  produced  at  the
    hearing.

 8. The judge has considered the validity of  the  decree  of  divorce  was
    satisfied that there was a stamp on the original document. He notes the
    nature of the documentation submitted to  the  ECO.  The  document  was
    certified as genuine  by  solicitors.  A  further  original  Decree  of
    Divorce had been produced before Judge Hopkins.

 9. Before me it was accepted that there was a genuine  document  and  that
    the sponsoring wife was therefore free to marry the  appellant  at  the
    time that they entered into the marriage.

10.  The  judge  clearly  considered  the  validity  of  the  documentation
    submitted and was satisfied that a valid document had been submitted to
    substantiate that the sponsoring wife was free to marry at the material
    time. Albeit that it was somewhat faint there was a stamp on the decree
    produced.

11. The grounds seek to argue that under Appendix FM -SE  paragraph  23  it
    was necessary for the original decree absolute to be produced with  the
    application.  As set out the judge considered that issue and found that
    the document did have the required stamps and  was  therefore  a  valid
    authenticated decree.

12. Even if the document was deficient in the manner described there  is  a
    discretion under Appendix FM-SE - paragraphs C and  D  where  documents
    are not submitted in the proper format. It would have been open  to  be
    appellant to contact the respondent requiring the respondent to produce
    a document in proper form. No attempt to do so was made  or  apparently
    considered. It is arguable that even at the height of  the  appellant's
    case the appeal would be allowed to the extent  that  it  was  remitted
    back to  the  appellant  for  consideration  of  the  exercise  of  the
    discretion. Given  that  a  valid  unauthenticated  document  has  been
    produced that appears to be unnecessary in the circumstances.

13. However the judge did  consider  whether  a  proper  and  authenticated
    document had been submitted. The judge was satisfied that the documents
    submitted did have the proper stamp therefore a valid document had been
    submitted as required by the rules. The judge  has  clearly  considered
    the evidence was entitled to come to the conclusion  that  he  did.  In
    those circumstances there is no material error of law in the decision.

14. There is a no material error of law in the determination.  I uphold the
    decision to allow this appeal under the immigration rules.



Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
