
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DP-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07417/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 September and 24 November 2016  |On 16 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KUWAIT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                   ABDULMOHSEN ALI ABDULJALIL SHAHAB AHMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer (1
September 2016)
     Ms Z Ahmed, Home Office Presenting Officer (24 November 2016)
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against a decision  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  issued  on  4  February  2016  allowing  the
    applicant's appeal against the decision made on 31 April 2015  refusing
    him a certificate of entitlement  to  the  right  of  abode.   In  this
    decision I will refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier
    Tribunal, the applicant  as  the  appellant  and  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer as the respondent.

 2. At the hearing before me there was no appearance by or on behalf of the
    appellant.  I am satisfied that the notice of hearing has been properly
    served. The appellant is a minor who lives in Kuwait with  his  family.
    The appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  decided  without  a
    hearing.  Taking into account that the judge accepted the account given
    by the appellant's mother and there has been  no  indication  that  the
    appellant wishes to be represented at this hearing, I am satisfied that
    the proper course is to proceed with the hearing.

Background

3.   The background to this appeal can be  briefly  summarised  as  follows.
    The appellant claims that he is a dual British/Kuwaiti national born in
    Kuwait.  He is the son of Zainab Ahmed (formerly Lynn Weatherspoon),  a
    British citizen, who married Ali Ahmad on 18 September 1989 when he was
    a student in the UK.  At some point they returned to live in Kuwait and
    they have two children, an older son  born  on  2  June  2001  and  the
    appellant born on 16 April 2004.  The appellant's mother has not  given
    up her British nationality but  last  British  passport  expired  on  9
    August 1999.  She obtained Kuwaiti nationality on 13 June 2001 and also
    obtained a certificate of entitlement to the right of abode in  the  UK
    on 8 January 2002, which is endorsed in her Kuwaiti passport.

4.   On 12 April 2015  both  the  appellant  and  his  brother  applied  for
    certificates  of  entitlement.   On  21  April  2015  the   appellant's
    application was refused on the basis that  he  had  provided  with  his
    application photocopies of the relevant  documents  whereas  applicants
    were advised that original documents should be produced in  support  as
    originals  could  be  examined  to  confirm  their  authenticity.   The
    decision records that the respondent attempted to contact the appellant
    on 13, 14, 15, 16, 19, 20 and 21 April on the telephone number provided
    and also emailed on 19 April 2015 in order to give him the  opportunity
    of providing his and his mother's original birth certificates  so  that
    the application could be processed.  In the absence of any response  to
    the telephone calls or a reply to the email,  the  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant had demonstrated that he had  a  right  of
    abode in the UK.  However, the application by his brother was granted.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The appellant appealed against this decision.   A  statement  from  his
    mother explained that original documents had been submitted at the Visa
    Centre in  Kuwait  along  with  copies.   She  was  asked  to  make  an
    additional copy and the originals were handed back to  her.   She  then
    had to travel to the UK as her mother was ill. Her phone would not work
    here as there was a problem.  Her husband sent her an email on 21 April
    that the Visa Section were trying to contact her and she replied asking
    what the query was and saying that she was going to return on 30  April
    2015.  Both her sons applied at the same time and whereas her older son
    was granted a certificate of entitlement the appellant  was  not.   She
    had submitted exactly the same documents for both sons.

6.   The judge accepted this explanation finding that the appellant and  his
    mother had provided the originals at the Visa  Processing  Centre  only
    for them to be given back mistakenly and the photocopies retained.   He
    said that it was not the appellant's fault that his  mother's  original
    documents were returned by the staff.

7.   The judge was provided with a copy of all the documents  including  the
    appellant's  mother's  birth  certificate,  her  own   certificate   of
    entitlement, her expired British passports and marriage certificate  as
    well as the conversion certificate issued by the mosque.  He found that
    these were genuine copies and he accepted her evidence in its entirety.
     He was satisfied that the respondent was right to request sight of the
    originals not having been aware that they had been erroneously returned
    by the Visa Processing Centre.  He commented that the respondent  would
    still be entitled to inspect the documents prior to the  issue  of  the
    certificate and also as and when the appellant or his mother sought  to
    arrive in the UK.  He was satisfied that the appellant  met  the  legal
    requirements to be granted a certificate of entitlement  and  therefore
    allowed the appeal.  He then commented that having allowed  the  appeal
    under the Rules he did not need to consider article 8.

The Grounds and Submissions

8.   The respondent argues in the grounds that the judge  erred  in  law  by
    failing  to  have  regard  to  the  requirements  of  reg.  6A  of  the
    Immigration  Certificate  of  Entitlement  to  the   Right   of   Abode
    Regulations 2006, which reads:

         "A certificate of  entitlement  will  only  be  issued  where  the
         appropriate authority is satisfied that the applicant


         (a) has a right of abode in the United Kingdom under Section  2(1)
                  of the 1971 Act and expressly requires


          (i)  the  applicant's  full   birth   certificate   or   adoption
                  certificate;


                  (ii)  the   parents'   marriage   or   civil   partnership
                      certificate if claiming through father or if claiming
                      through woman who is a parent  of  the  applicant  by
                      virtue of Section 42 or 43 of the 2008 Act;


                  (iii)    the parents'  full  birth  certificate,  adoption
                      registration or naturalisation certificate ..."

9.   It is argued that in the absence of  the  production  of  the  original
    documents the First-tier Tribunal Judge was not  entitled  to  rely  on
    copy documents to find that the appellant qualified for  a  certificate
    of entitlement.  In summary, it is asserted that the  judge  materially
    erred in law in allowing the appellant's appeal without  sight  of  the
    original documents.

10.  Mr Whitwell supported his submission that the judge had  erred  in  law
    by relying on  copy  documents  on  the  basis  that  the  "appropriate
    authority" referred to in the Regulations must be the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer and not those who process the application.  The  fact  remained
    that the respondent had not seen the original documents despite  making
    numerous attempts to obtain them.  Secondly, he argued that  the  judge
    had failed to explain why he was satisfied that the originals had  been
    produced at the Visa Processing Centre and that in the  light  of  this
    dispute of fact it had not been appropriate for the matter  to  proceed
    without a hearing.  He accepted that this was a matter  not  raised  in
    the grounds.

11.  Finally, Mr Whitwell submitted  that  the  judge  had  dealt  with  the
    appeal as an appeal under the Rules when by reason of the amendments to
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 there was now no right
    of appeal on that ground and any appeal could only be on  human  rights
    grounds.

12.  It is common ground that copy documents were submitted with the  notice
    of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal but it should also be  noted  that
    at section 3A the grounds say that if original  documents  have  to  be
    given they will be sent by  courier  and  the  appellant  asked  to  be
    informed if original documents  were  required.   In  section  (d)  the
    appellant sets out his  account  of  the  circumstances  in  which  the
    original documents were returned and explains why  the  family  applied
    for the right of abode as follows:

         "We are only using the right of abode as we were asked  to  do  so
         instead of carrying two passports.  All my family did not make  new
         British passports when they expired because of the right  of  abode
         in the Kuwait passports.  We have this as we hold two nationalities
         British and Kuwaiti.  I hope this can be resolved as I am a British
         citizen who has now not been given right to enter the country and I
         cannot claim for a visa because I am British.  Very confusing.  All
         original documents can be sent to you by DHL if required or can  be
         taken to the Visa Centre in Kuwait for  inspection  again.   Please
         advise me as to what I should do."

Consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in Law

13.  However, the issue I must consider is whether the  First-tier  Tribunal
    erred in law and that the decision should be set aside.  I am satisfied
    that there is an error of law because the First-tier  Tribunal  had  no
    jurisdiction  to  consider  an  appeal  on  immigration  grounds.   The
    provisions of s. 82 of the 2002 Act setting out the rights of appeal to
    the First-tier Tribunal came into full effect on 6 April 2015. There is
    no right of appeal against the decision to refuse  the  certificate  of
    entitlement. There is, however, a right of appeal if the respondent has
    decided to refuse a human rights claim made by an applicant.  There are
    transitional provisions for applications made before the 6  April  2015
    but the appellant, whose application was made on 12  April  2015,  does
    not come within them.   His  only  possible  right  of  appeal  on  the
    evidence before me depends on whether the respondent's decision can  be
    categorised as a decision to refuse a human rights claim.

14.  The ground  relating  to  jurisdiction  was  not  been  raised  in  the
    respondent's appeal but  it  does  not  need  to  be.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal's jurisdiction is set out by statute and cannot be extended by
    waiver, concession or a failure to take the point at an  earlier  stage
    in the proceedings.  As the First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction  to
    deal with the appeal in the way it did, there is an error of  law  such
    that the decision must be set aside.

15.  However, as I have already  indicated  it  may  be  arguable  that  the
    appellant has an appeal on human  rights  grounds.   Before  appeal  is
    relisted to re-make the decision,  the  parties  may  like  to  explore
    whether this matter can be resolved without  the  need  for  a  further
    hearing.  The respondent's position is that the Entry Clearance Officer
    as the appropriate authority is entitled to see the original  documents
    whereas the appellant says that the original documents  were  submitted
    but as the judge found returned in error  before  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer saw them.  The judge also  accepted  that  it  was  due  to  an
    unfortunate set of circumstances that the appellant's mother could  not
    get back in touch with the respondent before the decision  was  issued.
    In the grounds of appeal the appellant offered to send the originals to
    support his appeal but assuming they are in Kuwait, the sensible course
    would be to have an opportunity of producing them  there  so  that  the
    respondent can reconsider the decision.  Although it must  be  for  the
    parties to decide how to proceed, a sensible course would  be  for  the
    appellant through his parents to have an opportunity of contacting  the
    respondent to arrange for the original documents to be  made  available
    so that the decision can be reviewed.

16.  So far as this appeal is concerned  I  am  satisfied  that  the  proper
    course is for the appeal to  be  retained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    consider whether there is a right of appeal on human rights grounds and
    if so, to decide it. I am also conscious of the fact that the appellant
    has not had the opportunity of  making  submissions  on  the  issue  of
    jurisdiction or  commenting  on  the  respondent's  evidence  that  his
    application was made on 12 April 2015 and therefore  fell  outside  the
    transitional provisions. For the avoidance of doubt it will be open  to
    the appellant to raise these issues in further submissions.

17.  At the resumed hearing on 24 November 2016 there was no  appearance  on
    behalf of the appellant and no further written  submissions  have  been
    received.  I am satisfied that the notice of hearing has been  properly
    served and that the proper  course  is  to  proceed  with  the  hearing
    adopting the reasons set out in [2] above. No further submissions  have
    been received by or on behalf of the appellant.

Further Submissions.

18.  Ms Ahmed indicated that  she  had  no  information  about  whether  the
    appellant through his parents had contacted the respondent  to  arrange
    for the original documents to be made available so  that  the  decision
    could be reviewed, a course I had suggested in [15].

19.  This is a case where I am satisfied that the application  was  made  on
    12 April 2015 and therefore the appellant was not able to bring himself
    within the transitional provisions referred to at [13] above.

20.  It follows that the appellant's  only  right  of  appeal  is  on  human
    rights grounds.  The rights of appeal after 6 April 2015 are set out in
    the amended provisions of s.82  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  There is a right of appeal where  "the  Secretary  of
    State has decided to refuse a human rights claim made  by  [a  person]:
    s.82(1)(b)" and the term "human rights claim" is  now  defined  in  the
    amended s.113(1) of the 2002 Act as follows:

         "(a)     [human rights claim] means a claim made by a  person  that
             to remove him from or to  require  him  to  leave  the  United
             Kingdom or to refuse him entry into the United  Kingdom  would
             be unlawful under s.6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 ... but


         (b)  does not include a claim which,  having  regard  to  a  former
             claim, falls to be disregarded for the purposes of  this  part
             in accordance with the Immigration Rules."

21.  I am not satisfied  that  any  human  rights  claim  was  made  in  the
    appellant's application still less that there has been a  human  rights
    decision.  In any event, it is difficult to  see  how  a  human  rights
    claim  could  be  successful  in  a  case  where  the  certificate   of
    entitlement to the right of abode was refused in the  circumstances  of
    this application.  For the appeal to be allowed on human rights grounds
    would be to use the human rights appeal as a vehicle for an  appeal  on
    the merits to which there is now no entitlement by statute.

22.  It is unfortunate that the appellant and his family may well have  been
    misled by the fact that the notice of decision dated 21 April 2015 gave
    the impression that there was a full right of appeal when that was  not
    the  case.   However,  as  I  have  already  indicated  the   statutory
    jurisdiction of the First-tier Tribunal cannot be extended by waiver or
    concession.

23.  The appellant's remedy is  to  make  a  fresh  application  or  further
    representations to the respondent but there is no available  remedy  by
    way of a statutory appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

24.  There was no jurisdiction to allow the appeal as an immigration  appeal
    and I am not satisfied that there  has  been  any  human  rights  claim
    within s.113 of the 2002 Act or a decision giving rise to  a  right  of
    appeal.

Decision

25.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the  decision  is  set  aside.
    There was no right of appeal under s.82(1) as there was no decision  by
    the respondent to refuse a human rights claim. No  anonymity  direction
    was made by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed        H J E Latter                       Date: 14 December 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter


