
 [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/07834/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 11 September 2014                 |On 11 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                frank alegre
                                                                    Claimant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, CALAIS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Loughlin, instructed by Linga & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This appeal concerns a national of The  Netherlands  who,  on  5  March
    2013, was refused admission to the United  Kingdom  by  an  Immigration
    Officer at this country's juxtaposed  immigration  controls  at  Calais
    Ferry  Port,  pursuant  to  regulation  of  the  Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA  Regulations").  He  appealed
    against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal from out  of  country.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes dismissed the appeal in a determination
    promulgated on 5 December 2013.

 2. On 12 February 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor  granted  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal

    Background history

 3. The appellant was on 21 June 2006 convicted of  having  links  with  an
    organisation  involved  in  drug  trafficking.  His   appeals   against
    conviction and sentencing were protracted and  during  the  process  he
    moved to the United Kingdom.  While  here,  after  his  conviction  and
    sentence had been confirmed by  the  Dutch  Supreme  Court,  the  Dutch
    authorities sought his extradition so that he could serve his sentence.
    The appellant returned to the Netherlands where he served his sentence.



 4. On 5 March 2013 the appellant was stopped  at  Calais  Ferryport  by  a
    British Immigration Officer. He was questioned about why he  wished  to
    enter the United Kingdom and about the  offence  detailed  above.   The
    respondent refused him admission on the basis that  his  exclusion  was
    justified on public policy grounds.

    The appellant's case

 5. When interviewed the appellant said that he had  lived  and  worked  in
    London in 2010-11. He said that he had applied for a residence card  as
    confirmation of his right of residence but that  was  refused;  it  was
    then that he learned that a European Arrest  Warrant  had  been  issued
    against him. He had gone to court and had agreed to  be  extradited  to
    the Netherlands where he served a sentence from 1 March 2011  until  20
    February 2013. He said he intended to return to Amsterdam after a short
    visit as he had a meeting with a probation officer on 18 March 2013.

 6. The appellant said that his purpose in coming to London was to see  his
    daughter whom he had not seen since she was three years old; she  would
    be coming to London from Denmark where she lives with her  mother.   He
    was intending to stay with a friend, Mr Robert Oppong

    The Respondent's case

 7. The respondent's case is set out in the notice of decision of  5  March
    2013 and in the explanatory notice dated  15  March  2013.  The  former
    states briefly that the appellant is to be refused  admission,  on  the
    basis that his exclusion is justified on grounds of public  policy  for
    having involvement with  a  serious  organised  crime  group  who  were
    involved in drug  trafficking  for  which  he  had  served  two  years'
    imprisonment.

    Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant was represented by counsel, as was the respondent.  Judge
    Boyes did not hear oral evidence  but  there  were  in  the  bundle  of
    evidence adduced by the appellant two witness statements from him and a
    witness statement from Mr Oppong.   The  respondent  did  not  lodge  a
    bundle of evidence, relying only on the  notice  of  decision  and  the
    explanatory notice.

 9. In his determination [22], Judge Boyes noted that there was no  dispute
    that the appellant had been convicted in relation to the trafficking of
    drugs, or that he was sentenced  to  a  term  of  imprisonment.   After
    directing himself as to the relevant law as set out in  article  27  of
    the Citizens Directive and regulations 19 and 21 of the EEA Regulations
    [23], he noted that the appellant could only be excluded if  that  were
    justified on grounds  of  public  policy,  public  security  or  public
    health.  He found [24] that  the  appellant  was  not  entitled  to  an
    enhanced level of  protection  that  would  apply  had  he  acquired  a
    permanent right of residence or had resided here for 10 years.

10. Judge Boyes found [27] that the appellant was neither remorseful nor  a
    reformed  character  [27],  his  failure  to  surrender  to  the  Dutch
    authorities to serve his sentence being indicative.  He found also [28]-
    [30] that there  were  significant  inconsistencies  between  what  the
    appellant had told the immigration officer when  first  questioned  and
    what he said in his witness statements, those differences extending  to
    how long he intended to stay here, whether he intended to return to the
    Netherlands, and how long he had lived here, this leading to the  judge
    to consider unreliable [30] the appellant's evidence as to his previous
    residence here, character and propensity to re-offend.

11. The judge did not accept that the appellant's rehabilitation  would  be
    assisted by allowing him to enter the UK, it being more likely that  he
    would be properly monitored, if need be in the Netherlands where he was
    convicted and sentenced.

12. Judge Boyes concluded [33]  that  the  appellant  presents  a  genuine,
    present and sufficiently serious threat to the fundamental interests of
    UK society, given his total lack of regard for  the  authority  of  the
    courts and law and that the respondent was justified in  excluding  him
    on grounds of public policy.

    Grounds of appeal

13. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in its approach to regulation  21  of  the  EEA
    Regulations by:

          i) failing to have regard to the fact that  the  more  firmly  an
             individual is "anchored" in the United  Kingdom,  the  greater
             the need to  justify  refusal  of  admission,  this  appellant
             having been in the UK for in excess of  8  years,  and  having
             become integrated here (4);

         ii) failing correctly to assess the propensity of the appellant to
             commit further crimes, the judge failing  to take into account
             that he had committed only a single crime, and  had  been  law
             abiding in the United Kingdom (5);

        iii) failing to give adequate consideration  to  the  prospects  of
             rehabilitation in the UK, the appellant having already  served
             his sentence in the Netherlands (6);

         iv) concluding that the appellant presented a genuine, present and
             sufficiently threat  as  this  was  not  demonstrated  by  the
             evidence.

14. On 12 February 2014, Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor granted  permission,
    stating:

         "Although the ground are somewhat convoluted, it  is  arguable  (by
         references to paragraphs 5 and 7 of the grounds)  that  the  First-
         tier Tribunal failed to give adequate reasons  for  its  conclusion
         that the appellant presents a "sufficiently serious threat  to  the
         fundamental interests of society" and,  in  particular,  failed  to
         identify the nature of the "sufficiently serious  threat"  that  it
         concluded that appellant poses to such interests.

    While I see little merit in the other grounds, I do not limit the grant
    of permission."

15. We pause to observe that there are no challenges within the grounds  to
    the findings of fact made by Judge Boyes.

Submissions

16. As the case developed during argument before us, the  appellant  sought
    to argue that the decision in question was an exclusion order, and that
    it was unlawful, the respondent having failed properly to  comply  with
    the relevant policies and procedures.  It was  submitted  further  that
    the respondent had not shown that  the  decision  was  justified  under
    regulation 21 or was proportionate; and,  that  in  so  finding,  Judge
    Boyes had erred.

17. The respondent submitted that a distinction is to be  drawn  between  a
    decision to exclude on public policy grounds and an "exclusion  order",
    the latter being of enduring  effect,  unlike  the  former.   Mr  Avery
    expressly stated that that  the  decision  in  this  case  was  not  an
    exclusion order, and it was submitted that the decision  not  to  admit
    was justified.

18. In reply,  the  appellant  submits  that  such  a  distinction  is  not
    permissible under EU law, and that such an interpretation  of  the  law
    would be to permit the Secretary  of  State  to  make  enduring  orders
    without any of the relevant safeguards being in place.

Did the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involve the making of  an  error
of law?

19. As a preliminary matter, we note also that it was not in dispute before
    the First-tier Tribunal that this was an appeal  against  an  exclusion
    order; indeed, the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal make express
    reference to exclusion, and while the judge refers to a decision not to
    admit  (1),  his  decision  is  concerned  with  whether  exclusion  is
    justified (23).

20. The respondent has, however, now changed her case. It is  now  accepted
    that there had been no  compliance  with  the  procedures  relevant  to
    exclusion and it is said that the decision made was  not  an  exclusion
    decision, just a decision not to admit.  For these reasons alone, it is
    now evident that the  First-tier  Tribunal  reached  its  decisions  on
    fundamental mistakes as to the underlying decision, albeit mistakes  of
    which it was not and could not have been aware.

21. Was this error material? The respondent submits that it  was  not.  She
    submits that in any event there was a power not to admit,  and  it  was
    properly exercised.

22. The appellant submits there is no such power and that in any event  the
    proper procedures were not followed. The appellant  also  submits  that
    the error was material, and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was
    flawed. The appeal should, it is submitted, be allowed.

    Discussion

23. The starting point for our consideration is the  legislation  governing
    the right of admission and the power to exclude; we will  turn  to  the
    content of the procedural protections later.

24. The  EEA  Regulations  implement  European  Directive  2004/38/EC  (the
    "Citizenship  Directive").  Regulation  11  of  the   EEA   Regulations
    provides, so far as is relevant to this appeal:

         '11.- Right of admission to the United Kingdom

         (1) An EEA national must be admitted to the United  Kingdom  if  he
         produces on arrival a valid  national  identity  card  or  passport
         issued by an EEA State

         ...

         (8) But this regulation is  subject  to  regulations  19(1),  (1A),
         (1AB) and (2)'

25. Regulation 19 of the EEA regulations provided at the date of  decision,
    so far as is relevant:

         '19.- Exclusion and removal from the United Kingdom

         (1) A person is not entitled to be admitted to the  United  Kingdom
         by virtue of regulation 11 if his exclusion is justified on grounds
         of public policy, public security or public  health  in  accordance
         with regulation 21.

         (1A) A person is not entitled to be admitted to the United  Kingdom
         by virtue  of  regulation  11  if  that  person  is  subject  to  a
         deportation or exclusion order.

         (1B) If the Secretary of State considers that the exclusion  of  an
         EEA national or the family member of an EEA national  is  justified
         on the grounds of public policy, public security or  public  health
         in accordance with regulation 21 the Secretary of State may make an
         order for the purpose of these Regulations prohibiting that  person
         from entering the United Kingdom.'

26. The corresponding provisions of the Citizenship Directive provide:

         'Article 5 - Right of entry

         1.  Without  prejudice  to  the  provisions  on  travel   documents
         applicable to national border controls, Member States  shall  grant
         Union citizens leave to enter their territory with a valid identity
         card or passport  and  shall  grant  family  members  who  are  not
         nationals of a Member State leave to enter their territory  with  a
         valid passport.

         No entry visa or equivalent  formality  may  be  imposed  on  Union
         citizens.

         Article 15 - Procedural safeguards

         1. The procedures provided for by Articles 30 and 31 shall apply by
         analogy  to  all  decisions  restricting  free  movement  of  Union
         citizens and their family members  on  grounds  other  than  public
         policy, public security or public health.

         2. Expiry of the identity card or passport on the  basis  of  which
         the person concerned entered the host Member State and  was  issued
         with  a  registration  certificate  or  residence  card  shall  not
         constitute a ground for expulsion from the host Member State.

         3. The host Member State may not impose  a  ban  on  entry  in  the
         context of an expulsion decision to which paragraph 1 applies.

         Article 27

         1. Subject to the provisions of this  Chapter,  Member  States  may
         restrict the freedom of movement and residence  of  Union  citizens
         and their family members, irrespective of nationality,  on  grounds
         of public policy, public security or public health.  These  grounds
         shall not be invoked to serve economic ends.

         2. Measures taken on grounds of public policy  or  public  security
         shall comply with the principle of  proportionality  and  shall  be
         based  exclusively  on  the  personal  conduct  of  the  individual
         concerned.

         Previous criminal convictions shall not  in  themselves  constitute
         grounds for taking such measures.

         The personal conduct of the individual concerned must  represent  a
         genuine, present and sufficiently serious threat affecting  one  of
         the fundamental  interests  of  society.  Justifications  that  are
         isolated  from  the  particulars  of  the  case  or  that  rely  on
         considerations of general prevention shall not be accepted.

         3. In order to ascertain whether the person concerned represents  a
         danger for public policy  or  public  security,  when  issuing  the
         registration certificate or,  in  the  absence  of  a  registration
         system, not later than three months from the date of arrival of the
         person concerned on its territory or from  the  date  of  reporting
         his/her presence within the territory, as provided for  in  Article
         5(5), or when issuing the residence card,  the  host  Member  State
         may, should it consider this essential, request the Member State of
         origin and, if need be, other Member States to provide  information
         concerning any previous police  record  the  person  concerned  may
         have. Such enquiries shall not be made as a matter of routine.  The
         Member State consulted shall give its reply within two months.'

    The nature of the decision under appeal

27. It is necessary to consider first the decision made by  the  respondent
    on 5 March 2013 and the more detailed explanation dated 22 March  2013.
    It is headed "Refusal of Leave to Enter" and the operative part reads:

         "You have sought admission to the United Kingdom under  EC  law  in
         accordance with Regulation 11  of  the  [EEA  Regulations]  on  the
         ground that you are a Dutch National. However, I am satisfied  that
         your exclusion is justified on grounds of public policy for  having
         involvement with a serious organised crime group who were  involved
         in drug trafficking for which you served two years imprisonment."

28. The decision concludes:

         "Case was referred to HMI Whalley who concluded that the  passenger
         should be refused leave to enter on the grounds  of  public  policy
         due to his conviction for  involvement  with  a  serious  organised
         crime group, and that had the sentence been served  in  the  United
         Kingdom he would have been subject  to  a  Deportation  Order  upon
         release from prison."

29. It is notable that there is nowhere in  either  notice  any  indication
    that regard was had to regulation 21 of the EEA Regulations.

30. The manner in which this latter decision is worded displays a degree of
    confusion: is it a refusal of leave  to  enter  under  the  Immigration
    Acts, a refusal to admit  under  the  EEA  Regulations,  or  is  it  an
    "exclusion  order"  made  under  the  EEA  Regulations   although   the
    respondent now says it is not?

31. On further analysis, the decision is a little less confusing  when  the
    sequence of events which occurred in this matter is considered  in  the
    light of the relevant legislation. The Immigration  Act  1971  requires
    (subject to minor exceptions) non-British Citizens  to  have  leave  to
    enter. In the case of EEA nationals, that  requirement  is  amended  by
    section 7 (1) of the Immigration Act 1988 which provides:

         '(1) A person shall not under the principal Act  require  leave  to
         enter or remain in the United Kingdom in any case in  which  he  is
         entitled to do so by virtue of an enforceable Community right or of
         any provision made under section 2(2) of the  European  Communities
         Act 1972.'

32. A person who has been excluded from the United Kingdom, as is  provided
    for under EU  law  (see  Chapter  VI  of  Directive  2004/38/EC  -  the
    "Citizenship Directive") does not have any right of entry under EU law,
    or under the EEA Regulations which  are  the  relevant  provision  made
    pursuant to the 1972 Act. On that basis, a refusal of leave to enter is
    what would logically follow, in domestic law, from an exclusion  order.
    That does not, however, prevent either the decision to exclude  or  the
    decision to refuse leave to enter from giving rise to a right of appeal
    under regulation 26 of the EEA Regulations as an EEA Decision.

33. Despite references  to  "leave  to  enter",  given  the  references  to
    European Law and to "exclusion",  it is manifest  that  the  underlying
    substance of the decision is one made pursuant to the EEA Regulations.

34. There is, however, a  clear  divergence  between  the  wording  of  the
    decision, clearly referring to exclusion, and it being a  decision  not
    to admit. We also note, in passing, that the decision taken was due  to
    the continuing threat posed by the appellant, something of its  nature,
    likely to persist for a considerable time.

35. We therefore turn to the issue that developed in  argument  before  us:
    can the Secretary of State refuse to admit an EEA  national  on  public
    safety, security or health  grounds?  Can  that  only  be  done  by  an
    exclusion order? And, does a refusal  to  admit  on  public  policy  or
    security grounds constitute an exclusion order?

36. We turn next to regulation 11, set out above. It is  evident  that  the
    power to refuse to admit an EEA national who produced a valid  passport
    or national identity card, as had this appellant, is, confined  to  the
    circumstances set out in regulation 19.

37. Mr Avery's argument is that the wording of regulation 19  (1),  despite
    referring to "exclusion" does  permit  a  refusal  of  admission  which
    (unlike an  exclusion  order)  does  not  endure.  "Exclusion"  is  not
    defined, and while "exclusion order" is defined, that is in terms of an
    order made under regulation 19 (1B), it must mean something other  than
    a refusal of entry and it must mean an order of a type that endures, as
    otherwise the framework of the Regulations and the manner in which  the
    appeal rights and restrictions if made on them would  not  make  sense.
    As noted above,  the  decision  made  in  this  case  was  based  on  a
    continuing threat the applicant is said to  pose,  not  a  one-off,  or
    necessarily time-limited.

38. Regulation 19 (1) clearly  refers  to  exclusion  and  imports  also  a
    requirement to take into  account  various  factors  as  prescribed  by
    regulation 21. That requirement  is,  it  appears,  reinforced  by  the
    relevant policy, as is a decision to deport.

39. There is no general power in the regulations not to  admit  someone  on
    public policy grounds; such a person may  however  be  excluded  for  a
    period.  There  are  sensible  reasons  for  this  consonant  with  the
    requirement that restrictions on the right of  free  movement  must  be
    construed strictly (see Orfanopoulos and Oliveri [2004] ECR I-525).  If
    it were open to a member state continually  to  refuse  admission  that
    would in effect amount to an exclusion order but without the procedural
    safeguards established  by  Articles  30  and  31  of  the  Citizenship
    Directive.

40. We are strengthened in our view by the fact  that  since  the  date  of
    decision in  this  appeal,  regulation  19  has  been  amended  by  new
    regulation 19 (1AB) to  permit  the  refusal  of  admittance  to  those
    suspected of being likely to abuse rights or  who  have  been  in  some
    circumstances been subject to removal under reg. 19 (3) (a).   It  thus
    appears that it was thought necessary to  provide  specifically  for  a
    power to refuse admittance where there was  not  already  in  place  an
    exclusion order, thus indicating that there was no general power not to
    admit.

41. The respondent did, we accept, have the power to exclude the  applicant
    if she considered that he met the criteria for an exclusion order to be
    met. If she did consider that on the facts of this case he presented  a
    sufficient threat, then she could and should have made such  an  order.
    She could not achieve that end by a refusal to admit.

42. In the light of the above, we conclude  that  the  questions  posed  at
    paragraph 35 above can be answered as follows:

      a) There is no power in the  regulations  in  force  at  the  date  of
         decision permitting the Secretary of State to refuse  to  admit  an
         EEA national on public policy or security grounds

      b) The Secretary of State can exclude a person by way of an  exclusion
         order on public policy or security grounds

      c) A refusal to admit an EEA national is distinct  from  an  exclusion
         order, even if it is expressed to be on public policy  or  security
         grounds.

43. In this case, if  the  respondent  was  purporting  not  to  admit  the
    appellant, the clear references to exclusion in the reasons  given  for
    the decision make it clear that there was no proper application of  the
    relevant law. Given the acceptance that the proper procedures were  not
    complied with, we  consider  that  the  decision  was  clearly  not  in
    accordance with the law, and thus that a fresh, proper decision must be
    made.

44. In the circumstances, we consider that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law. We  set  it  aside,
    and allow the appeal on the basis that it was not  in  accordance  with
    the law. It is thus for the respondent to make a fresh decision.

Summary of Conclusions

1    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of an
    error of law and it is set aside.

2    We remake the decision by allowing the appeal on the basis that it was
    not in accordance with the law.


Signed   Date:

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
