
[pic]
IAC-FH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07294/2014
                                                               oa/07295/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 July 2015                      |On 15 September 2015                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                      entry clearance officer - Nairobi
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            MSIS LADAN ADAN ABDI
                            MISS AMINO ADAN ABDI
                       (aNONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms J Howorth, instructed by Irving and Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but for the purposes of this appeal I shall refer to the  parties
    as they were described before the First-tier Tribunal, that  is  Messrs
    Abdi as the appellants and the Secretary of State as the respondent.

 2. The appellants are sisters born on 6 December 2003 and 17 October  1998
    and are aged 11 and 16 respectively and are citizens of Somalia.   They
    appealed against the immigration decisions of the respondent  dated  12
    May 2014 to refuse  their  applications  of  6  April  2014  for  entry
    clearance as children of the sponsor in  the  UK.   Those  applications
    were made further to paragraph 297 for entry clearance to  settle  with
    their mother, Farhiyo Ibrahim Ahmed.  The sponsor had claimed asylum on
    her arrival in the UK on 15 November 2004 but that  claim  was  refused
    albeit she was granted indefinite leave to remain on 10  October  2008.
    It was said she regained contact with  two  of  the  children  after  a
    neighbour located them in Kenya after being cared for by a friend of Ms
    Ahmed.  The children advised that their father had deserted  them.   Ms
    Ahmed applied for those two children to join her in the UK.   She  only
    located the appellants later in 2012 being cared  for  by  a  different
    friend in Kenya.  She was keen to reunite her family  and  was  already
    undertaking three cleaning jobs and would be starting a fourth  one  in
    January 2015.

 3. The application was refused on  the  basis  that  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not  satisfied  as  to  the  claimed  relationship  on  the
    documents provided which  were  readily  available  in  Kenya  and  the
    photographs did not contribute to the claimed biological  relationship.
    The sponsor had not provided evidence of contact and she had re-located
    the children and she was granted ILR in May 2011 but the application in
    2014 was the first  made  for  the  appellants.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer was not satisfied the funds were transferred for the benefit of
    the appellants and there was no evidence in relation to the appellants'
    father.  According to the formulae the income minus accommodation costs
    were less than that would be available  to  the  appellants  on  income
    support and thus the appellants would not be satisfactorily  maintained
    and accommodated.  The  applications  did  not  raise  any  exceptional
    circumstances which were consistent  with  the  right  to  respect  for
    family life and Article 8.

 4. The appeal was decided by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Steer on  15
    January 2015 and the judge allowed the  appeal  on  Article  8  grounds
    having  accepted  that  the  appellants  could  not  comply  with   the
    Immigration Rules.

 5. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal a DNA report was provided
    and there was no challenge  by  the  Home  Office  as  to  the  claimed
    relationship between the appellants and their sponsor.

 6. An application for permission to appeal was made on the basis that  the
    appellants' case failed to meet the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
    Rules but it was made clear in  Gulshan  [2013]  UKUT  00640  that  the
    Article 8 assessment  should  only  be  carried  out  when  there  were
    compelling circumstances not recognised by the Rules.  Further, it  was
    asserted, Nagre [2013] EWHC  270  (Admin)  endorsed  the  Secretary  of
    State's guidance on the meaning  of  exceptional  circumstances  namely
    ones where refusal would lead to an unjustifiably harsh  outcome.   The
    case had failed to meet the requirements of the Immigration  Rules  and
    the appeal was then allowed under the ECHR and this, it was  submitted,
    was wrong.  The outcome could not be  considered  to  be  unjustifiably
    harsh.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish
    who stated that the determination made no reference whatsoever  to  the
    legal basis for considering the case outside the Rules arguing that the
    basis for proceeding outside the Rules was inadequately justified.

 8. At the hearing Mr  Melvin  submitted  that  there  were  no  compelling
    circumstances which caused this appeal to  be  considered  outside  the
    Immigration Rules.  There had been no face-to-face contact between  the
    appellants  and  the  mother  for  ten  years  and   nothing   in   the
    consideration of the circumstances which warranted exploration  outside
    the Immigration Rules.  There was  scant  consideration  given  to  the
    maintenance of immigration control and Counsel had  admitted  that  the
    income threshold was not met.  Only in  the  last  two  years  had  the
    appellants' sponsor made contact with them and I was referred  to  case
    law of SS (Congo) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2015]
    EWCA Civ 387, SM & Others (Somalia) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 223 and  AAO
    v Entry Clearance Officer [2011] EWCA Civ 840.

 9. Ms Howorth submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had  weighed  up  all
    the evidence and bore in mind the best interests of the children and it
    was that reason that the matter was considered outside the Rules.   The
    mother has sole responsibility for the children and the  siblings  were
    in the UK.  The current carer was too old to care for  the  appellants,
    there were no other family members.  The judge went through the  Razgar
    assessment, that the children had no carer  and  their  best  interests
    were to be with one of their parents.  There was no error of law  which
    was material.

10. Mr Melvin identified that there was an important financial  requirement
    to be considered and it was not acceptable  that  the  Rule  should  be
    considered to be met at a future date post the decision  date.   As  at
    the date of the decision both  for  the  Immigration  Rules  and  human
    rights purposes the relevant date was that of the decision of the Entry
    Clearance Officer.

11. In his submissions Mr Melvin stated that the children were being looked
    after by a neighbour and  attending  school  and  coming  to  no  harm.
    Section 117B  of  the  Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002
    emphasised the consideration of the British taxpayer and I was referred
    to paragraph 49 of  AAO  and  paragraph  17  of  SM  (Somalia).   These
    children would be a burden on the public purse.  The family life itself
    had a reduced quality as there had been no contact  for  the  past  ten
    years.  The children could not speak English.   SM  (Somalia)  confirms
    that the 'trauma in breaking up a family' and thereby  rupturing  lives
    maybe significantly greater than the effect of not facilitating the re-
    union of family members that have become accustomed  to  living  apart.
    There may be family life but the seriousness of the  intereference  was
    not such that it was a breach of Article 8.

12. Ms Howorth submitted that Mr Melvin relied on Appendix FM but these did
    not apply as the relevant old case law under paragraph  297  was  still
    relevant.  There was still a documented family life between the sponsor
    and her children and these were two minor children with three  siblings
    in the UK.  The compelling circumstances test  was  met  and  the  best
    interests of the children were to join their family.

13. I am not persuaded that the authorities quoted that is  Gulshan,  Nagre
    and MM (Lebanon) can be read as seeking to qualify  the  assessment  of
    Article 8 or displace Strasbourg jurisprudence.  I am supported in this
    view by Oludoyi v Secretary of State for the Home Department IJR [2014]
    UKUT00539 (IAC).

14. MF (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 1192 states at paragraphs 41 and 42:

         "41    We  accept  this  submission.  In  view  of  the  strictures
             contained at para 20 of Huang, it would have  been  surprising
             if the Secretary of  State  had  intended  to  reintroduce  an
             exceptionality   test,   thereby   flouting   the   Strasbourg
             jurisprudence. At first sight, the choice of  the  phrase  'in
             exceptional circumstances' might suggest that this is what she
             purported to do. But the phrase has been used in a  way  which
             was not intended to have this effect  in  all  cases  where  a
             state wishes to remove a foreign national who relies on family
             life which he established at a time when  he  knew  it  to  be
             'precarious' (because he had no right to remain  in  the  UK).
             The cases were helpfully reviewed by Sales J in  R  (Nagre)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2013]  EWHC  720
             (Admin).  The  fact  that  Nagre  was  not  a  case  involving
             deportation  of  a  foreign  criminal   is   immaterial.   The
             significance of the case law lies in the repeated use  by  the
             ECtHR of the phrase 'exceptional circumstances'.

         42.  At para 40, Sales J referred to a statement in  the  case  law
             that, in 'precarious' cases, 'it is likely to be only  in  the
             most exceptional circumstances that the removal  of  the  non-
             national family member will constitute a violation of art  8'.
             This has been repeated  and  adopted  by  the  ECtHR  in  near
             identical terms in many cases. At paras 41  and  42,  he  said
             that in a  'precarious'  family  life  case,  it  is  only  in
             'exceptional' or 'the  most  exceptional  circumstances'  that
             removal of the non-national family member  will  constitute  a
             violation of article 8. In our view, that is not to say that a
             test of exceptionality is being applied. Rather it is that, in
             approaching the question of whether removal is a proportionate
             interference with an individual's article 8 rights, the scales
             are heavily weighted in favour of  deportation  and  something
             very compelling (which will be 'exceptional') is  required  to
             outweigh the public interest in removal. In our view, it is no
             coincidence that the  phrase  'exceptional  circumstances'  is
             used in the new rules in the context of weighing the competing
             factors for and against deportation of foreign criminals."

15. Further, as stated in MM (Lebanon) [2014] EWCA Civ 985

         "... if the relevant group of IRs is not  such  a  'complete  code'
         then the proportionality test would be more at large albeit  guided
         by the Huang test and UK and Strasbourg case law".

16. Paragraph 297 is not part of Appendix FM and  Gulshan  concentrated  on
    the immigration requirements as set out  in  Appendix  FM  as  does  MF
    (Article 8: new rules) Nigeria [2012] UKUT 00393  and  as  does  Izuazu
    (Article 8: new rules) [2013] UKUT 00045.   The  opening  paragraph  of
    Nagre refers to an application for judicial review of the lawfulness of
    certain additions to the Immigration Rules promulgated by the Secretary
    of State on 13 June 2012 in relation to claims based on family life  as
    now contained in provisions contained in Sections E-LTRP and EX.1.

17. I can accept that the preamble to Appendix FM states that:

         "It sets  out  the  requirements  to  be  met  and  in  considering
         applications under this route, it reflects how under Article  8  of
         the Human Rights Convention the balance will be struck between  the
         right to respect for private and family  life  and  the  legitimate
         aims  of  protecting  national  security,  public  safety  and  the
         economic wellbeing of the UK: the prevention of disorder and crime:
         the protection of health or morals: and the  protection  of  rights
         and freedoms of others (and  in  doing  so  reflects  the  relevant
         public  interest  considerations  set  out  at  part  5A   of   the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  It also  takes  into
         account the need to safeguard and promote the welfare  of  children
         in the UK in line with the Secretary of State's duty under  Section
         55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009."

18. The Immigration Rules in reference to paragraph  297  were  implemented
    prior to the implementation of Appendix FM  and  do  not  set  out  the
    strict financial requirements referred to in MM (Lebanon)  and  in  the
    application  for  permission  to  appeal.   Appendix  FM-SE  which  was
    referred to by Mr Melvin refers to the  specified  evidence  applicants
    need to provide to meet the requirements  of  the  Rules  contained  in
    Appendix FM and where those requirements are also  contained  in  other
    Rules and unless otherwise stated  the  specified  evidence  applicants
    need to provide to meet the requirements of those Rules.  The  Rule  in
    relation to paragraph 297(5) is separate from Appendix  FM  (A280  (b))
    and merely states that the  appellants  "can  and  will  be  maintained
    adequately by the parents or relative the  child  is  seeking  to  join
    without recourse to public funds" and the relevant guidance to be taken
    into account is that set out in the case law at KA and Others (Adequacy
    of maintenance) Pakistan [2006] UKAIT 00065.

19. The application for permission to appeal was couched on the basis  that
    the Tribunal did not identify compelling circumstances to consider  the
    matter outside the rules and this was  the  extent  of  the  permission
    granted by Judge Frankish.

20. I take the point of Mr Melvin that the relevant time for  consideration
    was that at the date of the Entry Clearance Officer's decision and that
    the judge referred unfortunately in the last paragraph [27]  to  "given
    that the appellants' mother can now (my emphasis)  adequately  maintain
    and accommodate  the  appellants,  I  find  that  the  reunion  of  the
    appellants with their mother and  siblings  in  the  UK  outweighs  the
    public interest in the maintenance of effective  immigration  control."
    Even with that error, the judge was aware that the appellants could not
    meet the Immigration Rules. The judge did identify at the outset of the
    conclusions  that  the  appellants  could  not   meet   the   financial
    requirements of the Immigration Rules [19].  The judge  again  referred
    to that fact at [25].  Further the judge  makes  reference  to  Section
    117B which includes the issue of whether there  would  be  a  financial
    burden on the state with the admission of the appellants [21].

21. As the judge stated, however, first, there was no real challenge to the
    fact that the mother had sole responsibility for the  appellants  since
    she left the father in 2004 and secondly,  no  real  challenge  to  the
    evidence of the appellants' mother or that  of  the  affidavit  of  the
    appellants' current carer who states that she could no longer care  for
    them.  The judge also found that the  mother  had  previously  obtained
    leave for her other two children to settle with her in the UK and  that
    it was in the children's best interests to live with at  least  one  of
    his/her parents [27].  These were in effect, despite  the  difficulties
    with the financial requirements, the compelling  circumstances  and  on
    which the judge found the decision to be disproportionate.   The  judge
    had already referred to Mundeba (s55 and  para  297(i)(f)  [2013]  UKUT
    00088 and the application of the best interests principle  to  children
    outside  the  UK  and  whether  the  combination  of  circumstances  is
    sufficiently compelling to require admission.

22. I find that there is just sufficient in this determination  that  there
    is no error of law.  Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]
    UKUT 00085 (IAC) confirms at its headnote

         'Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
         makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge.

23. I took into account SM & Others (Somalia) but in my view this  supports
    the  contention  that  the  application  for  permission  is  merely  a
    disagreement with the findings of the judge  which  although  they  may
    have been generous it was open to her. In that  case  there  were  five
    appellants who lived abroad and seeking entry clearance whilst  it  was
    found that the sponsor could relocate abroad.  In this case the sponsor
    here has already been given permission to bring in two of her  children
    to the UK and  a  requirement  to  relocate  (of  which  there  was  no
    suggestion here) would have the effect of disrupting  their  lives  and
    existing ties here of children.  AAO in fact related to the claim of  a
    mother wishing to join her children in the UK. As AAO v Entry Clearance
    Officer [2011] EWCA Civ 840 confirms,  and  indeed  MF,  the  Appellate
    Immigration Authority should consider that decisions taken pursuant  to
    the lawful operation of immigration control will  be  proportionate  in
    all save a minority of exceptional cases identifiable on a case by case
    basis but it is not necessary that the Appellate Immigration  Authority
    need  ask  itself  in  addition  whether  the  case  met  the  test  of
    exceptionality (Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 [20]).

Notice of Decision

24. I therefore find that there is no error of law and the  decision  shall
    stand.

25. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

