
IAC-TH-LW-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07591/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 December 2014                          |On 31 December 2014           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                             mrs sabrima ahmadi
                         (anonymity ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. P. Haywood, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. No anonymity order has previously been made in these proceedings and no
    reason has been put before me today why such an order should  be  made.
    I therefore make no such order.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 25 March  1988.   She
    applied for settlement in the United Kingdom on 20 November 2012 as the
    spouse of Mr Ali Ahmadi (the  sponsor)  who  has  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.  A decision was made to refuse to  grant  the  appellant  entry
    clearance which was subsequently not reviewed following receipt of  the
    grounds of appeal.  The reasons for the decision  are  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was not satisfied that the  respondent  was  able  to
    meet  the  financial  requirements  set  out  in  Appendix  FM  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 3. The appellant appealed and following a hearing at Taylor House Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Tiffen, in a determination  promulgated  on  26
    February 2014, dismissed the appellant's appeal.

 4. She did so  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  also  relying  on  the
    authority of Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach)  [2013]
    UKUT 00640 (IAC).  She found at paragraph 24 of her determination that:-



         "I  have considered the circumstances in which  the  appellant  and
         the sponsor now find themselves and reach the conclusion that there
         are not arguably good grounds which  were  not  considered  by  the
         respondent such that I am required to  consider  the  appeal  under
         Article 8."

 5. Permission to appeal was sought but refused in both the First-tier  and
    Upper Tribunal.  Thereafter the appellant applied for  judicial  review
    to the High Court.  Following consideration of the documents lodged  by
    her and the acknowledgment of the respondent in these  proceedings  the
    Honourable Mr Justice Supperstone granted permission.  He observed that
    the appellant's appeal is arguable "applying Cart principles".

 6. Thus the matter came before me today.

 7. Mr. Haywood expanded on a skeleton argument prepared by  the  Kent  Law
    Clinic, the appellant's representatives, and dated  10  December  2014.
    The nub of his submission is that the legal  position  has  now  become
    even clearer since the grant of permission by the High  Court  in  this
    appeal following R (on the application of Ganesabala) [2014] EWHC  2712
    (Admin), R (on the  application  of  Adiya  &  Ors)  [2014]  EWHC  3919
    (Admin), R (on the application of Oludoyi  &  Ors)  (Article  8  -  MM)
    (Lebanon) and Nagre (IJR [2014] UKUT 00539 and R (on the application of
    MM Lebanon), AM Pakistan and SJ  Pakistan  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985.   In
    short, that where the Immigration  Rules  themselves  provide  for  the
    consideration  of   exceptional   circumstances,   then   any   further
    consideration  of  Article  8  may  well  be  limited  to  those  cases
    exhibiting exceptional  circumstances  over  and  above  those  already
    considered under the Immigration Rules.  However, where the Immigration
    Rules do not so provide, then decision  makers  must  consider  whether
    Article 8 is engaged, and whether in all the circumstances a refusal is
    proportionate.  That proportionality consideration can only be the same
    as applied before the introduction of the new family migration Rules in
    2012, namely applying the step-by-step approach  contained  within  the
    guidance given by Lord Bingham in R (on the application  of  Razgar)  v
    SSHD [2004] UKHL 27.  The entry clearance Rules currently do not  admit
    of any exceptions, nor allow for any  discretion  and  in  this  appeal
    there was  no  reference  whatsoever  to  Article  8  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights and not even any  evidence  that  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer has considered any guidance.

 8. Mr. Avery emphasised that the appellant could not  meet  the  financial
    requirements contained with the Immigration Rules and  that  inevitably
    the appeal  under  the  Rules  must  be  dismissed.   Contrary  to  the
    submissions  of  Mr.  Haywood  he  urged   me   to   accept   that   no
    proportionality assessment is now required.

 9. I am satisfied that the Immigration Rules applicable here, unlike those
    relating to deportation, are not  a  complete  code.   That  being  the
    position, as stated in MM above, the proportionality test  is  more  at
    large, albeit guided by case law.

10. For all  the  reasons  set  out  in  the  appellant's  representative's
    skeleton argument I find that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred.
     I invited the representatives to address me  as  to  how  this  appeal
    should now proceed.  Contrary to the submissions  within  the  skeleton
    argument Mr. Haywood invited me to remit the appeal back to the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the basis that no  fact-finding  has  taken  place  in
    relation to the appellant's Article  8  claim.   This  course  was  not
    resisted by Mr. Avery.  Where the First-tier Tribunal decision  is  set
    aside the Upper Tribunal has power to remit the appeal  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal with directions for reconsideration  of  the  appeal.   I
    take account of the practice statements where  there  is  contemplation
    that an appeal may be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  where  the
    effect of the error has been to deprive a party before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for a party's  case  to
    be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  This was the  nub
    of Mr. Haywood's argument for remittal.   Both  representatives  agreed
    that the matter should therefore be returned to the First-tier Tribunal
    where the issue of Article 8 is to be heard de novo.



Signed        Date 31 December 2014.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



                                 DIRECTIONS


 1. The substantive hearing of this appeal will take place at the Taylor
    House Hearing Centre on 4 June 2015 at 10 a.m. before any judge other
    than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Tiffen.

 2. The Tribunal will provide an Afghan Dari interpreter.

 3. The time estimate is three hours.

 4. Any further documentary evidence relied upon by either party is to be
    filed with the Tribunal and served upon the other party no later than 4
    p.m. five working days prior to the substantive hearing.



Signed        Date 31 December 2014.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

