
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07767/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 29th July 2014                               |On 8th August 2014         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRENCH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


                                     S S
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Dhanji, instructed by UK Migration Lawyers
Limited


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. S S is a citizen of India, currently living there, who was born on  3rd
    January 1980.  In the interests of continuity I will continue to  refer
    to him as "the Appellant"  and  to  the  Secretary  of  State  as  "the
    Respondent", the titles by which they were known before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The Appellant and his former wife have a daughter J who  was
    born in the United Kingdom on 18th February 2008 and is thus now aged 6
    years. The child is a British citizen. She is living with the Appellant
    in India.

 2. The Appellant's immigration history so far as time spent in the  United
    Kingdom is concerned appears to be that he first  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom in 2006 and claimed asylum in March 2007.  Following refusal of
    that claim he did not leave.  He had met his former wife  in  or  about
    November 2006 and a relationship developed.  J was born in early  2008.
    The Appellant left the United Kingdom in November 2008  accompanied  by
    his then wife and J and the couple married in India  on  25th  November
    2008.

 3. Following his marriage the Appellant made an application for settlement
    in the UK as the spouse of a British citizen but that was refused.  His
    former wife left India to return to the United  Kingdom  (the  date  is
    unclear).  The Appellant's appeal against refusal  of  entry  clearance
    was dismissed.   The Appellant initiated divorce proceedings  in  India
    under the Hindu Marriage Act and a decree of  divorce  was  granted  in
    September 2012.  The Appellant has formed a relationship  with  another
    British citizen who travels to India to meet him and sends funds.   The
    Appellant made an application for entry clearance to exercise  a  right
    of access to a child in January 2013.  The application  was  considered
    under paragraph 246 of the Immigration Rules and Appendix  FM  and  was
    refused on 19th February 2013.  The Appellant appealed.

 4. The appeal  was  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Colyer  at
    Nottingham Magistrates' Court on 12th March  2014.   He  dismissed  the
    appeal under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  upheld  the  refusal  under
    paragraphs 320(7A) and 320(11) but went on to state in the decision:

         "I find that the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer  breaches
         the  Appellant's  derived  rights  under  the  community   treaties
         conferring rights of entry and residence on the primary carer of  a
         British citizen and I allow the appeal on that aspect.

          I allow the appeal under Article 8 of the European  Convention  on
         Human Rights."

 5. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal.   The  first  basis
    was that the appeal should not have been allowed under Article 8 as the
    decision was at odds with the judge's findings.  It was stated  in  the
    determination that the Respondent's decision was not a disproportionate
    interference with the Article 8 rights of the Appellant or  members  of
    his family.  The second ground alleged a failure  to  give  reasons  or
    adequate reasons for his findings.  It was  said  that  the  judge  had
    failed to provide adequate reasons why refusing the Appellant entry  to
    the UK would deprive J of the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the
    rights associated with her status as an EU citizen.  It  was  submitted
    that in line with the case law in Zambrano  it  was  the  duty  of  the
    Appellant  to  provide  clear  documentary   evidence   regarding   the
    whereabouts of his child's mother and what had been done  to  find  and
    locate her and obtain her views  on  the  child's  custody  and  living
    arrangements.  The Appellant had failed to provide any adequate  reason
    as to why he did not mention the child during divorce  proceedings  and
    there was no evidence that the child's mother had no  interest  in  the
    child and no evidence that refusing the Appellant entry to the UK would
    deprive the child of the genuine enjoyment  of  the  substance  of  the
    rights associated with her status as an EU citizen as there were family
    members in the UK who could care for her.

 6. Permission was granted by  Judge  Plumptre  on  13th  Mary  2014.   She
    commented that the determination was a detailed and  thorough  document
    but found it  arguable  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  his  approach
    particularly when it was  common  ground  that  the  Appellant  had  no
    contact with the child's mother and did not know  her  whereabouts  and
    that her views on the child's custody and living arrangements  had  not
    been obtained.  It was arguable that the refusal of entry clearance was
    proportionate because there was no evidence to suggest that  the  child
    had been deprived of  rights  associated  with  her  status  as  an  EU
    citizen.

 7. At the hearing Mr Dhanji for the Appellant accepted that the judge  had
    made a slip in stating that the appeal  be  allowed  under  Article  8.
    That is clearly right.   The  judge  considered  Article  8  issues  at
    paragraph 73 to 79 of his determination and found  that  there  was  no
    breach of Article 8.

 8. With regard to the  other  issue  Mr  Mills  addressed  me  first.   He
    accepted that the Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006
    had been amended to take account  of  the  judgment  of  the  Court  of
    Justice of the European Communities in Zambrano [2011]  EUECJ  C-34/09.
    The principle originally applied to  expulsion  of  a  parent  but  the
    Tribunal in MA and SM (Zambrano: EU children outside  EU)  Iran  [2013]
    UKUT 00380 (IAC) had said there was no reason why it could not apply to
    exclusion also.  He said that in a  normal  case  where  there  was  no
    record of past deception it might be reasonable to  accept  that  there
    was no contact between a British child abroad and a UK parent  but  the
    starting point was that this Appellant had practised deception.   Judge
    Colyer had accepted the findings of the earlier judge  (Judge  Telford)
    that the Appellant had been deceitful.  That, he said, was the starting
    point.  Zambrano was a hard case as was the subsequent case  of  Dereci
    and Others (European citizenship) [2011] EUECJ C-256/11.   It  was  not
    enough that there might be economic hardship.  With the mother  in  the
    United Kingdom there was an issue as to what contact there was  between
    her and the child.  He said if  there  had  been  no  past  credibility
    issues the judge would have been entitled to accept that there  was  no
    contact but in the circumstances he was not a credible witness  without
    corroboration.

 9. The divorce document, he pointed out, stated that  the  couple  had  no
    children.  The Appellant had claimed that he had custody but the  child
    had not been mentioned in the divorce proceedings  which  recited  that
    there were no issue.  He said it was perverse of the  judge  to  accept
    the Appellant's evidence.  If I did not agree with him on  that  regard
    he said there was a lack of reasoning.  The judge was of the view  that
    the Appellant could have  made  contact  with  his  former  wife.   The
    important point was whether the child could be in this country  without
    the Appellant.  There had been no consideration of the position of  the
    mother caring for the child.  It was  not  a  question  of  preference.
    With regard to the Regulations, which he said should be interpreted  in
    the light of the judgment in  Zambrano,  the  Appellant  might  be  the
    primary carer at the  moment  of  the  child  but  it  was  clear  from
    Regulation 11(5)(e) read with Regulation  15A(4)(c)  that  the  crucial
    issue was whether the child would be able to live in the United Kingdom
    if the Appellant were denied entry.  The Appellant had  not  discharged
    the burden upon him.

10. In response Mr Dhanji said the starting point was the  refusal  notice.
    The ECO had accepted that the Appellant  had  sole  responsibility  and
    that, he said, had coloured the judge's approach.  It  appeared  to  be
    common ground that there was no contact with the child's  mother.   The
    question had been whether the Appellant had shown, on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the child could not live in the United Kingdom or  a
    different EEA state without him entering with her.  He said  there  was
    sufficient evidence to that effect notwithstanding the previous adverse
    findings.  The judge was not blind to those findings to  which  he  had
    referred.  The ECO had accepted that the daughter  had  been  abandoned
    and that the Appellant had sole responsibility.  Without the  Appellant
    being in the United Kingdom the child could not be here either.

11. Finally Mr Mills said that it was not common ground that the  Appellant
    had sole responsibility.  The refusal notice referred to there being  a
    lack of evidence and there had been no mention  of  the  child  in  the
    divorce proceedings; there was therefore an issue.   If  there  was  no
    evidence save oral evidence and the witness  had  previously  practised
    deception the matter required looking at with great circumspection.

12. There is only one live issue in this appeal.  It was accepted that  the
    judge had erred in allowing  the  appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR  when
    clearly that had not been his intention.  The live issue is whether  he
    erred in law in allowing the appeal on the basis that the Appellant  is
    the primary carer of the British child J who  could  not  live  in  the
    United Kingdom or any  other  EU  state  without  the  Appellant  being
    granted entry.

13. Regulation 11 relates to right of admission to the United Kingdom.  The
    relevant part reads as follows:

    (5)  A person ("P") meets the criteria in this paragraph where - ...

         (e)  P is accompanying a British citizen to or  joining  a  British
             citizen in the United Kingdom  and  P  would  be  entitled  to
             reside in the United Kingdom pursuant  to  Regulation  15A(4A)
             were P and the British citizen both in the United Kingdom.

     Paragraph 15A relates to derivative rights of residence and states:

    (1)  A person ("P") who is not an exempt person and who  satisfies  the
         criteria in paragraph (2), (3), (4), (4A) or (5) of this Regulation
         is entitled to a derivative right to reside in the  United  Kingdom
         so long as P satisfies the relevant criteria ...

    (4A) P satisfies the criteria in this paragraph if -

         (a)  P is the primary carer of a  British  citizen  ("the  relevant
             British citizen");

         (b)  the  relevant  British  citizen  is  residing  in  the  United
             Kingdom; and

         (c)  the relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in  the
             UK or in any other EEA state if P were required to leave.

14. The refusal notice is lengthy and concerns several  issues.    Although
    at one point it refers to the Appellant holding sole responsibility for
    the child, shared with his own family in India, it is also  noted  that
    the divorce document made no mention of the custody of  the  child  and
    what arrangements had been made. Nothing had been provided to  indicate
    the child's mother had given her agreement to his having sole  custody.
    The Appellant had stated that the reason for the divorce was because he
    did not want to go  to  the  UK  to  reside  yet  he  had  submitted  a
    settlement application with a view to doing  that.   The  role  of  the
    mother was clearly raised at the hearing  as  at  paragraph  18  it  is
    recited that the Presenting Officer on that occasion contended that  it
    was wholly unlikely that the mother would have abandoned the child.

15. The judge considered the Regulations and also the case of Zambrano  and
    MA and SM.  He noted (at paragraph 66):

         "The relevant question  that  is  posed  by  these  Regulations  is
         whether J would be unable to reside in the UK or another EEA  state
         if the Appellant was unable to accompany her to the UK.  It is said
         that Jessica has no contact with  her  mother  or  with  any  other
         members of her mother's family.  However there is reference to  the
         mother's address being in Leicester in the United Kingdom."

    It went on in the next paragraph to refer to the judgment of the  Court
    of Appeal in Harrison (Jamaica) v SSHD [2012] EWCA  Civ  1736,  quoting
    Lord Justice Elias (at paragraph 19) stating

         "In my judgment by referring to action which deprives  children  of
         the 'substance of the right' the Court is intending to say that the
         right may be infringed if in practice the children will  be  forced
         to leave with their ascendant relative even though  they  could  in
         theory, as a matter of strict law, remain in  the  state  of  which
         they are nationals. It would be no answer for the state to say that
         the parents should be  denied  the  right  to  remain  because  the
         children can be adopted, for example. That approach of the Court is
         consistent with a fundamental tenet of EU  jurisprudence  which  is
         that it always looks at substance rather than form."

16. The judge went on to refer to Zambrano and to quote from MA and SM.  He
    concluded "on the exceptional facts of this case I find that a  refusal
    to admit the Appellant to the United Kingdom would deprive his child of
    the genuine enjoyment of the substance of the  rights  associated  with
    her status as an EU citizen.  Consequently,  denying  the  Appellant  a
    right of entry and residence to the United  Kingdom  would  lead  to  a
    breach of Article 20 of the Treaty on the Functioning of  the  European
    Union.  The appeal is therefore allowed on the basis that the  decision
    of the Entry Clearance Officer breaches the Appellant's derived  rights
    under the community treaties in respect of entry to  and  residence  in
    the United Kingdom."

17. The first challenge (which had not been made in the grounds)  was  that
    the  judge's  conclusion  was  irrational  bearing  in  mind  the  poor
    immigration history and previous deceit of the Appellant.  That history
    is not disputed but I find that the conclusion was  not  irrational  or
    perverse on the basis that a judge could not possibly have come to that
    conclusion.  I do however find that the conclusion was not reasoned  in
    such a way that the Respondent would be able to understand why she  had
    lost. The judge thereby erred in law.

18. The Regulations make it clear that the derivative right in respect of a
    non-EEA national caring for a British citizen is on the basis that  the
    relevant British citizen would be unable to reside in  the  UK  (or  in
    another EEA state) without the presence of the non-EEA  national.   The
    quotation above from Harrison makes it clear that  the  right  for  the
    British national must not be illusory.  Lord Justice Elias went  on  to
    state (at paragraph 63) "I agree with  Mr  Beale  QC  Counsel  for  the
    Secretary of State that there is really no basis for asserting that  it
    is arguable in the light of all of the authorities  that  the  Zambrano
    principle extends to cover anything short of a situation where  the  EU
    citizen is forced to leave the territory of the EU.  If the EU citizen,
    be it child or wife, would not in practice be compelled  to  leave  the
    country if a non-EU family member were  to  be  refused  the  right  of
    residence, there is in my view nothing in these authorities to  suggest
    that EU law is engaged.  Article 8 Convention rights may then come into
    the picture to protect family life as the court recognised  in  Dereci,
    but that is an entirely distinct area of protection."

19. The judgment of the Court of Justice of the European  Union  in  Dereci
    put the matter this way:

         "European  Union  law  and,  in  particular,  its   provisions   on
         citizenship of the Union, must be interpreted as  meaning  that  it
         does not preclude a Member State from refusing  to  allow  a  third
         country national to reside  on  its  territory,  where  that  third
         country national wishes to reside with a member of his  family  who
         is a citizen of the Union residing in the Member State of which  he
         has nationality, who has never exercised his right  of  freedom  of
         movement, provided that such refusal does not lead, for  the  Union
         citizen concerned, to the denial of the genuine  enjoyment  of  the
         substance of the rights conferred by virtue  of  his  status  as  a
         citizen of the Union, which is a matter for the referring court  to
         verify."

20. The live issue which was not addressed by the judge (and which had been
    raised by the Presenting  Officer)  was  connection  with  the  child's
    mother and her role or potential role.   The  Indian  divorce  document
    dated 25th September 2012, brought at the Appellant's suit,  refers  to
    two addresses for the wife in Leicester.  The basis of the divorce  was
    desertion and it is stated in  the  petition  that  the  cause  of  the
    marriage breakdown was that the Appellant's wife wanted him to live  in
    England but he did not wish to do so. He had requested her to come back
    to him but she had refused.  It is stated that the wife had put  in  an
    appearance and contested the petition so the address given for  service
    must have been one at which at least at that time she  could  be  found
    but she had not appeared at the actual hearing.  The document expressly
    sets out that there were no children of the union.

21. The judge did not approach in a reasoned and adequate way the  question
    of whether the mother of the child would be prepared to have the  child
    live with her.  There was no evidence of any attempt having  been  made
    to contact the mother by or on behalf of the Appellant.  The burden  of
    proof rests upon him.   Given  the  Appellant's  previous  deceit,  and
    apparent wilful reluctance to contact the mother to  obtain  her  views
    the judge did not adequately reasons why it was that he found that  the
    child would not be able to live  in  the  United  Kingdom  without  the
    presence of the Appellant.  The current partner in  the  UK  said  that
    there was no contact between the child and the mother  but  that  would
    only be so far as she was aware and it does not establish that  if  the
    mother were contacted she would not be prepared to have the child  live
    with her.  This is quite distinct  from  the  scenario  posed  by  Lord
    Justice Elias that a British child could live in the United Kingdom  if
    it were adopted or cared for by Social  Services.   This  child  has  a
    mother in the United Kingdom who appears capable of being contacted  to
    ascertain her views.  Without those views being clearly  known  (or  it
    being established that the mother could not be traced despite  efforts)
    the Appellant had not shown that the decision deprived the child of the
    genuine enjoyment of the substance  of  the  rights  attaching  to  the
    status of a European Union citizen.

22. I accordingly find that Judge Colyer erred in law in this  respect.  No
    purpose could be served by a further hearing as it was clear  that  the
    Appellant had no evidence which might lead to a  different  conclusion.
    He is of course free to make a further application if further  evidence
    is available. I  set  aside  the  judge's  decision  and  substitute  a
    decision that the appeal is dismissed on the evidence available.

23. As this determination concerns a child and as  an  anonymity  direction
    was made previously I propose to make an  anonymity  order  as  follows
    below.

Decisions

24. The original determination contained an error on a  point  of  law.   I
    have set aside the decision and substitute a decision that  the  appeal
    is dismissed on all grounds.

25. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008 I order that the disclosure or publication of any matter  unlikely
    to lead members of the public to identity the Appellant or  members  of
    his family is prohibited.  Failure to comply with this order  may  lead
    to proceedings for contempt of court.






Signed                              Date:  06 August 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge French


