
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07594/2015
     OA/07596/2015
     OA/07597/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30th January 2018                          |On 5th April 2018             |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                               devashwari [d]
                                     [y]
                                     [s]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr Hussain
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The Appellants born on [ ] 1981, [ ] 2002 and [ ] 2005 are all citizens
    of India.  The first Appellant is the mother of the  second  and  third
    Appellants.  They have made application  for  entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom to join the first Appellant's  spouse  as  a  dependant.
    The Entry Clearance Officer had refused that application on 13th  March
    2015.  The Appellants had appealed that decision  and  the  appeal  had
    been heard before First-tier Tribunal Judge Beg at Taylor House on 18th
    January 2017.  The judge had dismissed the appeals.

 2. Permission to appeal had been made to the First-tier Tribunal and  that
    permission had been refused by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin  on  1st
    September 2017.  A further application for  permission  to  appeal  was
    made to the Upper Tribunal and that application was  granted  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Pitt on 19th October 2017.  It  was  said  that  it  was
    arguable that there had been an error as  to  the  admission  of  post-
    decision evidence an incorrect standard of proof being applied and that
    evidence potentially to show the marriage was genuine and  the  Sponsor
    was the father of the children was omitted from the assessment.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 3. It was said that under Rule 15(2A) evidence was submitted which was  in
    the form of DNA evidence to prove  paternity  and  that  the  delay  in
    getting that to the First-tier  Tribunal  was  not  the  fault  of  the
    Appellants rather poor presentation by representatives.  It was further
    submitted the judge  had  made  an  error  by  excluding  post-decision
    evidence.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 4. It was conceded the judge did not have much evidence  to  work  on  but
    nevertheless the exclusion of post-decision evidence was not a material
    error in this case.

 5. At the conclusion I reserved my decision to consider the  evidence  and
    submissions raised.  I now provide that decision with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The Entry Clearance Officer's refusal of this  case  had  been  on  two
    distinct grounds namely:

      a) It was not accepted that this was a genuine and subsisting marriage
         on the limited evidence produced.

      b) The photograph taken of  the  family  was  considered  a  fake  and
         accordingly a false document had been produced and refusal was also
         made under paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules.

 7. The judge had noted at paragraph 5 that the Respondent no longer relied
    upon the second ground and indeed the issue of the  photograph  or  any
    matters arising did not form any part of the judge's decision.

 8. The judge at paragraph 7 had correctly stated  the  appropriate  burden
    and standard of proof in this case.  He had also noted  "I  take  fully
    into consideration all the  documents  contained  in  the  file".   The
    decision  thereafter  supports  the  fact  the  judge   had   carefully
    considered the  documents  available  as  well  as  the  oral  evidence
    produced.

 9. It was clear from the outset of refusal that the paternity of  the  two
    dependent children was an issue in the case; given the  genuineness  of
    the marriage being called into question at the outset.

10. At paragraph 7 to 12  the  judge  had  taken  account  of  the  limited
    evidence available and provided reasons for the findings  made.   There
    were concerns as to the validity of both the marriage  certificate  and
    the two birth certificates given that they had been obtained many years
    after the respective events.  The supportive evidence from witnesses in
    India, in the form of documentary evidence was considered by the judge.
     In general little weight was attached to that evidence  by  the  judge
    for reasons that he provided.  There was a sufficiency of reasons given
    for that decision, nor could it be said that such a  decision  was  one
    that no other judge would have reached.  It did not  transgress  either
    the burden or standard of proof applicable in these cases.

11. The judge had further considered the bank  account  provided.   It  was
    said to be a joint bank account.  However it was noted that whilst  the
    Appellant's name was typed the Sponsor's name had been  handwritten  as
    an addition.  The judge was entitled to question that oddity  which  is
    apparent when one examines the bank statements at pages 48 to 63 of the
    Appellants' bundle.  He did note that the monies  deposited  into  this
    bank account all post-dated the date of decision (13th March 2015)  and
    were predominantly made in 2016.  He did not take those  deposits  into
    account in line with the case of DR (Morocco) [2005] UKIAT 0038.   That
    was an error, and indeed was identified as such by Upper Tribunal Judge
    Martin at paragraph 3 of her decision to  refuse  the  application  for
    appeal, on the basis that whilst an error it was not  material  to  the
    judge's conclusion.  It is clear that in terms of the  bank  statements
    the overriding concern was the addition in handwriting of the Sponsor's
    name turning a single owned account of the Appellant into ostensibly  a
    joint account.  That was not without significance given the core of the
    refusal was the genuineness of the marriage.   The  judge  had  further
    noted at paragraph 1 the features  of  the  Respondent's  refusal  that
    noted there was no evidence of joint assets,  liabilities  or  savings.
    Taken together that could raise a question when the name of the Sponsor
    was added to the account and did it only postdate the  refusal  letter,
    consistent with the entries of deposits noted by the judge.  The  judge
    in looking at those bank statements whilst noting the entries from late
    2015 onwards, would have noted no earlier deposits, despite the parties
    asserting a marriage in 1999 and the Sponsor being in the UK  for  some
    years prior to 2015.   Accordingly  whilst  it  was  an  error  not  to
    consider that evidence of remittances in late 2015/2016 it  was  not  a
    material error in the judge's assessment of the finances and that  bank
    statement's peculiarities in particular.

12. Whilst it is said in submission the judge did not  take  account  of  a
    visit to India in 2016, potentially  for  the  same  reason,  the  only
    reference by the judge to visits was to acknowledge in paragraph 13 the
    Sponsor made  visits  to  India  for  almost  seven  years  accordingly
    acknowledging that visits had been made.

13. The judge did not impose too high a standard when assessing evidence of
    the genuineness of the marriage but made reasonable findings  based  on
    the limited evidence available to him and applying  the  proper  burden
    and standard of proof.

14. In terms of DNA evidence this is not without  significance.   There  is
    now before the Tribunal by virtue of Rule 15(2A) DNA  evidence  and  an
    explanation as to its failure to  be  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge.  That explanation was essentially poor case presentation.  It is
    further  acknowledged  that  the  Rule  15(2A)  evidence  only  becomes
    relevant if admitted if the decision is remade following a finding that
    the judge made a material error of law.

15. The judge had commented upon the absence of DNA evidence  at  paragraph
    12.  It was noted that the explanation provided by the Sponsor for  the
    absence of DNA evidence was the expense  in  providing  such  evidence.
    However the judge had noted that  the  Appellant  had  paid  for  legal
    representation and was in employment.  The  inference  being  that  the
    explanation for no DNA evidence seemed to sit ill  with  the  Appellant
    paying for and having legal advice and receiving a regular income.  The
    judge further noted  that  had  DNA  evidence  been  available  proving
    paternity that could not only prove the issue of paternity  in  respect
    of Appellants 2 and 3 but would have a bearing on  the  genuineness  of
    the marriage, the core issue in this case.  That was an  understandable
    and accurate comment for the judge to have made.  Indeed had there been
    DNA evidence available and not considered by the judge then that  would
    almost self-evidently have been a material error of law.   However  the
    judge did not have that evidence, the  DNA  evidence  only  being  made
    available in November 2017.  Further the absence of that evidence given
    the juxtaposition of the Sponsor's claim of its expense but his payment
    for legal advisors and employment  did  not  assist  his  case  or  his
    discharge of the burden of proof.

16. Accordingly whilst there is now DNA evidence  available  that  was  not
    before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  indeed  there  has  been
    potentially contradictory reasons given for  its  absence.   There  had
    been no adjournment request to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  to  allow
    for the  obtaining  of  DNA  evidence.   Accordingly  on  the  evidence
    available before the judge whilst the  judge  did  err  in  not  taking
    account of payments post-March 2015 that was not a  material  error  in
    this case.  The judge applied the appropriate burden  and  standard  of
    proof and had carefully considered  all  the  evidence  available.   He
    reached a conclusion based upon reasoned findings  that  were  open  to
    him.  There was not accordingly a material error of  law  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

17. In terms of the way forward  now  there  appears  to  be  DNA  evidence
    available it is of course open  to  the  Appellants  to  make  a  fresh
    application placing that evidence together with a full and clear bundle
    of evidence before an Entry Clearance Officer.

Notice of Decision

There was no material error of law made  by  the  judge  in  this  case  and
accordingly I uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever

