
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
OA/07668/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 26 October 2017                        |On 21 November 2017               |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   MrS R U
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwncyz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Basharat of Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer. I shall refer to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer throughout as such  and  to  Mrs  R  U  as  the
    claimant in order to avoid confusion.

 2. The claimant is a citizen of Pakistan who was born on 3  October  1989.
    She applied for entry clearance to enter the  UK  as  a  partner  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.  By way of a  decision  dated  25
    March  2015  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused   the   claimant's
    application.




    The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 3. The claimant appealed against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.
     In a decision promulgated on  28  November  2016  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Mill allowed the  claimant's  appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    allowed the appeal on the basis of Article 24(3) of the EU  Charter  of
    Fundamental Rights.  The appeal was also allowed on Article 8 grounds.

 4. The Entry Clearance Officer applied for permission  to  appeal  against
    the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   On  1  August  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  Frankish  refused  permission  to  appeal.   The  Entry
    Clearance Officer renewed the application for permission to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal and on 31 August 2017 Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    McGeachy granted permission to appeal.

    The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

    Submissions

     The grounds of appeal assert that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  by
     following the case of Abdul (section 55 - Article 24(3) Charter) [2016]
     UKUT 106 (IAC).  It is also asserted that, in this case, even if  Abdul
     is correctly decided the appeal has no  EU  law  aspect  at  all.   The
     claimant seeks, as a non-EEA national, to join her British husband  who
     has never exercised any free movement rights.  It is asserted that this
     is plainly outside any scenario where the  UK  as  a  member  state  is
     implementing Union law.

 5. Reference is made to Article 51 of the Charter, which reads as follows:

                                 "Article 51

                                    Scope

         (1)   The  provisions  of  this  Charter  are  addressed   to   the
             institutions and bodies of the Union with due regard  for  the
             principle of subsidiarity and to the member states  only  when
             they are implementing Union law.  They shall therefore respect
             the rights, observe the principles and promote the application
             thereof in accordance with their respective powers.

         (2)  This Charter does not establish any new power or task for  the
             Community or the Union, or modify powers and tasks defined  by
             the treaties."

 6. Whether or not there is a freestanding right as found in  Abdul  simply
    does not arise in the context of this appeal.  It is asserted that  the
    judge has erred by accepting that the Charter extends Community law  in
    a manner not permitted by Article 51(2).

 7. Ground 2 submits that the judge took into  consideration  matters  that
    are not admissible.  It is asserted that the Entry Clearance  Officer's
    decision was on 25 March 2015.  The appeal, brought under Section 82(1)
    against refusal of entry clearance,  was  subject  to  Section  85A(2),
    constraining consideration to circumstances appertaining at the date of
    decision.  It is asserted that the judge had regard to  the  claimant's
    passing of an English language test postdating the decision and to  the
    delay in the appeal coming to hearing, which  by  definition  postdated
    the decision.  The judge took into account as a  relevant  factor  that
    the Rules would now be met.  This is  flawed.   Post-decision  evidence
    going to matters concerning Article 8 is debarred by Section 85A(2)  to
    the same extent as any other, see AS (Somalia) & Anor  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2009] UKHL 32.  It is asserted that  the
    judge has not conducted the proportionality  exercise  on  the  correct
    basis in that the child's supposed freestanding right under the Charter
    does not exist and postdecision irrelevant matters have been taken into
    consideration.  The full analysis required by  the  law  has  not  been
    properly carried out.

 8. Mr Diwncyz relied on the grounds of appeal.

 9. Ms Basharat submitted that the appeal was allowed  under  two  grounds,
    the Charter and  also  Article  8.   She  submitted  that  the  Charter
    reference was only part of the reason for the appeal being allowed,  so
    if it was an error of law that was  not  material  as  the  appeal  was
    allowed under Article 8 in any event.  Ms Basharat  accepted  that  the
    claimant could not meet  the  Immigration  Rules.   In  response  to  a
    question I  asked  regarding  proportionality  she  submitted  that  at
    paragraph 19 of the First-tier Tribunal decision the judge has  carried
    out an appropriate proportionality exercise.  She  submitted  that  the
    grounds of  appeal  do  not  raise  criticism  of  the  proportionality
    exercise.

10. With regard to the EU charter issue the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  set
    out:

         14...The appellant's son is an  EU  citizen.   The  EU  Charter  of
             Fundamental Rights and in  particular  Article  24(3)  of  the
             Charter which bears  the  title  'the  rights  of  the  child'
             stipulates:-

                  'Every child shall have the right to maintain on a regular
                  basis a personal relationship and direct contact with both
                  his or her parents, unless that is contrary to his or  her
                  interests.'

         15.  The Honourable Mr Justice McCloskey, President  of  the  Upper
             Tribunal, states in Abdul that  he  is  of  the  opinion  that
             Article 24(3) creates  a  freestanding  right  interconnecting
             with the concept of the 'best interests' right.

         16.  Regardless of whether the foundation upon Article 24(3) of the
             Charter is  a  freestanding  right  which  would  justify  the
             granting  of  the  appeal  or  whether  that   would   trigger
             justification for consideration of the appellant's  Article  8
             rights on a  standalone  basis,  aside  from  the  Immigration
             Rules, may  make  no  odds.   However  on  the  basis  of  the
             appellant's child's best interests, having regard to the  fact
             he is a British citizen, this does seem to  me  reasonable  to
             trigger a consideration of the appellant's Article 8 rights at
             large.

         17.  Looking at all the relevant facts  and  circumstances  in  the
             round, there does not appear to me to be any persuasive public
             interest arguments against granting the appeal.

         18.  The preservation  of  the  appellant's  son's  Charter  rights
             require him to be admitted to the United Kingdom in  my  view.
             There is no evidence to suggest this would not be the  correct
             thing to do to enable him to exercise his rights as a  British
             citizen.

11. At paragraph 27 the Upper Tribunal in Abdul set out:

             '...Having regard to the gateway provisions of Article 51,  it
             is clear that, by virtue of the EU  law  context,  Article  24
             applied to both the underlying decision of  the  Secretary  of
             State and that of the FtT on appeal....'

12. In this case there is no EU law context. Article 51 as set out  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer provides that the provisions of the EU  Charter
    are addressed to the member states  only  when  they  are  implementing
    Union law. This case involved the UK's domestic Immigration  Rules  and
    Article 8 of the ECHR. Therefore the EU charter is not relevant. It was
    an error of law for the judge to allow the appeal on the basis  of  the
    EU Charter.

13. The judge also allowed the appeal under Article 8.

         14.  The respondent's  representative  did  not  suggest  that  the
             appellant would not meet the terms of  the  Immigration  Rules
             now.  A fresh application could, of course, be made but I note
             that the appeal has been  outstanding  for  some  considerable
             time through no  fault  of  the  appellant.   Her  appeal  was
             received on 28 April 2015, a period over eighteen months  ago.
             The case was not listed before it was heard before me. ...

         ...

         19.  I  consider  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  require  the
             appellant to apply afresh for entry clearance.  I believe this
             would have an adverse effect upon the appellant and  her  son.
             Such a course of action would delay  the  opportunity  of  the
             appellant's son, who is a British citizen, to enter the United
             Kingdom with his mother who is his primary  caregiver  who  it
             seems clear to me would meet  the  terms  of  the  Immigration
             Rules should any fresh application be made now.  Alternatively
             the appellant's son would travel alone and this would have the
             effect of  significantly  interfering  with  the  relationship
             between himself and the appellant which would be unduly harsh.

         20.  Though the appellant could be criticised for having failed  to
             investigate and ensure that the appropriate English  test  was
             taken and certified for the purposes of her  application,  the
             substantial delay caused thereafter has not been her fault and
             certainly not been the fault of her son."

14. It is clear that the judge did take post-decision factors into account.
    Further there was no proper proportionality exercise undertaken by  the
    judge. The judge appears to have been influenced by  the  finding  that
    the claimant's son's charter rights require him to be admitted  to  the
    UK and simply states that there does not appear to be persuasive public
    law  arguments  against  granting  the   appeal   and   it   would   be
    disproportionate for the claimant to apply afresh.  In  addition  there
    are insufficient reasons given by the judge and  no  consideration  has
    been given to section 117 of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002.

15. I find that there  were  material  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision. I  set  that  decision  aside  pursuant  to  section
    12(2)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCEA').

16. After giving my decision at the hearing that there were material errors
    of law I invited submissions as to whether or not I  could  remake  the
    appeal myself. Both parties submitted that I could remake the  decision
    on the papers before me.  I invited submissions in support of  the  re-
    making. I asked if there were any particular needs in  respect  of  the
    child.  Ms Basharat indicated there were none that she was aware of and
    that she has no submissions to make.

    Re-making the decision

17. Ms Basharat accepted that the claimant did not meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules therefore  the  only  issue  is  whether  or  not
    refusal of entry clearance would be contrary to  the  UK's  obligations
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.

18. The first consideration is the best interests  of  the  claimant's  and
    sponsor's son. In Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88(IAC)
    the Tribunal held that  although  the  statutory  duty  under  s.55  UK
    Borders Act 2009 only applies to children within the UK the exercise of
    the duty by the Entry Clearance Officer to assess an application  under
    the  Immigration  Rules  as  to  whether  there  are  family  or  other
    considerations making  the  child's  exclusion  undesirable  inevitably
    involves an assessment of what the child's welfare and  best  interests
    require.

19. The child is now 5 years old and has lived in Pakistan with his  mother
    all his life. He is still at a very young age when  the  focus  of  his
    life will be on his parents (in this case his mother who is his primary
    carer). Any integration he has will be into the  life  and  culture  in
    Pakistan. Therefore many of the factors ordinarily taken  into  account
    in assessing the best interests of a child who is  in  the  UK  do  not
    apply in this case. The sponsor  has  had  little  direct  day  to  day
    involvement but this is as a result of the claimant being refused entry
    to the UK.  He has visited his wife  and  son  in  Pakistan.  There  is
    nothing to indicate that the sponsor and the claimant do  not  want  to
    raise their son together as  a  family  or  that  the  sponsor  is  not
    involved, albeit at a distance, in his son's upbringing. There were  no
    particular factors that should be taken into account with regard to the
    child or the claimant. He is a British  Citizen  as  a  result  of  his
    paternity. He is also a Pakistani citizen. The intrinsic importance  of
    citizenship should not be played down -ZH (Tanzania) (FC) (Appellant) v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department (Respondent) [2011] UKSC 4.

20. The best interests of this child are to be brought up by both  parents.
    That does not, however, lead to the conclusion that this must be in the
    United Kingdom. As held in ZH Tanzania:

         'The fact of British citizenship does not  trump  everything  else.
         But it will hardly ever be less than a very significant and weighty
         factor against moving children who  have  that  status  to  another
         country with a parent who has no right to remain  here,  especially
         if the effect of doing this is that they will inevitably lose those
         benefits and advantages for the rest of their childhood.'

21. In this case the child is entitled to reside in the  UK  as  a  British
    Citizen and to benefit from all the rights and benefits that flow  from
    that. He also has the right to benefit from his Pakistani  citizenship.
    This child will not be uprooted from a settled  life  in  the  UK.  His
    British citizenship is not a trump card but I weigh it as a significant
    factor when considering whether nor not refusal of entry  clearance  to
    his mother is disproportionate.

22. In Razgar 2004 UKHL 27 the House of Lords set out five steps to  follow
    when determining Article 8 outside of the Rules. It is not  in  dispute
    that the first 4 steps of the test are met and the issue is whether  or
    not refusal of entry clearance is proportionate to the pursuit  of  the
    legitimate aim.

23. In SS(Congo) and Others: [2015] EWCA Civ 387 the  court  held  that  in
    relation to an application for leave to enter the requirements upon the
    state under Article 8 are less stringent than in the  leave  to  remain
    context. In MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10 the  Supreme  Court  considered
    that the issue is always whether the authorities  have  struck  a  fair
    balance between the individual and public interests

24. A state has the right to control entry as held in ZH Tanzania:

         17...The starting point is, of  course,  that  any  state  has  the
         right, in international law, to control the entry of foreigners and
         how long they may remain after entry. Nevertheless, that right  has
         to be exercised consistently with the obligations of  the  European
         Convention on Human Rights. In Abdulaziz, Cabales and Balkandali  v
         United Kingdom (1985) 7 EHRR  471,  the  European  Court  of  Human
         Rights held that refusing to admit the foreign spouses  of  British
         citizens or persons settled here was not a breach of the article  8
         right to respect for family life; there was no  general  obligation
         to respect a married couple's choice of country  to  live  in;  and
         there were no obstacles to establishing family life in their own or
         their husband's home countries.

25. In MM (Lebanon) the court considered:

         41. There is no general obligation to respect  a  married  couple's
         choice of country  in  which  to  reside  or  to  authorise  family
         reunification. It will depend upon the particular circumstances  of
         the persons concerned and the general interest. Factors to be taken
         into account are the extent to which family life would  effectively
         be ruptured; the extent of the ties in the  host  country;  whether
         there are "insurmountable obstacles" (or, as it has sometimes  been
         put in other cases, "major impediments...in the way of  the  family
         living in the alien's home country; and whether there  are  factors
         of immigration control (such a history of breaches  of  immigration
         law) or public order weighing in favour of exclusion...  If  family
         life was created at a time when the people involved knew  that  the
         immigration status of one of them  was  such  that  persistence  of
         family life in the host state would from the outset be  precarious,
         "it is likely only to be  in  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
         removal  of  the  non-national  family  member  will  constitute  a
         violation of article 8"...

26. I am required to take the provisions of section 117B into account  when
    considering whether a decision breaches a person's  respect  to  family
    life under Article 8. 117B(1) requires that sufficient weight be  given
    to the public interest in  immigration  control.  The  claimant  speaks
    English to a sufficient standard (117B(2))  and  it  appears  that  the
    sponsor would be able to support the  claimant  financially  (s117B(3).
    Subsections (4-6) are not applicable because (4 and 6) refer to persons
    in the UK and (5) concerns private life.

27. In the instant case, the couple entered into their marriage at  a  time
    when they knew that the claimant had no right to reside in the  UK.  As
    identified in MM (Lebanon) in such circumstances it is likely  only  to
    be in exceptional circumstances that the  refusal  of  entry  clearance
    will constitute a violation of article 8. It has not been  argued  that
    there are major impediments to the couple continuing their relationship
    in Pakistan or that the sponsor would be unable to re-locate there. The
    sponsor has visited on a number of occasions and  they  married  there.
    Essentially  this  was  a  choice  made  by  the  couple  to  marry  in
    circumstances where the claimant had no right  to  reside  in  the  UK.
    Sufficient weight must be afforded to the need  to  maintain  firm  and
    fair immigration control. The claimant did not meet the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules. Countervailing against this is the fact that the
    child is a British Citizen. This weighs  heavily  in  favour  of  entry
    clearance but it is not a trump card. The result of the  decision  will
    not involve removal to another country that is alien  to  him.   Taking
    all the factors into consideration that  I  set  out  above  I  do  not
    consider that this is sufficient on the facts of this case to  tip  the
    balance in favour of the claimant.

28. The refusal of entry clearance in this case  is  proportionate  to  the
    need to maintain effective immigration control.

    Notice of Decision

There was a material error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  I
set that decision aside and re-make the decision dismissing  the  claimant's
appeal against the decision of the Entry Clearance  Officer.   The  decision
of the Entry Clearance Officer stands.






Signed   P M Ramshaw                             Date 19 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw


