
[pic]

Upper Tribunal         Appeal Number
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        OA/07496/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                   at                    Field                    House
                                             Determination promulgated
On 15 July 2014        On 16 July 2014

                                   Before

               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis

                                   Between

                          Entry Clearance Officer,
                                   Bogota
                                                              Appellant
                                     and

                         Pedro Jose Bernal Martinez
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                   Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr. G. Saunders, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr. M. Sowerby of Counsel instructed by Nandy &  Co..




                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer ('ECO')  against  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingam promulgated on  29  April
      2014 allowing Mr Martinez's appeal against the decision dated 25  June
      2012 refusing entry clearance as a spouse.


   2. Although in the proceedings before me the ECO is the appellant, and Mr
      Martinez is the respondent, for  the  sake  of  consistency  with  the
      proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer  to
      Mr Martinez as the Appellant and the ECO as the Respondent.


Consideration

   3. Given that essentially there was no dispute between the parties  today
      - see further below - it is unnecessary to set out the  background  to
      this case in any detail. All such details are a matter  of  record  on
      file and are rehearsed in the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal.  I
      am able to be relatively brief herein.


   4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge stated her decision at the  end  of  the
      determination as being that the appeal under the Immigration Rules was
      dismissed, but that the Appellant's appeal was allowed under Article 8
      of the ECHR.


   5. The Respondent challenged the  favourable  conclusion  in  respect  of
      Article 8, with reference in particular to the  decisions  in  Gulshan
      [2013] UKUT  00640  (IAC)  and  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin).  No
      challenge was made to any of the primary findings of fact made by  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge.


   6. In granting permission to appeal First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen,
      whilst accepting  there  was  an  arguable  case  in  respect  of  the
      favourable decision  on  human  rights  grounds,  also  observed  "the
      Appellant may wish to argue that the Judge erred in law in that having
      found in his favour on the only two issues under the Immigration Rules
      (paragraph 320(11), decided in  paragraph  24  of  the  Determination;
      paragraph 281 (v), decided in  paragraph  28),  and  having  expressly
      stated in paragraph 34 that the Appellant had met the requirements  of
      the Rules, she then dismissed the appeal under the Rules".


   7. I am grateful for the helpful and realistic way in which  Mr  Saunders
      dealt with this appeal. He readily acknowledged that the  observations
      of Judge Brunnen in  respect  of  the  appeal  under  the  Rules  were
      appropriate: indeed he suggested that the refusal under the Rules  had
      every appearance of being a 'slip' given the  favourable  findings  of
      fact.


   8. Further, Mr Saunders accepted that in such circumstances the  decision
      of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingam under  the  Rules  should  be  set
      aside because she had erred in  not  translating  her  findings  to  a
      favourable decision under the Rules, and the decision should be remade
      by allowing the appeal under the Rules. In such circumstances  it  was
      unnecessary to consider Article 8 of the ECHR.


   9. Mr Sowerby necessarily accepted this approach in respect of the Rules.
      Whilst  he  formally  indicated  that  the  Appellant   disputed   the
      Respondent's challenge to the Article 8 decision, he acknowledged that
      it was unnecessary to resolve it in  circumstances  where  the  appeal
      fell to be allowed under the Rules.


  10. In all such circumstances I find that Judge Lingam  erred  in  law  in
      dismissing the appeal under the Immigration Rules.  I  set  aside  the
      decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  accordingly.  I  set  aside  the
      decision, both in respect of the Rules and human rights because if the
      Judge had not erred in respect of the Rules she would not have  needed
      to consider the issue of human rights.


  11. I remake the decision in the appeal and allow it under the Immigration
      Rules. The Respondent's decision to refuse entry clearance was not  in
      accordance with the Rules and entry  clearance  should  properly  have
      been granted to the Appellant.


  12. In the circumstances it is  unnecessary  to  remake  the  decision  in
      respect of human rights grounds.


Decision

  13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contained  an  error  of
      law and is set aside. The decision  in  the  appeal  is  re-made.  The
      appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.





Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal I. A. Lewis     15 July 2014




