
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07826/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 October 2014                            |On 4 November 2014           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ROBERTSON


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                              MRS MAVIS QUACOE
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:   Ms F Shaw, Counsel, instructed by Peter Otto & Co,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


Claim History


1. The Appellant in this  appeal  was  the  Respondent  at  the  First-tier
   Tribunal hearing on 6 May 2014. However,  for  ease  of  reference,  the
   Appellant and Respondent are hereinafter referred to as they were before
   the First-tier Tribunal. Therefore Mrs Quacoe  is  referred  to  as  the
   Appellant and the Secretary of State is referred to as the Respondent.


2. The Appellant, who is a citizen of Ghana, applied for leave to enter the
   UK as the spouse of Mr Ransford Quaye, who is present and settled in the
   UK. As to her immigration history prior to  her  application  for  entry
   clearance, she entered the UK in 2004  following  a  customary  marriage
   arranged by their families, and she was without lawful status until 2008
   when she returned to Ghana to make an application  for  entry  clearance
   following legal advice  [30].  The  Appellant  and  Mr  Quaye  have  two
   children, Rachel, born on 29 January 2006 and Bright, born on  26  April
   2007 who are British nationals and have always resided in the UK [24].

3. A number of issues were raised in the entry clearance  officer's  notice
   of refusal, including the submission of a false document  (the  Ghanaian
   marriage certificate); failure by the  Appellant  to  meet  the  English
   language and maintenance requirements of the Immigration Rules for entry
   clearance as a spouse; and the failure to establish that she  was  in  a
   genuine and subsisting relationship and  intended  to  live  permanently
   with her Sponsor. Judge  Omotosho  found  that  the  Appellant  had  not
   submitted a false document [28 - 29], that the relationship between  the
   Appellant and the Sponsor was  genuine  and  subsisting  and  that  they
   intended to live together permanently [31]. She proceeded to  allow  the
   appeal under Article 8 ECHR.


4. The Respondent's grounds for permission to appeal  are  that  the  Judge
   materially misdirected himself in law because

       (i)  She  failed  to  consider   whether   there   were   compelling
       circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised  under  the  Rules   as
       provided in Nagre v SSHD EWHC 720 (Admin); and

       (ii) She appeared to consider that  the  Appellant's  failure  by  a
       small  margin  to  meet  the  English   Language   and   maintenance
       requirements  were  to  be   factored   into   the   proportionality
       assessment, contrary to he principle set out in Miah &  Ors  v  SSHD
       EWCA Civ 261 and Patel v SSHD [2013] UKSC 72.

5. Permission was granted because the grounds were arguable.


6. Mr Tarlow relied on the grounds of application, stating that at [44] the
   Judge had clearly had regard to the margin by which the Appellant failed
   to meet the Immigration Rules; she had stated  that  the  Appellant  was
   qualified and able to work and had only marginally  failed  the  English
   Language test. Mr  Tarlow  added  that  there  was  nothing  within  the
   determination to indicate that the Judge had  considered  whether  there
   were compelling reasons to consider the case outside the Rules.


7. Ms Shaw submitted a detailed skeleton argument on which she relied.  She
   submitted that the Judge considered when she was  able  to  consider  an
   appeal under Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules at [33 -  34].  She
   had considered the case law and applied Gulshan (Article 8 - new rules -
   correct approach [2013] UKUT 00025 at [37] and  found  that  exceptional
   circumstances had been  established.  This  was  a  case  in  which  the
   children were British born and aged 7 and 8. The Appellant had lived  in
   the UK until 2008 when she went back to 'do the right thing'  and  apply
   for entry clearance. That was 6 years ago and due to the changes in  the
   Rules, she had not been able to meet the entry  clearance  requirements.
   The only means of contact between her  and  the  children  had  been  by
   telephone; she did not have access to a computer.  Her  husband  was  71
   years of age and had arthritis of the knees which was worse  in  winter.
   He walked the children to school, which was a mile away,  because  there
   was no bus service and he did not have a car. The Judge had before her a
   psychologist's report in relation to  the  effects  of  absence  of  the
   Appellant on her children, in particular on Bright. As stated in Zoumbas
   v SSHD [2013] UKSC 74, the best interests of the children had to  be  at
   the forefront of a decision-maker's mind  and  it  was  clear  that  the
   Judge, who had before her a report from an educational psychologist, had
   had regard to the best interests of the children,  and  that  these  had
   weighed heavily in the balance. With regard to the reliance  within  the
   ground on a 'near miss argument', she  submitted  that  it  was  a  'red
   herring'.


8. In response, Mr Tarlow submitted that the difficulty with the Article  8
   assessment was that the Judge did not follow the  guidance  in  Gulshan;
   she did not establish  that  there  were  compelling  circumstances  for
   considering the appeal outside the Rules before proceeding to conduct  a
   free standing Article 8 assessment.


9. Following submissions, I reserved  my  decision,  which  I  give  below,
   together with my reasons.



 Analysis and reasons

10. There was no dispute as to the facts found by the Judge; the only  issue
   was whether she could consider the appeal under Article 8 ECHR  directly
   applied  and  whether  she  applied  a  'near  miss'  principle  in  her
   assessment of proportionality under Article 8.

11. As stated by Lord Carnwath in Patel and Ors v SSHD [2013] UKSC  72  when
   considering the near miss argument:

         "44....The most authoritative guidance on the correct  approach  of
         the tribunal to article 8 remains that of Lord Bingham in Huang. In
         the passage cited by Burnton LJ  Lord  Bingham  observed  that  the
         rules are designed to identify those to whom "on  grounds  such  as
         kinship and family relationship  and  dependence"  leave  to  enter
         should be granted, and that  such  rules  "to  be  administratively
         workable, require that a line be drawn somewhere". But that was  no
         more than the starting point for the consideration  of  article  8.
         Thus in Mrs Huang's own case, the most relevant rule (rule 317) was
         not satisfied, since she was not, when the decision was made,  aged
         65 or over and she was not a widow. He commented at para 6:

             "Such a rule, which does not lack a rational basis, is not  to
             be  stigmatised  as  arbitrary  or   objectionable.   But   an
             applicant's failure to qualify under the rules is for  present
             purposes the point at which to begin, not  end,  consideration
             of the claim under article 8.  The  terms  of  the  rules  are
             relevant   to   that   consideration,   but   they   are   not
             determinative""


12. Therefore the context of the Immigration Rules may be  relevant  to  the
   assessment of proportionality, provided it  is  not  formulated  into  a
   'near miss' or 'sliding scale principle'(para 56 of Patel).

13. I find that the Judge was no more than setting out the  context  of  her
   consideration of Article 8 when she referred to the  way  in  which  the
   Appellant failed to meet the Immigration  Rules;  she  referred  to  the
   reasons for the particular  provisions  with  which  the  Appellant  had
   failed to comply with a view to assessing the impact on  the  legitimate
   aims. As confirmed at [45] the real concerns that weighed heavily in the
   balance were the best interests of the children  and  the  inability  of
   their father to continue to care for them.

14. The submission that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  Guidance  in
   Gulshan is without merit. She clearly had regard  to  it  [23,  37]  and
   identified  good  reasons  for  considering  the  appeal   outside   the
   Immigration Rules; she states

       "...this is especially because I have considered the best  interests
       of the children in this case. I am satisfied  as  confirmed  in  the
       school report and the educational psychologist's  report  before  me
       that  the  children  especially  Bright   have   been   experiencing
       difficulties in school and at home which can be  attributed  to  the
       absence  of  their  mother.  Also  the  reports   from   the   Early
       Intervention   Service,   Specialist   Teachers,   Lewisham   Common
       Assessment Framework and NHS  Speech  and  Therapy  Assessment  also
       mentions the impact separation has had on  the  children  especially
       Bright. I have also  noted  with  care  the  Educational  Psychology
       consultation  Record  which  confirms  the  difficulties  Bright  is
       experiencing. It is clear that the sponsor who is aged 71 is finding
       it very difficult to cope and care for the children on his own.  The
       children clearly miss their mother and although they speak to  their
       mother  regularly  by  telephone,  this  cannot  be  regarded  as  a
       substitute  for  the  care  and  support  a  mother  would  provide,
       physically, mentally, emotionally or psychologically."

15. Read as a whole the determination discloses no material  errors  of  law
   and the grounds are simply a  disagreement  with  the  findings  of  the
   Judge.


Decision


16. The determination of Judge Omotosho contains no material errors of  law
    and her decision therefore must stand.


17. The Respondent's appeal is dismissed.


18. There was no application for an anonymity order before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal or before us. In the circumstances of this  case,  we  see  no
    reason to direct anonymity.



Signed                                  Date 4 November 2014
M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


     In light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a fee  award
under  Rule  9(1)(a)(costs)  of  the   Asylum   and   Immigration   Tribunal
(Procedure) Rules 2005 and section 12(4) (a) of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
Enforcement Act 2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011). As the  Respondent's  appeal  has  been
dismissed, I confirm the fee award of Judge Omotosho.


Signed                          Dated 4 November 2014

M Robertson
Sitting as Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal










