
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07897/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th June 2014                               |On 3rd July 2014           |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

            LORD MATTHEWS SITTING AS JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                               ms Taposi ghosh
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K Fortescue, Counsel instructed by Sheratons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of India who  made  application  for  entry
    clearance to come to the United Kingdom as the  dependent  relative  of
    her  son  Himadri  Ghosh  who  is  present  and  settled  here.    That
    application  was  refused  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  her
    subsequent appeal dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Deavin  in  a
    determination promulgated on 3rd March 2014.

 2. Grounds of application for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    were  lodged,  essentially  submitting  that  the  judge  had   ignored
    important medical evidence and permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Deans, who noted  a  doctor's  letter  before  the
    judge which said that the Appellant "is unable  to  perform  her  daily
    chores like changing her clothes and taking a shower".

 3. While the  Secretary  of  State  initially  lodged  a  Rule  24  notice
    contending that the  judge  had  directed  himself  appropriately,  the
    position of Ms Everett for the Home  Office  before  us  was  that  she
    agreed that there was an  error  in  law  because  the  judge  had  not
    properly considered the medical evidence.  As such, she  accepted  that
    the decision should be set aside and remade by us.

 4. We therefore found that there was an  error  of  law  for  the  reasons
    stated.

 5. Ms Fortescue for the Appellant asked us to hear oral evidence  from  Mr
    Ghosh and his wife and we agreed to do so.  It is helpful at this point
    to set out, briefly, the terms of their joint witness statement.

Joint Witness Statement of Himadri Ghosh and Debarati Ghosh

 6. Himadri Ghosh first entered the UK on 2nd June 2004 and he was  granted
    ILR on 16th May 2009.  His mother lives alone in India and his  sister,
    who is married, lives in the USA.  He works here as a head chef.

 7. He visits his mother in India on a regular basis once or twice  a  year
    and has provided continuous care and support for her.  He provides  for
    her basic financial needs namely food, shelter and clothing.

 8. His mother's health has been deteriorating rapidly and she has been  in
    a lot of pain.  She suffers from cervical dorsal,  lumbar  degenerative
    disease, with limited mobility of the spinal chord.  She  also  suffers
    from osteoarthritis and Auditory Processing Disorder  (APD).   She  has
    trouble performing her daily chores because of her chronic  orthopaedic
    and medical problems.  She suffers from depression and severe  anxiety.
    She cries all the time and gets frequent panic attacks.

 9. At this point she requires emotional support that only he can offer.  A
    domestic help is for  household  chores  which  is  not  sufficient  to
    provide her with the emotional support to recover from her depression.

10. It is customary in India for sons to take responsibility and  care  for
    their elderly parents.  There is nobody else that his mother  can  turn
    to for the support she requires.  Since July 2010 his mother  has  been
    living alone.

11. He cannot return to India to take care of his  mother  because  he  has
    family here and cannot uproot everyone.  His wife is a secondary school
    science teacher here and has a degree and postgraduate  certificate  in
    education.   They  asked  the  court  to  consider  the   compassionate
    circumstances when deciding this appeal.

The Oral evidence

12. We heard their oral evidence which is as  recorded  in  our  Record  of
    Proceedings.

13. Mr Ghosh adopted his witness statement as true and correct.   He  spoke
    to his mother at least five times a week.  She was taking about ten  to
    twelve tablets daily and was doing so as at the date of  the  decision.
    With regard to hospital records at pages 40 to 47 of the first  bundle,
    his mother had been taken to the hospital as an emergency  appointment.



14. In cross-examination he said that no-one was looking  after  her.   Her
    condition was deteriorating.   Asked  if  she  was  on  medication  for
    depression, he said she was on many tablets and the  doctor  could  not
    give her any more.  He had tried to contact nursing agencies  and  care
    homes but the response was that they could not help.  The domestic help
    was for cleaning and washing up only.  There was no  re-examination  of
    the witness.

15. Debarati Ghosh also adopted her witness statement as true and  correct.
    Asked in cross-examination why they could not employ someone to be  her
    carer she said that they had considered that option.  The primary  need
    was psychological and emotional and there was  no  way  that  could  be
    arranged  in  India.   Her  doctor  had  explained  that  it  was   her
    psychological need that had to be considered.  Nothing material emerged
    in re-examination.

Submissions for the Home Office

16. Reliance was placed on  the  reasons  given  for  the  refusal  of  the
    Appellant's application.  There was now a lot more  evidence  than  was
    before the Entry Clearance Officer.  Nevertheless it was not  suggested
    that we could not take this further evidence into account.

17. The evidence did suggest that the Appellant's medical needs were  being
    taken care of.  It was not clear what further care  she  required.   It
    was not accepted that a carer could not be obtained given that  a  huge
    section of the Indian workforce was self-employed.  We  were  asked  to
    dismiss the appeal.

Submissions for the Appellant

18. Reliance was placed on the skeleton argument.  There  was  considerable
    medical evidence both from Dr Bharat  Chaubey,  orthopaedic  and  spine
    surgeon and Dr Sarkar the family  physician,  that  the  Appellant  had
    chronic medical problems.  In particular it was said she could not walk
    more than a few steps and was unable to  sit  up  for  long.   She  was
    suffering from acute depression and the evidence from Dr Sarkar  before
    the First-tier Tribunal was that she was unable to  perform  her  daily
    chores like changing her clothes and taking a shower.

19. Her mental health condition interlinked with  her  physical  condition.
    She needed the emotional support of her family.

20. The requirements for entry  clearance  were  set  out  in  Appendix  FM
    Section FM 6.0.  There was  no  dispute  that  the  Appellant  met  the
    eligibility, financial and suitability requirements.  The issue in this
    case  was  if  the   Appellant   met   the   following   "relationship"
    requirements.

21. Under E-ECDR2.4 the applicant must as  a  result  of  age,  illness  or
    disability require long term personal care to perform everyday tasks.

22. Under E-ECDR2.5 the applicant must be unable, even with  the  practical
    and financial help of the Sponsor, to obtain the required level of care
    in the country where they are living because -

      a) it is not available and there is no  person  in  that  country  who
         could not reasonably provide it; or

      b) it is not affordable.

23. Under paragraph E-ECDR2.4,  the  evidence  proved  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the Appellant required long term  personal  care  to
    perform everyday tasks.  The body of medical evidence clearly  set  out
    that she was unable to perform everyday chores and  that  her  mobility
    was severely restricted.  Her  orthopaedic  and  spinal  condition  and
    osteoarthritis,  which   severely   restricted   her   mobility,   were
    degenerative conditions.  Taking into account  her  age  and  advancing
    years it could properly be inferred that the care  needed  to  be  long
    term.

24. In terms of E-ECDR2.5 the medical evidence and evidence from emails set
    out at paragraphs 37 to 44 of the appeal bundle showed that the type of
    care  required  is  not  available  in  India.   The  Appellant's  care
    requirements involve both her physical and mental health.  The  medical
    evidence stated that her mental health needs could only be met with the
    involvement and emotional support of a family  member.   There  are  no
    family members in India to provide that support.

25. At present her care did not meet her needs and in particular her mental
    health needs and her mental health  issues  stemmed  from  her  limited
    mobility and feelings of abandonment.  In India it is the  culture  for
    sons to care for elderly parents.  Her mental  health  condition  would
    not improve without care needs being met by her son and family.

26. As such the Appellant met the terms of the Immigration  Rules  and  the
    appeal should be allowed.  Separately she enjoyed family life with  the
    Sponsor and his wife and by remaining in India  without  the  emotional
    support of family members her private life in the sense of  her  mental
    and physical integrity was compromised.  Her continued  exclusion  from
    the UK was a disproportionate interference in all the circumstances and
    this  was  a  case  where  there  were   exceptional   and   compelling
    circumstances that  would  mean  it  is  unjustifiably  harsh  for  the
    Appellant to remain in India.

Conclusions

27. At the end of the hearing we indicated to  parties  that  we  would  be
    allowing this appeal for reasons to be given subsequently  and  we  now
    give those reasons.

Reasons

28. As noted in DR (ECO:  post-decision  evidence)  Morocco*  [2005]  UKIAT
    00038 there is no simple exclusion of evidence arising after  the  date
    of decision as we are entitled  to  take  into  account  "circumstances
    appertaining" at the date of decision in terms of Section 85(5) of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

29. As it is, the medical evidence at around the date of decision is  clear
    that the Appellant was suffering severely from anxiety  and  depression
    because of her physical disability and lack of emotional support.

30. None of the medical evidence is disputed. We accept it.   Nor  were  we
    invited to find that either witness who gave  evidence  before  us  was
    telling anything but the entire truth about the Appellant.  We have  no
    hesitation in concluding that both witnesses were credible and reliable
    and we accept  what  they  said  about  the  particular  needs  of  the
    Appellant to be with her family.

31. From the oral evidence we have heard it seems clear that even with  the
    practical and financial help of the  Sponsor  she  cannot  achieve  the
    required level of care in her country of  nationality.  We  accept  the
    evidence of the Sponsor that he did contact nursing agencies  and  care
    homes but they could not be of assistance. We also accept that there is
    no family member in India  who  can  provide  the  emotional  level  of
    support to the  Appellant  which  the  medical  evidence  indicates  is
    required.

32. The requirements of paragraphs E-ECDR2.4  and  E-ECDR2.5  are  set  out
    above and there is no need  to  repeat  them.  It  is  clear  from  the
    totality of the evidence presented to us that in terms of paragraph  E-
    ECDR2.4, on a balance of probabilities the Appellant does require  long
    term personal care to perform everyday tasks. To the same  standard  it
    is established under paragraph  E-ECDR2.5  that  the  Appellant  cannot
    reach the required level of care in her country of nationality  because
    of the terms of the undisputed medical evidence allied to the  evidence
    of the Sponsor and his wife. We are therefore allowing the  Appellant's
    appeal under the Immigration rules and there is  no  need  to  consider
    Article 8 ECHR.











Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

We set aside the decision.

We re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.





Signed                              Date
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
