
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/07850/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 16 November 2016                        |On 9 December 2016             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     SB
                           (Anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by RH & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1) This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal
   Saffer dismissing an appeal against  refusal  of  entry  clearance  as  a
   spouse.  The application  was  made  in  January  2015  and  the  refusal
   decision was made on 4 April 2015.

2) The appellant was  born  on  12  December  1985  and  is  a  national  of
   Pakistan.  Her application for entry clearance was  refused  because  the
   respondent did not accept the marriage was genuine and  subsisting  owing
   to a lack of evidence  of  contact  or  intervening  devotion  before  or
   following the marriage.

3) In his decision, the judge noted that  the  sponsor,  who  is  a  British
   citizen, has been diagnosed as schizophrenic.  He was accordingly treated
   by the judge as a vulnerable witness.

4) The judge accepted that the appellant and the  sponsor  are  married  and
   that the sponsor had spent 3  weeks  in  Pakistan  at  the  time  of  the
   wedding, staying for a few days afterwards.  There  were  photographs  of
   the couple together.   The  judge  accepted  that  there  has  been  some
   communication between them.  They are distantly related outside marriage.
    The primary reason they came together was through  long-standing  family
   friendship and the fact  that  the  appellant  lives  next  door  to  the
   sponsor's aunt.

5) The judge had regard to evidence of the sponsor and his sister  regarding
   the frequency of communication between the  sponsor  and  the  appellant.
   The sponsor said in his evidence that he contacted the appellant  once  a
   week or once a fortnight and she contacted him  with  similar  frequency.
   The judge observed that this would mean that the  couple  spoke  to  each
   other either twice a week or once a week.  The evidence of the  sponsor's
   sister was that the contact was every other day.  The judge regarded this
   as a significant discrepancy.

6) In relation to the sponsor's condition the judge observed that there  was
   no medical evidence to indicate the severity of this.  At the hearing the
   sponsor answered questions clearly and without apparent  difficulty.   He
   is in receipt  of  Disability  Living  Allowance  and  his  sister-in-law
   receives a carer's allowance for him.  There was no  indication  that  he
   has an impaired memory or a propensity to lie.  The  judge  accepted  his
   evidence of the frequency of contact and found that the sponsor's  sister
   was embellishing the level of contact.  The  judge  considered  that  the
   sponsor's sister was supporting the application as she believed that  the
   appellant could provide support for  the  family  generally  rather  than
   because the marriage was a genuine or subsisting one.

7) The judge also accepted the evidence of the  sponsor  that  during  a  10
   minute telephone conversation he speaks to family members other than  the
   appellant and he is not the only one in the UK  who  takes  part  in  the
   conversation.   The  judge  observed  that  even  if  the   conversations
   themselves were entirely between the  appellant  and  the  sponsor,  they
   would amount to no more than 20 minutes telephone contact per week.   The
   judge considered that the actual contact was significantly  less  because
   the sponsor said it could be twice a  fortnight  when  they  spoke.   The
   judge did not accept that each of them spoke only to  the  other  for  10
   minutes.  The judge described the telephone contact as "minimal".

8) The judge  nevertheless  noted  that  telephone  records  showed  regular
   contact between the UK and  Pakistan.   This  was  not  however  just  in
   respect of the sponsor's phone.  This  included  the  sponsor's  mother's
   phone.  She also made calls to the family, which was not surprising given
   the relationship.

9) The judge further accepted that money was sent from the  UK  to  Pakistan
   but regarded this as nothing more than a family in the  UK  supporting  a
   family in Pakistan rather than the  money  being  specifically  from  the
   sponsor to the appellant.

10) The judge noted that the sponsor had  explained  why  he  had  spent  so
   little time in Pakistan since the  wedding.   This  was  because  of  his
   illness.  However, there was no medical evidence about the extent of  his
   illness, why he could not  take  the  required  medication  with  him  to
   Pakistan, and why his wife could not  care  for  him  there.   The  judge
   considered that if the relationship  was  genuine,  irrespective  of  the
   sponsor's illness, it was likely that the sponsor would  have  spent  far
   more time in Pakistan.  The sponsor is not in employment and  he  has  no
   children.  He was described by the judge as having no commitments in  the
   UK.  So far as photograph evidence was concerned,  the  judge  considered
   the photographs to have been staged.  The judge was  not  satisfied  that
   this was a genuine or subsisting marriage.

Application for permission to appeal

11) The original grounds of appeal were based  primarily  on  the  sponsor's
   mental health.  Although the judge said there was no evidence as  to  the
   extent of the sponsor's mental illness there was  a  doctor's  report  at
   page 77 of the appellant's bundle showing the  sponsor's  diagnosis.   It
   was submitted that the appellant lived in remoter area  of  Pakistan  and
   the sponsor would not be able to "survive in Pakistan".  Nevertheless the
   judge found that the sponsor would have spent more time  in  Pakistan  if
   this was a genuine relationship.  The judge had failed to understand  the
   material facts and made an illogical and irrational decision.

12) Permission to appeal was granted principally on the basis that  although
   the judge accepted that the sponsor has schizophrenia  he  dismissed  the
   proffered explanation that the appellant's illness was the reason  for  a
   lack of contact between the parties through  the  sponsor  travelling  to
   Pakistan.  It was arguable that there was an inconsistency between  these
   findings.

13) At the hearing the appellant  sought  to  rely  on  amended  grounds  of
   appeal lodged on 17 October 2016, after both the grant of  permission  to
   appeal and after the rule 24 response.  As the basis  for  accepting  the
   revised grounds Mr Winter referred me to the case of Ferrer  [2012]  UKUT
   304.

14) It was pointed out that the revised  grounds  for  the  application  for
   permission to appeal were lodged after a change of solicitor.   It  could
   be highly irregular in my view for  the  application  for  permission  to
   appeal to be significantly altered after permission to  appeal  has  been
   granted.  The question, however, is  ultimately  one  of  fairness.   The
   respondent had had notice of the revised grounds and was not claiming  to
   be disadvantaged by them.

15) In my view the proper approach to the  revised  grounds  was  to  regard
   them as a variation of grounds, which  may  be  allowed  under  the  case
   management powers in rule 5.  Even if the new grounds went  further  than
   the original grounds the respondent was not objecting to them and did not
   claim to have been disadvantaged.  Accordingly there was no unfairness.

16) In the revised grounds of appeal it was contended  that  the  judge  did
   not follow the case of Goudey  (subsisting  marriage  -  evidence)  Sudan
   [2012] UKUT 00041.  The judge imposed his own view  of  how  the  parties
   could reasonably be expected to conduct  their  relationship  instead  of
   evaluating the consistent and supporting evidence  that  was  before  the
   Tribunal  as  to  how  the  relationship  was  actually  conducted.   The
   telephone records did not of themselves prove that the sponsor  had  been
   speaking to the appellant in Pakistan as opposed to someone else but they
   did support the appellant's account in the  entry  clearance  application
   and her testimony in  the  appeal.   It  was  clear  that  a  great  many
   telephone calls had been made during the period of the relationship.   It
   was improbable that the communication was with someone else  rather  than
   between the sponsor and the appellant.  Parties who intended to conduct a
   relationship by telephone did not also have to demonstrate that they were
   conducting a  relationship  by  visits.   There  were  no  countervailing
   factors generating suspicion as to the intentions of the parties.   There
   was no evidence of lies, poor immigration  history  or  deception  albeit
   there was some embellishment  by  the  sponsor's  sister.   The  evidence
   showed that the families were content with the marriage.

17) It was further contended that the judge erred by  failing  to  recognise
   that the requirement to show a "subsisting marriage" did not impose  some
   significant burden to produce evidence other than showing that there  was
   a genuine intention to live  together  as  man  and  wife  in  a  married
   relationship.  It was said in GA ("subsisting" marriage) Ghana [2006] Imm
   AR 543 that for a marriage to be subsisting it only required  that  there
   was a real relationship as opposed to a merely formal one of  a  marriage
   not having been terminated.

18) It was contended in the revised grounds that the judge erred by  falling
   into speculation.  He found that the money being  sent  from  the  UK  to
   Pakistan was nothing more than the UK family  supporting  the  family  in
   Pakistan but there was no evidential basis for this finding.   The  judge
   considered that if this was a genuine relationship the sponsor would have
   spent far more time in Pakistan.  There was no evidential basis for  this
   finding.  The judge found the photographs were staged but  there  was  no
   evidential basis on which the judge could arrive at this finding.


19) A rule 24 notice dated 13 October 2016  was  lodged  on  behalf  of  the
   respondent stating that the judge's findings were properly  reasoned  and
   sufficient.  The judge was  clearly  mindful  of  the  sponsor's  medical
   condition.





20) The  appellant  sought  to  lodge  an  additional  bundle  of  evidence,
   including an up-to-date statement, although there was no application  for
   additional evidence to  be  lodged.   In  the  up-to-date  statement  the
   sponsor states that he visited Pakistan from 12 October  until  returning
   to the UK on 15 November 2016.  During this period he spent "some quality
   time" with the appellant.

Submissions

21) Mr Winter began his submission by  referring  to  the  case  of  Goudey,
   which he  submitted  the  judge  had  misunderstood.   According  to  the
   appellant both she and the sponsor were in regular contact.  The  sponsor
   visited the appellant in March 2016 for 3 weeks.  This  was  recorded  at
   paragraph 8 of the decision.  The judge had  phone  records  before  him.
   There was evidence of money transfers.  Nevertheless the judge  concluded
   at paragraph 18 that if the relationship was genuine, the  sponsor  would
   have spent more time in Pakistan.  Instead of  looking  at  the  evidence
   cumulatively the judge had formed his own view of  how  the  relationship
   should be conducted.

22) Mr Winter continued that medical evidence had been provided.  There  was
   also evidence from the  family  about  the  difficulty  for  the  sponsor
   visiting Pakistan.

23) Mr Winter continued if  there  was  an  error  of  law  then  there  was
   sufficient evidence to show the relationship was genuine and  subsisting.
   The additional evidence showed that the sponsor had  just  returned  from
   visiting Pakistan with his sister and mother.

24) Mrs O'Brien began by pointing out that the rule 24  response  was  based
   on the grounds for seeking permission to appeal  as  originally  drafted.
   She submitted that the Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  had  taken  the
   proper approach and had not departed from Goudey.  The judge had  made  a
   holistic assessment of the evidence and had not super-imposed  his  views
   of what a couple should do.  The marriage was accepted  as  being  legal.
   The judge pointed out that much of the phone  contact  was  communication
   between members of the family.  This was not sufficient to show a genuine
   relationship.  The judge was aware of the sponsor's  condition  and  took
   into account the lack of visits to the appellant.  The judge was entitled
   to take into account that there was no barrier  to  the  sponsor  staying
   longer in Pakistan.  The judge was entitled to  take  into  account  that
   there was no evidence of impairment of memory or confusion on the part of
   the  sponsor.   The  medical  evidence  identified  only  the   sponsor's
   condition.   It was not correct  to  say  that  the  judge  had  drawn  a
   negative inference from the lack of  medical  evidence.   The  judge  was
   fully aware of the sponsor's medical condition but there was  no  medical
   evidence of the impact this would have.  There was no medical evidence to
   show why the sponsor would have had to leave Pakistan  so  quickly  after
   the wedding.  The sponsor had no work to return to in the UK.  There  was
   no medical evidence to show why he could not have visited  Pakistan  more
   frequently since the wedding.

25) Mrs O'Brien continued that the judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  the
   phone records and the memory transfers were made by the  family  network.
   There was a discrepancy in  the  evidence  of  the  amount  of  telephone
   contact.  The judge was entitled to find  this  was  not  a  genuine  and
   subsisting relationship.  This was a  "caring  scenario"  rather  than  a
   matrimonial one.  It was based on wider family support.

26) In reply, Mr Winter pointed out  that  the  sponsor  had  given  various
   mobile telephone numbers in his statement.  He had made various calls  to
   his wife's number.  These were shown to have lasted from 3 minutes to 10-
   20 minutes.  The relationship had been conducted over the telephone.  The
   records were consistent with the relationship.  The judge had  gone  awry
   by imposing his own view of how the parties could reasonably be  expected
   to conduct their relationship.

Discussion

27) I will address first the question of  the  medical  evidence.   Although
   the doctor's letter had been removed from  the  appeal  file  before  the
   hearing, presumably for return to the appellant, I was shown  a  copy  at
   the hearing.  This stated a diagnosis but did not give any details of the
   impact of the sponsor's condition upon his capabilities.  Accordingly the
   judge was justified  in  finding  that  there  was  no  medical  evidence
   indicating of what the sponsor might  or  might  not  be  capable.   This
   applied both to the assessment of the sponsor's own evidence and  to  the
   ability of the sponsor to visit the appellant in Pakistan.   Although  it
   was contended by the family that the  conditions  in  Pakistan  were  not
   appropriate for the sponsor, as the judge pointed out at paragraph 18, it
   was not explained why the sponsor could not take any required  medication
   with him, and why his wife would not be able to care for him in Pakistan.



28) Turning to the case of Goudey, this is not infrequently relied  upon  by
   appellants as meaning that the existence of a  genuine  marriage  can  be
   established from telephone cards.  It is correct that according to Goudey
   evidence of telephone cards is capable  of  being  corroborative  of  the
   contention of the parties that they communicate by phone and it is not  a
   requirement that the parties also write to or text  each  other.   It  is
   sometimes overlooked, however, that reliance on telephone cards to  prove
   the existence of a  genuine  relationship  assumes  that,  as  stated  at
   paragraph 11 of Goudey, "everything else is neutral".   Possible  adverse
   factors referred to in Goudey were evidence  of  lies,  poor  immigration
   history or deception.  In the present appeal it must  be  said  there  is
   little evidence of lying, although the judge  found  that  the  sponsor's
   sister had embellished her evidence of contact.

29) In this appeal, however, there are other factors to which the judge  was
   entitled to have regard in assessing  the  relationship.   As  the  judge
   recorded at paragraph 6 of the decision, the sponsor is assisted  by  his
   family in making telephone calls or connecting by Skype.  At paragraph 11
   the judge recorded the evidence of the sponsor's sister that  the  mobile
   phone the sponsor uses is also used by his mother.  They both use  it  to
   call their various relatives in Pakistan.

30)  It  is  further  noted  that  the  money  transferred  to  Pakistan  is
   transferred by the sponsor's mother.

31) As Mrs O'Brien submitted, the  evidence  before  the  judge  showed  the
   existence of a family network whose various members were in contact,  but
   did not necessarily show  the  existence  of  a  genuine  and  subsisting
   relationship between the appellant and the  sponsor.   In  pursuing  this
   point Mrs O'Brien went so far as to suggest that the relationship between
   the appellant and the sponsor was  a  "caring  scenario"  rather  than  a
   matrimonial one.  For my part I am sure that within the permutations of a
   matrimonial relationship it is possible to have a relationship  based  on
   one spouse caring for another.  Mrs O'Brien explained, however, that  she
   was  not  referring  to  a  matrimonial  relationship  of  care   but   a
   relationship where  the  wider  family  supported  the  sponsor  and  the
   appellant would contribute to this support.  This  is  largely  what  the
   Judge of the First-tier Tribunal decided at paragraph 13, where he  found
   that the sponsor's sister was supporting  the  relationship  because  the
   appellant would provide support for  the  family  generally  rather  than
   because there was a genuine and subsisting marriage.

32) In this appeal, as in many others, the evidence  before  the  First-tier
   Tribunal as to  the  genuineness  of  the  relationship  was  capable  of
   different interpretations.  The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal assessed
   the evidence in such a way as to  find  that  the  relationship  was  not
   genuine and subsisting.  The judge did not err in law simply because  the
   evidence might have been construed differently.  To constitute  an  error
   of law there must be more than disagreement with the judge's findings.

33) I have considered whether the judge misdirected himself as to  the  case
   of Goudey and I find that he did not.  Goudey is not  authority  for  the
   proposition that telephone records must be  accepted  as  evidence  of  a
   genuine and subsisting relationship.  The  judge  was  entitled  to  take
   other factors into account.

34) It is said that the judge speculated about  the  purpose  of  the  money
   transferred from the UK to Pakistan; about why the sponsor had not  spent
   more time in Pakistan; and by stating that the photographs  were  staged.
   It cannot be said, however, that there  was  no  basis  for  the  judge's
   findings on these matters.  The evidence before him was  that  the  money
   transfers were arranged by the sponsor's mother.  There really was little
   satisfactory explanation of why the sponsor had not spent  more  time  in
   Pakistan.  There was simply  an  assertion  that  the  sponsor's  medical
   condition prevented him from staying longer in Pakistan.   As  the  judge
   pointed out, however, there was no evidence to explain why he  could  not
   take medication in Pakistan and why he could not rely on his wife to look
   after him in Pakistan.

35) Among the evidence relied  upon  to  show  the  genuine  nature  of  the
   relationship were the  photographs  of  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor
   together, sometimes just as a  couple  and  sometimes  with  others.   By
   suggesting that these photographs were staged, the  judge  was  doing  no
   more than indicating  that  in  the  circumstances  of  this  appeal  the
   photographs were  not  to  be  relied  upon  as  evidence  of  a  genuine
   relationship.  This was a point the judge was entitled to make.

36) The position is that the judge reached findings which were open  to  him
   upon the evidence.  These findings were supported by adequate  and  valid
   reasons.  The judge properly directed himself as  to  the  relevant  case
   law.  The judge did not engage in unjustifiable speculation and  did  not
   disregard the medical  evidence  which  was  available.   The  judge  was
   entitled to have regard to omissions in the evidence, including omissions
   in the medical evidence.  The judge was entitled to reach the conclusions
   which he did.  Although Mr Winter argued the case for the appellant  most
   ably, he has not persuaded me that there  is  an  error  of  law  in  the
   judge's decision such that it should be set aside.

Conclusion

37) The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  involve
   the making of an error on a point of law.

38) I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

39) The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity, which  I  continue.
   Unless and until a Tribunal or court orders otherwise, the  appellant  is
   granted anonymity.  No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
   indirectly identify her or any witness in these proceedings.  This  order
   applies to both the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure  to  comply
   with this order could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Deans

