
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07979/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 21 July 2014                               |On 19th Aug 2014             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                         SUTHILA SALAH OSMAN ABDALLA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       eNTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - CAIRO
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Rutherford, instructed by TRP Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS
The Appeal

 1. This is an appeal by the appellant against a determination  promulgated
    on 11 March  2014  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  A  J  Parker  which
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules for entry clearance as
    a spouse and under Article 8 ECHR.

 2. It was common ground that the appellant could not meet the  Immigration
    Rules for entry clearance as a spouse. As  at  [8]  of  Judge  Parker's
    decision, the sponsor  had  not  produced  6  months'  bank  statements
    corresponding with the wage slips provided and did not produce a letter
    from an employer.

 3. It was also common ground that the sponsor could  not  be  expected  to
    exercise his family life with the appellant in Sudan  as  he  has  been
    recognised as a  refugee  in  need  of  protection  from  the  Sudanese
    authorities. The evidence that he had been unable  to  obtain  a  visit
    visa for Morocco to meet his wife was also not disputed  before  me  by
    the respondent.

 4. It was the appellant's case before me that where those matters were so,
    the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  should  have  found  that  there  were
    insurmountable obstacles to  the  family  life  of  the  appellant  and
    sponsor being exercised anywhere other than the UK and the appeal under
    Article  8  allowed.  The  finding  at  [18]   that   there   were   no
    insurmountable obstacles was an error.

 5. It was also submitted that the judge erred in placing reliance  on  the
    sponsor having stated at the hearing  that  a  future  entry  clearance
    application would succeed under the Immigration Rules.  The  judge  was
    not entitled to place weight on any future application succeeding.  The
    outcome of any application had be to be  uncertain  and  the  sponsor's
    subjective opinion on it should not have been taken into  account.  The
    judge was also in error in finding that waiting a further 8 months  for
    a future entry clearance application was not disproportionate.

 6. My difficulty with the case made out for the appellant is, simply, that
    it did not appear to me, in a free-standing Article  8  proportionality
    assessment, that finding it reasonable to expect  her  to  make  a  new
    entry clearance application, whether or not there appeared  to  be  any
    likelihood of success in such an application, was an erroneous position
    for the First-tier Tribunal to take. That is  so  even  if  the  couple
    cannot exercise their family life elsewhere.

 7. The public interest is expressed by way of the Immigration Rules  which
    include  the  documentary  requirements  relating  to   the   sponsor's
    financial position. They were not met here. The  failure  to  meet  the
    Immigration  Rules  is  the   starting   point   of   the   Article   8
    proportionality exercise; see Haleemudeen v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 558 at
    [47].

 8. The appellant argues that  the  public  interest  cannot  outweigh  her
    family life with the sponsor if he cannot join her in  Sudan  and  they
    cannot live anywhere else together. It was for the First-tier  Tribunal
    to make that assessment, however. Judge Parker accepted  much  of  what
    was put forward on her behalf including at [24] that she would not be a
    burden on the public finances. It remained open to him to find that the
    decision  was  proportionate,  the  couple   not   being   "permanently
    separated" thereby, as at [25] as the appellant could reapply for entry
    clearance. The circumstances here, where  the  substantive  Immigration
    Rules were not met, are not the same as Chikwamba v SSHD [2008] UKHL 40
    where return to seek entry clearance was required even  though  it  was
    conceded that the substantive Immigration Rules were met.

 9. The manner in which the First-tier Tribunal dealt with Gulshan (Article
    8 - new  rules  -  correct  approach)  [2013]  UKUT  00640  is  equally
    immaterial where a free-standing Article  8  assessment  was  conducted
    from [22] onwards.

Decision

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error on a
    point of law and shall stand.

Signed:[pic]                                 Date: 18 August 2014
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
