
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07262/2015
     OA/07270/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 April 2017                              |On 5 June 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway

                                   Between

                           [A L] (first Appellant)
                          [M L] (second Appellant)
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - new delhi
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Roberts
For the Respondent:    Mr Avery


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Bhutan born on [ ] 1998  and  [  ]  2001
    respectively.  They made applications on 31  December  2014  for  entry
    clearance to join their mother, a recognised refugee from Bhutan.

 2. In summary, their claim was that they were refugees  in  Nepal.   Their
    mother with whom they had lived in a refugee camp in Nepal had  arrived
    in the UK in October 2009 subsequently being granted refugee status.

 3. They themselves have been living for the last  three  years  and  eight
    months at a boarding school in  Nepal.   They  have  a  legal  guardian
    there.

 4. They were issued in November 2014 with a Bhutanese travel document  and
    exit permit by the government of Nepal.

 5. The applications were refused on 13 March 2015 under paragraph 319X(vi)
    and (vii) of the Immigration Rules.  The ECO  was  not  satisfied  that
    their mother could maintain  and  accommodate  them.   They  were  also
    refused under paragraph 320(3).  Checks conducted by the ECO  confirmed
    that the documents purporting to be the  refugee  travel  document  and
    exit permit were not genuine.

 6. They appealed.

    First tier hearing

 7. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 30  August  2016  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Monson dismissed the  appeals  under  the  Rules  and  under
    Article 8.

 8. He heard evidence from the Appellants' mother.

 9. In his 'Discussion and Findings' the judge found that the  applications
    should not have been considered under paragraph  319X  as  one  of  the
    requirements is that the relative the applicant is seeking to  join  is
    not  the  parent.   Also,  they  do  not  meet  the   maintenance   and
    accommodation  requirements.   Further,  they  could   not   meet   the
    requirements of paragraph 297 under maintenance and accommodation.

10.  The  judge  considered  the   applications   under   paragraph   352D.
    Maintenance  and  accommodation  are  not   requirements   under   that
    paragraph.  However, the judge concluded that the  applications  failed
    under paragraph  352D (iv).

11. The judge went on to  consider  the  refusal  under  paragraph  320(3).
    Having expressed some concerns about  the  documents  he,  nonetheless,
    concluded '... the Respondent has not produced the  necessary  evidence
    to show that the travel documents are not genuine'  [24].   However  as
    the claims failed under paragraph  352D (iv) he  dismissed  them  under
    the Rules.

12.  The judge finished by examining their claims under Article  8  outside
    the Rules.  He considered as part of the proportionality exercise  that
    the children's best interests were finely balanced,  on  the  one  hand
    that it was in their best interests to enjoy family reunion with  their
    mother in the UK, but on the other hand that it would not be  in  their
    best interests to break off their education  in  Nepal.   He  concluded
    that the balance favoured the Respondent.

13. The Appellants sought permission to appeal  which  was  granted  on  27
    February 2017.

    Error of law hearing

14. At the error of law hearing before me Mr Roberts did not seek to  argue
    grounds alleging lack of a fair hearing due to some documents not being
    in the possession of the Appellants at the First-tier hearing.

15. Both Mr Roberts and Mr Avery agreed that  the  relevant  paragraph  was
    352D.  In Mr Roberts' submission the analysis under paragraph 352D (iv)
    was inadequate.  It was clear that the  Appellants  were  part  of  the
    family unit prior to the mother claiming asylum.  The only issue  which
    prevented the family living  together  prior  to  the  Sponsor  seeking
    asylum was the fact that she was arrested by the Bhutanese  authorities
    and imprisoned in Bhutan between 2005  and  2009.   While  she  was  in
    prison in Bhutan her children had  lived  with  their  aunt  in  India.
    Further, it was perverse to find that the  Appellants  do  not  qualify
    under paragraph 352D by claiming that the reason the Sponsor  left  her
    country of habitual residence was not to seek asylum when  she  was  in
    fact detained by the Bhutanese  authorities.   She  was  released  from
    prison in 2009 after which she went to India to see her children before
    travelling to the UK to seek asylum.

16. Mr Roberts also submitted that the assessment of Article 8 was  flawed.
    In a family reunion case the best interests of the children must be  to
    be with their mother who was separated from them when she fled to claim
    asylum.

17. Mr Avery's brief reply was that the judge's interpretation of paragraph
    352D was one that was open to him.  As for  Article  8  the  submission
    amounted to nothing more than a disagreement.

    Consideration

18. In considering this matter the issue, both parties agreed, was  whether
    the  Appellants  satisfied  paragraph  352D  (iv)  which   reads   'The
    requirements to be met by a person seeking leave to enter or remain  in
    the United Kingdom in order to join or remain with the  parent  who  is
    currently a refugee granted status as such under the immigration  rules
    are that the applicant... (iv) was part  of  the  family  unit  of  the
    person granted asylum at the time that the person granted  asylum  left
    the country of his habitual residence in order to seek asylum...'

19. The judge's analysis of this is contained in one paragraph  [17]  where
    he writes:

         'However, one of the  conditions  which  has  to  be  met  is  that
         contained in subparagraph (iv) of paragraph 352D which is that  the
         applicant was part of the family unit of the person granted  asylum
         "at the time that the person granted asylum left the country of his
         habitual residence in order to  seek  asylum".   From  the  history
         provided by the Sponsor in her oral evidence, she did not leave the
         country of her habitual residence in order to  seek  asylum.'  [The
         judge emphasised the last five words.]

20. The oral evidence (none of which is challenged) is  contained  at  [13]
    and [14].  In summary, the Sponsor left Bhutan at the age  of  13  with
    her parents and had gone to live in a refugee camp in Nepal.  She  left
    the camp in 2005 to make a protest at the Bhutan/Nepal border.  She was
    arrested by the Bhutanese police and imprisoned for  four  years.   Her
    children were taken from the camp by a relative to an  aunt  in  India.
    She was reunited there with her children.  She only remained in India a
    brief time before making her way  to  Europe  arriving  in  the  UK  in
    October 2009.

21. As indicated the judge's conclusion was that 'from the history provided
    by the Sponsor in her oral evidence, she did not leave the  country  of
    her habitual residence in order to seek asylum.' He does not state what
    her country of habitual residence was. It may be that he considered  it
    to be her country of nationality, Bhutan, which  she  left  when  young
    apparently to seek safety in Nepal, and  as  such  she  did  not  leave
    Bhutan in order to seek asylum in the UK.

22. It may be that he considered it to be Nepal and that  because  she  was
    arrested and imprisoned in Bhutan following a protest at the border, he
    decided that she did not leave Nepal in order to seek asylum.

23. It may be that because, following release by the Bhutanese  authorities
    on the  Nepal/India  border,  she  spent  some  time  in  India  before
    advancing to Europe and the UK, such was the basis for his conclusion.

24. Whatever was in his mind the judge  failed  to  give  reasons  for  his
    decision.  Such was a material error of law.

25. As also indicated Mr Roberts suggested that the judge  had  found  that
    the children were not part of the  family  unit  prior  to  the  mother
    leaving and that such was wrong as it was clear that they were part  of
    the family unit of their mother since their births in  Nepal  and  that
    the only matter which prevented the family living together prior to her
    coming to the UK  and  claiming  asylum  was  the  fact  that  she  was
    imprisoned for four years.

26. In fact, the judge appears to have found, albeit again  without  giving
    reasons, that the children were part of the family unit at the relevant
    time. Such would suggest that he, indeed,  considered  the  country  of
    habitual residence to have been Nepal.

27. In any event, for the reasons stated the decision is set  aside  to  be
    remade.

28. I consider what the mother's country of habitual residence was.  Whilst
    the paragraph will encompass  many  who  have  left  their  country  of
    nationality I see no reason not to give the words 'country of  habitual
    residence' their ordinary meaning.

29. The unchallenged evidence, as indicated,  is  this.   The  mother  left
    Bhutan at the age of thirteen in 1994 for Nepal where  she  lived  with
    her parents  in  a  refugee  camp  and  then  with  her  children,  the
    Appellants, who were born there in 1998 and 2001. She continued  living
    in Nepal with her children until 2005.  Having  lived  continuously  in
    Nepal for some eleven years until 2005 I find Nepal to  have  been  her
    country of habitual residence.

30. It is not disputed that in 2005 she went  to  make  a  protest  at  the
    border between Nepal and Bhutan.

31. I agree with Mr Roberts that it  would  be  absurd  to  find  that  the
    children do not qualify under paragraph 352D (iv) by claiming that  the
    reason the mother left the country of habitual  residence  (Nepal)  was
    not to seek asylum when she was in fact  arrested  and  imprisoned  for
    four years at the border by the Bhutanese authorities.

32. It is clear that on her release on the border between Nepal and  India,
    she went to India where she remained briefly before she arrived in  the
    UK and sought asylum in October 2009. The fact  that  she  was  granted
    refugee  status  clearly  indicates  that,  having  been   freed   from
    imprisonment, she came to the UK to seek asylum. The history  indicates
    that she left Nepal her country of habitual residence in order to  seek
    asylum.

33. As part of the family unit at the time their mother left Nepal to  seek
    asylum, her children should be allowed to join her in  family  reunion.
    Their appeals succeed.

34. I set aside the decision and remake it by allowing  the  appeals  under
    the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows material error of law.  It  is
set aside and remade as follows:

The appeals are allowed under the Immigration Rules.

No anonymity direction made.


Signed                              Date     1 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

