
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07126/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 12 December 2016                        |On 25 January 2017               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - islamabad
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Abdul Basit
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs R Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Ghafoor, Girlington Advice & Training Centre


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Abdul Basit, was born on 15 August 2005  and
    is a male citizen of Pakistan.  He appealed against the decision of the
    respondent dated 16 March 2015 to  refuse  him  entry  clearance  as  a
    dependent child under paragraph 297 of HC 395 (as amended).  The First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Myers) in a decision promulgated on 20 June  2016,
    allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. This appeal turned on the question of sole responsibility.  The grounds
    of appeal challenge the judge's decision on  the  basis  that  she  has
    placed little weight on two witness statements (by the sponsor and  the
    sponsor's wife respectively) although she had  attached  weight  to  an
    affidavit by the appellant's  biological  mother  in  circumstances  in
    which,

         this evidence has not been  confirmed  by  independent  documentary
         evidence to confirm that it is indeed written  by  the  appellant's
         biological mother.  In addition, there was no full explanation  why
         the appellant's mother abdicated her parental responsibilities.

    Likewise, whilst the  judge  accepted  that  the  sponsor,  as  he  had
    claimed, remained in contact with the  appellant's  school,  she  found
    that there was "no evidence to authenticate his claim."  The judge also
    found that there was no evidence of the "grandmother's medical ailments
    or a witness statement from the uncle as to why they  could  no  longer
    look after the appellant."

 3. I find that the appeal should be dismissed.  First, the  assessment  of
    the evidence was a matter for the judge.  She had  the  opportunity  of
    reading the documentary evidence and hearing  oral  evidence  from  the
    sponsor who attended the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   Having  heard
    examined all the evidence, the judge was required to carry out a robust
    fact-finding exercise giving reasons for her findings and I  find  that
    she has done this.  She attached little weight to the sponsor's  wife's
    statement [17] because this had been "written in very similar terms and
    phrasing to the statement that purported to  be  from  the  appellant."
    Likewise,  she  attached  little  weight  to  the  appellant's  written
    statement which she found  to  be  "written  in  a  language  which  is
    unlikely to be used by a child of the appellant's age."  In each  case,
    the judge has assessed the evidence and given reasons as to why she has
    decided to attach weight or not to that evidence.  The  affidavit  from
    the appellant's mother differed entirely from  the  statements  of  the
    appellant and the sponsor's wife and I  can  identify  no  reason  why,
    having  given  clear  reasons  for  attaching  little  weight  to   the
    statements, the judge should have erred in law by  accepting  that  the
    affidavit before her had been  signed  by  the  appellant's  biological
    mother.  The judge  dealt  with  the  submission  from  the  Presenting
    Officer [18] that the mother "may have been coerced into giving up  her
    son."  However, it is clear that she took the evidence  at  face  value
    and was right to investigate "the rights and wrongs of  how  this  came
    about".  Likewise, it was open to the judge to accept the  evidence  of
    the sponsor without seeking documentary corroboration  as  the  grounds
    suggest should have been sought.  The judge assessed all  the  evidence
    before her and has given cogent reasons to the attachment of weight  to
    the various items of evidence in each case.   She  reached  an  outcome
    which was clearly available to her.  The grounds amount to little  more
    than a disagreement with the judge's findings.



Notice of Decision

 4. This appeal is dismissed.

 5. There is no anonymity direction.



Signed                              Date 20 January 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
