

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07603/2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Field House                                   |Determination Promulgated    |
|9 December 2013                               |16 December 2013             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                                Kahina Sadek
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The Secretary Of State For The Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    1. On 14 May 2013,  in  granting  permission  to  appeal,  I  gave  the
       following directions:


     1. The Entry Clearance Officer  refused  the  application  because  he
        considered the language  test  provider,  Active  Training  English
        Institute in Algeria was not  on  the  United  Kingdom  authorities
        accredited  list  of  providers.   That  allegation  was  otherwise
        unsupported.  It was apparently wrong:  the  ESOL  certificate  was
        from Language Solutions in Algeria which was accredited.  The Entry
        Clearance Officer did not otherwise challenge the certificate.
     2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge dismissed the appeal because the copy
        of the certificate he had did not contain a copy of its second page
        which was not the reason for refusing the application by  the  ECO.
        It was arguably procedurally unfair for the  Judge  to  rely  on  a
        reason on which the appellant did not have notice.
     3. It is probable that this occurred because, in breach of directions,
        the Entry Clearance Officer did not supply a copy of it, see [8] of
        the determination.  This has, arguably, resulted  in  a  procedural
        unfairness of which  (at  the  moment)  only  the  Entry  Clearance
        Officer knows the answer.






                                 DIRECTIONS


           1. The Entry Clearance Officer must respond to  the  appellant's
              grounds of appeal by 18 June 2013 and must assert (a) whether
              it is the respondent's case that the certificate submitted to
              it was defective in the  way  found  by  the  Judge  and  (b)
              whether the respondent maintains the reason it  advanced  for
              refusing entry clearance, namely,  the  certificate  was  not
              from an accredited source and (c) any other  reason  why  the
              appellant's appeal should not be allowed.
           2. If the respondent fails to respond  in  accordance  with  (1)
              above, I intend to allow the  appeal  without  a  hearing  in
              accordance with Rule 34.  It  is  important  that  those  not
              entitled to obtain entry clearance are not permitted to do so
              and  I  therefore  highlight  the  need  to  comply  with  my
              directions or seek further time.


    2. The directions were precise and have  not  been  complied  with.   I
       therefore allow the appeal in accordance with the clear indication I
       gave in the directions that the appeal would be allowed if the Entry
       Clearance Officer had not complied with them.


    3. The letter of Mr Parkinson  of  11  June  2013  did  not  amount  to
       compliance.  In it, he said on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer
       that the refusal decision had been revoked by the ECM and a visa had
       been issued.   However, the decision of the ECM is not an appealable
       immigration decision.  It is, nevertheless, a  clear  concession  on
       the part of the respondent that the original decision on  the  Entry
       Clearance Officer  was  not  in  accordance  with  the  law  or  the
       Immigration Rules.


    4. All this would be  academic  if  a  visa  had  been  granted  as  Mr
       Parkinson's letter suggests.  Unfortunately, according to the letter
       of Mr  Graham  Smith  dated  2  September  2013,  when  the  sponsor
       travelled to Algeria to accompany the appellant on  her  journey  to
       the United Kingdom, the Entry Clearance  Officer  appeared  to  know
       nothing of the contents of Mr  Parkinson's  letter  and  refused  to
       grant the visa.  No response to the  allegations  contained  in  the
       letter  has  been  filed  by  the  respondent  who  has  had   ample
       opportunity to dispute them.  I assume them to be true.


    5. I disagree with Mr Parkinson that  there  is  no  longer  an  appeal
       before the Tribunal because the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  recent
       action in refusing the appellant the visa belies the suggestion that
       the Entry Clearance Officer's decision has been withdrawn.


    6. I am, therefore, satisfied that the appeal should be allowed. I  see
       no reason why a hearing would  advance  the  just  disposal  of  the
       appeal since the respondent has failed to  put  forward  as  he  was
       required to do any other reason why the  appellant's  appeal  should
       not be allowed.




DECISION

    The Judge made an error on a point of law and I re-make the decision in
    the following terms:


        The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                             9 December 2013






