
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA 07267 2012

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 29 May 2013                                |On 10 June 2013              |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                Fataha Begum
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER DHAKA
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Choudhury of Masud & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh  born  in  1988  against  a
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal  against  a
    decision of the respondent refusing her entry clearance  to  the  United
    Kingdom  as  a  wife.   There  were  three  things  that  concerned  the
    respondent.  The appellant had not shown that she had sufficient command
    of the English language in accordance with the Rules, she had not  shown
    that she would be accommodated in accordance with the Rules and she  had
    not shown that she would be maintained in accordance with the Rules.

 2. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was satisfied that the appellant had shown
    she would be maintained as the Rules required.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge was not satisfied that the  appellant  had
    shown that she had sufficient command of the English language but it  is
    clear that this finding arose from a mistake on the part  of  the  judge
    who had two similar certificates  before  her  showing  the  appellant's
    ability both to hear and to speak the English language.  I  find  it  at
    least probably that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  appreciate
    that she had two different certificates.  What is quite  plain,  as  has
    been fairly point out by Mr Melvin, is  that  there  was  good  evidence
    before the Entry Clearance Officer and the First-tier Tribunal that  the
    appellant was able to listen and speak as required, but for reasons that
    are not entirely clear neither the Entry Clearance Officer nor the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge were satisfied  about  both  points.   The  evidence
    suggests that they should have been and I am satisfied that that finding
    on the part of the First-tier Tribunal Judge was wrong and I  substitute
    a decision that the appellant does satisfy the requirements of the Rules
    relating to her language skills.

 4. The appellant's ability to satisfy the requirements about  accommodation
    is a little less clear.   Although  the  point  was  not  taken  in  the
    grounds, there is no proper finding by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    concerning whether the appellant would be  accommodated  satisfactorily.
    There is a finding that  the  sponsor  was  an  unsatisfactory  witness.
    However, when the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that the  evidence  of
    the sponsor about maintenance was unsatisfactory she looked at  all  the
    evidence before her including documentary evidence which  satisfied  her
    that the evidence about maintenance was  in  fact  right,  although  the
    sponsor's contribution to it was not good.  If she had  applied  similar
    logic to issues relating to accommodation she  would  have  allowed  the
    appeal on this point because there is independent evidence that there is
    sufficient accommodation available at the chosen  address.   It  is  the
    place where the sponsor presently resides, it has  been  examined  by  a
    surveyor and said to be a house in good condition with  sufficient  room
    for the appellant to live  there  too.   The  issue  is  whether  it  is
    believable that accommodation would be available on  a  rather  informal
    basis.  It is always best if there is good, clear documentary  evidence.
    Informal arrangements between family members can be  perfectly  good  in
    law but they are sometimes harder to prove and it is unhelpful if people
    misguidedly impose over an informal relationship a formal gloss that  is
    not there.  It can create difficulties and that may be what has happened
    here.

 5. Stepping back and looking at the case dispassionately  it  seems  to  me
    entirely reasonable that the person accommodating the sponsor  would  be
    prepared to accommodate his wife under similar circumstances.  There  is
    no good reason to doubt that.  The other parts of the appeal  have  been
    established and I think the proper decision is to allow the appeal.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in two respects.  She made an
    irrational decision concerning the  appellant's  ability  to  speak  the
    English language and she failed to make a proper  reasoned  decision  on
    the availability of suitable accommodation.  I set  aside  her  decision
    and I substitute a decision allowing the appeal for the reasons given.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside  and  this  appeal  is
allowed


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 10 June 2013                   |

