
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07102/2014
                                                               OA/03267/2014
                                                               OA/03266/2014
                                                               OA/03268/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre|Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21 July 2015                      |On 22 July 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                         MOHAMED ABDULLE MOHAMED (1)
                         MANDEQ SHIAWOW MOHAMED (2)
                          KAMAL SHIAWOW MOHAMED (3)
                          AHMED SHIAWOW mOHAMED (4)
                            (No anonymity order)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, NAIROBI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford, instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors,
Birmingham
For the Respondent:    Mr D MIlls, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Following the hearing on 31 March 2015, I found that the  decision  and
    reasons statement of Designated Judge Coates contained  errors  of  law
    that required it to be set aside and for the decisions  to  be  remade.
    The parties have confirmed that they have copies of my decision.

 2. This resumed hearing was arranged so I could hear further  evidence  in
    order to remake the decisions.  At the start of the resumed hearing, Mr
    Mills made the following concessions.

      a. The sponsor's evidence that she was married to the first  appellant
         was credible and therefore his  appeal  succeeded  under  paragraph
         353A of the immigration rules.

      b. The sponsor's evidence that her husband cared for the  three  other
         appellants was also credible and because it would  be  unreasonable
         to expect the first appellant to abandon them  their  appeals  must
         also succeed under Article 8 ECHR as the situation was exceptional.

 3. Mr Mills outlined his reasons for these concessions.

 4. Despite what may have been suggested during the  hearing  on  31  March
    2015, the sponsor remained a refugee.  This was evidenced by  the  fact
    that she had been issued with a UN Travel Document and  not  a  British
    passport.  Therefore, the first appellant succeeds as long  as  he  can
    prove his relationship to her.

 5. Despite what may have been suggested during the  earlier  hearing,  the
    sponsor had initially been refused asylum and had  appealed.   She  was
    granted refugee status after succeeding in her appeal in  which  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Cheales found her to be credible.

 6. Having perused in detail the Home Office files, Mr  Mills  admitted  he
    had found nothing to undermine the positive finding  that  the  sponsor
    was a credible witness.  As such he realised he could not realistically
    argue that the sponsor's bare assertions that she was  married  to  the
    first appellant and that he cared for the other three  appellants  were
    insufficient evidence to discharge the burden of proof.

 7. I have no reason to go behind these concessions and I accept them.   In
    so doing I remake the decisions and  allow  the  appeals  of  all  four
    appellants.



Signed   Date

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
