
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07666/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 21 April 2017                         |On 30 June 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL

                                   Between

                    THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MANILA

                                  Applicant
                                     and

                                     KMT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr J Collins, of Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. This is an appeal against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         (Judge Callender Smith) allowing the applicant's appeal  against  a
         decision of the Entry Clearance Officer (ECO) made on 24 March 2015
         refusing her application for entry clearance as a  dependent  child
         to enable her to join her relative (hereafter "the sponsor") in the
         UK. In this decision, I will refer to  the  parties  as  they  were
         before the First-tier Tribunal, the applicant as the appellant  and
         the ECO as the respondent.

Background

      2. The appellant is a citizen of the Philippines. At the date  of  the
         respondent's decision she was nine years old. She is the biological
         child of the sponsor's first cousin and his wife.

      3. On 25 January 2015, the appellant made  an  application  for  entry
         clearance as a child dependent of the sponsor. The sponsor came  to
         the UK in 1998 as a work permit holder and  was  naturalised  as  a
         British citizen in July 2005. Shortly after the appellant was  born
         she became ill. As her parents lived in poverty with other children
         they were unable to meet her care needs. They asked  the  sponsor's
         parents to care for the appellant who, in turn, asked  the  sponsor
         to  take  on  that  responsibility.  While  the  sponsor   had   no
         relationship with her cousin, she agreed to care for the  appellant
         and visited her in the Philippines in October 2005. Since then, the
         sponsor has visited the appellant each year  and  has  remained  in
         contact  through  various  methods  of  communication.  Whilst  the
         appellant lives with the sponsor's parents, it is the  sponsor  who
         takes full responsibly for the appellant. This includes meeting the
         costs of  her  education,  medical  expenses  and  paying  for  the
         services of nannies to provide day-to-day care.

      4.  In  2008  the  sponsor  initiated  adoption  proceedings  in   the
         Philippines. The adoption was  finalised  in  2010,  together  with
         consent given to change the appellant's name. The only contact  the
         appellant has had with her biological parents since  2005,  was  in
         2009, when they were present at a hearing in the Philippines.

      5. Since 2010, the appellant's applications to join the sponsor in the
         UK have been unsuccessful. The last refusal, which is  the  subject
         of this appeal, was on  the  basis  that  the  respondent  was  not
         satisfied that there  had  been  a  genuine  transfer  of  parental
         responsibility and thus it had not  been  demonstrated  that  a  de
         facto adoption had taken place, and nor was she satisfied  that  an
         inter-country adoption could take place as the domestic  courts  in
         the Philippines were not regarded as a competent authority for  the
         purposes of adoption under The Hague Convention. The respondent was
         further not satisfied that the sponsor was the appellant's  primary
         carer or that she [the appellant] had severed  all  ties  with  her
         biological parents.

      6.  Finally,   whilst   the   respondent   noted   the   compassionate
         circumstances raised by the application, she was not satisfied that
         there were serious and compelling family  or  other  considerations
         which made exclusion undesirable. The appellant could not therefore
         meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules  ("the  Rules")  and
         there were no circumstances constituting exceptional  circumstances
         justifying a grant of leave outside the Rules.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

      7. At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 13 September 2016,
         the sponsor gave oral evidence relying in  substance  on  what  was
         noted as a detailed witness  statement  filed  in  support  of  the
         appeal. The judge noted that the sponsor's evidence  was  supported
         by considerable documentary evidence and  found  the  evidence  was
         "clear, cogent and credible."

      8. The judge canvassed with the  representatives  his  view  that  the
         respondent's "section 55 assessment" (section 55  of  the  Borders,
         Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009) was so inadequate that it was
         unlawful (at [30]). There appears to have been no dissent from  the
         respondent's representative to that view  and  the  representatives
         thus agreed that it was open to the judge "to remit the  matter  to
         the Respondent to make a lawful decision." While the judge  has  no
         statutory  power  to  remit  an  appeal,  nothing  turns  on   this
         unfortunate  phraseology.  Nevertheless,  the  judge  adopted   the
         appropriate course and proceeded to deal with the appeal.

      9. Before the judge, Counsel on behalf of  the  appellant,  based  her
         submissions on the requirements of paragraph 297 of the  Rules.  It
         was said that either the appellant  qualified  under  sub-paragraph
         (e) or (f) thereof  "because  there  were  serious  and  compelling
         reasons that made her exclusion from the UK undesirable. There  had
         been a legal adoption and, at no stage, was any issue raised  about
         maintenance  and  accommodation  in  the  UK  being  inadequate  or
         unsatisfactory" (at [34]).

     10.      The judge stated that he agreed  with  those  submissions  and
         then said this (at [36]):

         "However, I am mindful that this young Appellant deserves to  have
         the greatest possible attention given to the reasons why her appeal
         should succeed in  exactly  the  same  way  as  the  Respondent  is
         entitled to know why I have concluded that,  even  outside  of  the
         Immigration Rules, I find that the  cursory  Article  8/section  55
         assessment purportedly conducted by the ECO  and  ECM  are  neither
         satisfactory nor proportionate in all the circumstances."

     11. There is then a detailed rendition of Article 8  jurisprudence  (at
         [38]-[87]) following which the  judge  concluding  thus  (at  [88]-
         [90]):

         "Considering the Article 8  family  life  bonding  and  dependency
         between the Sponsor and the Appellant and, in  addition,  factoring
         in the manifest  efforts  that  the  Sponsor  has  devoted  to  the
         continuing support, welfare and upbringing  of  this  disabled  and
         otherwise disadvantaged Appellant in  circumstances  of  determined
         personal energy and commitment over the years that it has taken her
         to create a stable situation of  actual  adoption  -  even  by  the
         Appellant is currently living away from the Sponsor - I  find  that
         it is overwhelmingly in the best interests (in section 55 terms) of
         the Appellant to be living in the  UK  with  the  Sponsor  at  this
         critical stage in her development. (sic)

         Respect for the Respondent's concerns about effective  immigration
         control, insofar as those are proportionality issues that  need  to
         be weighed into the  balance,  are  completely  outweighed  by  the
         Appellant's practical needs and rights  to  be  with  her  adoptive
         mother in the UK (and vice  versa  between  those  two  parties  in
         family life terms).

         While I have formally allowed the  Appeal  under  the  Immigration
         Rules, I emphasise that I have specifically reinforced that  result
         by my Article 8/section 55 decision as well."

     12. On that basis, the appeal succeeded.

The Grounds of Application

     13. The respondent's grounds seek to argue that the  judge  misdirected
         himself in law in failing  to  deal  with  the  Rules  relating  to
         adoption and thus failed to have regard to the  legal  requirements
         in bringing a child to the UK. It  is  further  asserted  that  the
         judge failed to  make  any  findings  as  to  the  relationship  or
         identify in which capacity the appellant was being brought  to  the
         UK.  It  is  argued  given  that  failure  the  judge's  Article  8
         assessment was inadequate.

     14.      Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
         Saffer for the following reasons:

         "Paragraphs 37 to 87 of the Judge's decision are unhelpful as they
         simply recite numerous case ratio's by way of academic  lecture  on
         s55 and do not apply them to the facts of this case  (sic).  It  is
         arguable  that  the  Judge  ignored  the  immigration   rules   and
         lawfulness of the "adoption" in reaching the  decision  within  the
         rules and outside them."

Consideration of Whether there is an Error of Law

     15.      I agree with the observation of Judge Saffer that the  judge's
         recital of numerous Article 8 case summaries is  unhelpful.  It  is
         not  good  practice  and  requires  revision.  Some  of  the  cases
         referenced are no longer good law or do not have strict application
         in an entry clearance appeal. Notwithstanding, I am  not  satisfied
         that the judge materially erred in law.

     16. There is no merit in the grounds that  the  judge  failed  to  make
         findings on the relationship between the appellant and sponsor. The
         judge was clearly aware of the relationship as this is referred  to
         in the sponsor's detailed evidence which the judge accepted.

     17. While it is correct to say, as Mr Tufan submits, that the judge did
         not deal with the Rules relating to adoption, the  difficulty  with
         the respondent's grounds is that it fails, as Mr  Collins  submits,
         to recognise that the judge allowed the appeal under paragraph  297
         of the Rules. Mr Tufan fairly and properly acknowledged that  there
         is no challenge in the grounds to the judge's decision allowing the
         appeal under the Rules. Paragraph 297 permits a  child  to  join  a
         "relative" present and settled in the UK if certain conditions  are
         met.  As  there  was  no  evidence  the  appellant's  adoption  was
         recognised  under  UK  law,  the  judge  was  not  prohibited  from
         considering paragraph 297 - see SK ("Adoption"  not  recognised  in
         UK) India [2006] UKAIT 00068. In the absence of  any  challenge  to
         the judge's decision that the appellant should be permitted to join
         the sponsor in the UK as a relative, that decision must  stand.  In
         any event, even if there had  been  a  challenge,  any  failure  to
         consider the adoption Rules was not material for the reasons  given
         above.

     18. Nevertheless, Mr Tufan submits that the judge's Article 8  findings
         are inadequate and that he failed to follow the well-known step-by-
         step approach enunciated in Razgar [2004] UK HL 27. I accept, as Mr
         Tufan submits, that the judge's decision is open  to  criticism  in
         that, he could have elaborated more on the detail and addressed the
         Razgar questions specifically, however, I am not satisfied that his
         consideration  is  so  inadequate  as  to   render   the   decision
         unsustainable.

     19. The  judge  clearly  considered  all  the  evidence  including  the
         respondent's refusal which he made detailed reference  to  at  [6]-
         [17]. He made equally detailed reference to the sponsor's  evidence
         at [19]-[27]. There is no challenge to those  findings  which  were
         plainly open to the judge on the evidence.

     20. As I indicated earlier there was no  dissent  by  the  respondent's
         representative to the  judge's  conclusion  that  the  respondent's
         decision was unlawful. That must have been in the judge's mind when
         he came to assess the Article 8 claim. On a holistic reading of the
         decision it is plain, in my judgement, that the judge was aware  of
         the legal requirements and interests in play  on  both  sides  and,
         whilst his reasons are brief, it is clear  why  on  the  facts  the
         judge reached the decision that he did. It is unsurprising that the
         judge concluded that she was entitled to admission under Article  8
         with reference to paragraph 297 given his  conclusions  at  [34]  &
         [88]-[90]. The grounds are essentially limited to a challenge  that
         the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  adoption  Rules.  Given  the
         alternate  route  the  judge  took  to  determine  the  appellant's
         admission under the Rules, that failure does not materially  infect
         his decision under Article 8, given  with  reference  to  paragraph
         297.

     21. I am thus satisfied that the judge's decision when read as a  whole
         sets out findings that  were  sustainable  and  based  on  adequate
         reasoning.

Decision

     22. I  therefore  find  that  no  material  errors  of  law  have  been
         established  and  that  the  judge's  decision  should  stand.  The
         respondent's appeal is dismissed.

     23. No application has been made to discharge  or  vary  the  anonymity
         order made by the First-tier Tribunal and  that  order  accordingly
         remains in force.






Signed                                  Date:                  25 June 2017



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral



