
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: OA/07875/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On November 30, 2016            |On December 1, 2016             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                              MR ZAIN UL ABDEEN
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Represented by the sponsor, Samina Javid
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. The  appellant  applied  for
       entry clearance as a spouse. The respondent refused his  application
       on April 7, 2015.

    2. The appellant appealed that decision  under  section  82(1)  of  the
       Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 on May 5, 2015.

    3. The appeal came before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Mozolowski
       (hereinafter referred to as the Judge) on December  17,  2015  as  a
       paper case and in a decision promulgated  on  January  20,  2016  he
       allowed the appellant's appeal under the Immigration Rules.

    4. The  respondent  lodged  grounds  of  appeal  on  February  1,  2016
       submitting the Judge had erred by allowing evidence in which had not
       been submitted to the Entry Clearance Officer.  Permission to appeal
       was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Davidge on June  22,
       2016 who found the point arguable.

    5. The matter came before me on September 8, 2016  and  after  I  heard
       submissions from Mr Bates and from the sponsor  I  found  there  had
       been an error in  law  and  I  set  aside  the  decision  under  the
       Immigration Rules and re-made that decision by dismissing  it  under
       the Rules.

    6. The sponsor was given an opportunity to consider whether she  wished
       to pursue an article 8 appeal in view of the fact the Judge had  not
       addressed this issue or to submit a fresh application. She indicated
       she wished to pursue the appeal and a further  date  was  fixed  for
       today.

    7. No anonymity direction has been made.

EVIDENCE

    8. The sponsor gave oral evidence  and  asked  that  I  had  regard  to
       documents she had submitted on August 10, 2016.  She  confirmed  she
       currently lived with her parents and elder sister but was  buying  a
       house for her and her husband to live in. This meant that her income
       was reduced as she had additional expenses and she did  not  believe
       it was fair that her  husband  had  to  wait  three  years  for  his
       application to be granted. If she had re-applied then  it  would  be
       further cost. She confirmed her husband lived with  his  family  and
       worked as a farmer. She last saw him about twelve months ago and she
       had previously seen him when she married in Pakistan.

    9. Under cross-examination she confirmed her husband had never been  to
       the United Kingdom and their contact, save as  set  out  above,  had
       always been by skype or telephone.

SUBMISSIONS

   10. Mr Bates relied on refusal letter and submitted  the  appellant  had
       not provided the specified evidence as laid out in Appendix FM-SE of
       the Immigration Rules and  he  therefore  had  to  show  there  were
       compelling or exceptional circumstances to  allow  this  appeal.  He
       pointed out that they had never enjoyed family  life  here  and  the
       family life they had always been electronic. If the application  was
       refused then the status  quo  would  be  maintained.  Although  this
       appeal had taken some time to reach this stage this was due the fact
       the appellant did not meet the Rules. It had always been open to the
       appellant to re-apply if the Rules were met and then there would not
       have been a delay. He invited me to dismiss the claim.

   11. Ms Javid stressed that she had waited three years to build this case
       and it was hard to be separated from her husband.  She found it hard
       to take time off to visit her husband in Pakistan and as she now had
       the correct paperwork the appeal should be allowed as she wanted  to
       start a family with him. She questioned why she should be put to the
       additional cost of bringing fresh  proceedings  and  invited  me  to
       allow the appeal.

DISCUSSION AND FINDINGS

   12. An application for entry clearance requires specified evidence to be
       served with the application. The Rules are clear that  this  is  the
       time  for  the  evidence  to  be  served  and  there  are  very  few
       exceptions. This was not one of those exceptions  as  it  was  clear
       that the appellant had not submitted the correct paperwork with  the
       application  and  I  previously  dismissed  the  appeal  under   the
       Immigration Rules.

   13. I adjourned the case previously for oral evidence on article 8  ECHR
       and for the appellant to serve any additional relevant  evidence.  I
       reminded her that I was considering the case as at April 2015.

   14. In SS (Congo) and Others: [2015] EWCA Civ 387 Richards LJ said  what
       is in issue in relation to an application for leave to enter is more
       in the nature of an appeal to the state's positive obligations under
       Article 8 referred to in Huang at paragraph [18] (a request that the
       state grant the applicant something that they do not currently  have
       - entry to the United Kingdom and the ability to take up family life
       there), rather than enforcement of its negative duty,  which  is  at
       the fore in leave to remain cases (where family life already  exists
       and is currently being carried on in the United Kingdom, and  family
       life or any private life established in the United Kingdom  will  be
       directly interfered with if the applicant is  removed).  This  means
       that the requirements upon  the  state  under  Article  8  are  less
       stringent in the leave to enter context than in the leave to  remain
       context.

   15. When the application was submitted the appellant did  not  meet  the
       Rules. The appellant argues now that she would have  met  the  Rules
       and relies on the evidence from her sister  and  brother  served  on
       August 10, 2016 and the additional documents that were submitted  to
       the original Judge. These documents have never been assessed by  the
       entry clearance officer and whilst the original Judge concluded they
       satisfied the Rules I remind  myself  that  the  respondent  is  the
       person who must consider that evidence afresh.

   16. The parties are married and I accept they have  a  family  life  but
       that family life has to be looked at carefully. They have spent  two
       short spells together as husband and wife  and  the  sponsor's  last
       visit was brought about by the sponsor's need to return to  Pakistan
       for a family issue and not specifically to see her husband.

   17. They have only ever enjoyed family life from  a  distance  and  when
       they married they would have  known  the  requirements  to  be  met.
       Effectively, the sponsor asks me to allow the appeal because  it  is
       unfair they have had to wait since late  2014  for  a  visa  and  to
       require them to re-apply would be expensive and the sponsor now  has
       additional expenses to meet.

   18. I  am  not  satisfied  that  these  are  exceptional  or  compelling
       circumstances requiring me to consider this appeal  outside  of  the
       Rules.

   19. However, I have nevertheless considered the case in  line  with  the
       approach set out in Razgar [2004] UKHL 00027.

   20. The appellant and sponsor are husband and wife and evidence produced
       confirms the marriage is subsisting and there is family life between
       them as set out above. Their  existing  family  life  is  not  being
       interfered with but their  desire  to  be  together  here  is  being
       interfered  with.  This  interference  is  occurring   because   the
       appellant did not meet the Immigration Rules. Such  interference  is
       necessary to maintain immigration control.

   21. I have considered Section 117B of the 2002 Act and  in  doing  so  I
       accept the appellant can speak  English  to  the  appropriate  level
       because he has passed the relevant English language test  prescribed
       in Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules.  They  did  not  meet  the
       financial requirements of Appendix FM.

   22. Section 117B(1) makes clear  that  the  maintenance  of  immigration
       control is in the public interest and the fact I find the  appellant
       did not meet the Rules is a factor I must  take  into  account  when
       considering the claim under article 8 ECHR.

   23. Taking all of the above factors into account and  having  regard  to
       the  guidance  given  in  SS  (Congo)  I  find  it  would   not   be
       disproportionate to refuse the application.

DECISION

   24. The making of the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve
       the making of an error on a point of law.

   25. I set aside the decision under the  Immigration  Rules  and  I  have
       remade it that decision and dismissed it.

   26. I dismiss the appeal under article 8 ECHR.


Signed:   Dated: December 1, 2016

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No order is made because I have dismissed his appeal.


Signed:   Dated: December 1, 2016

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


