
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/07579/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Piccadilly             |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2016                           |On 11 May 2016             |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                MAVIA KHADIM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the Appellant: Not represented
For the Respondent: Mr A Mc Vitie Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  in
   order to avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the
   First-tier Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against
   a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuel promulgated  on  5  August
   2015 which allowed the Appellants appeal against the Respondents  refusal
   to grant entry clearance to the Appellant as the spouse of Tahleel  Ahmed
   (the Sponsor).

3. The Appellant did not attend the appeal nor was she  represented  at  the
   appeal as those who had previously appeared, Thornhills  had  written  to
   the court on 9 March  2016  indicating  that  they  would  no  longer  be
   representing the  Appellant  and  also  that  they  understood  that  the
   Appellant would not be attending. I am satisfied that due notice  of  the
   appeal was served upon the Appellant at the address that was given. I  am
   therefore satisfied that having been served notice of the hearing and not
   attended it is in the interests of justice to proceed with the hearing in
   the Appellant's absence as I am entitled to do by virtue of paragraph  38
   of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Background


4. The Appellant was born on 1 January 1989 and is a national of Pakistan.
5. On 8 April 2014 the Appellant applied for settlement in  the  UK  as  the
   spouse of the Sponsor.
6. On 23 May 2014  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  refused  the  Appellant's
   application. The refusal letter gave a number of reasons:
   a) It was not accepted that the relationship was genuine  and  subsisting
      as there was no evidence other than purported wedding  photographs  of
      an ongoing relationship.
   b) The Appellant had only produced a copy of the Nikah Nama when original
      documents were required to prove that the marriage was valid.
   c) The Appellant had not produced the necessary language certificate.


The Judge's Decision
7. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
   Judge Manuel ("the Judge") allowed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
   decision. The Judge found :
   a) The Sponsor  and  Appellant  were  aware  that  an  original  language
      certificate was required but produced instead a notarized copy.
   b) There was nothing in the Rules or evidential requirement  of  Appendix
      FM-SE  to suggest that a notarized copy was not acceptable.
   c) She accepted that the parties relationship was ongoing and genuine.
   d) The issue of the language certificate was not pursued.
8. Grounds of appeal were lodged  arguing  that  the  Judge  had  materially
   misdirected herself in law in that paragraph 39B(d)  of  the  Immigration
   Rules  requires  that  specified  documents  must  be  originals   unless
   otherwise stated. Appendix  FM-SE  paragraph  26  which  relates  to  the
   evidence of marriage does not state that copy documents  are  acceptable;
   and findings that the marriage was genuine  were  vitiated  by  the  same
   error.
9.  On 27 November 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew gave permission  to
   appeal.

10. At the hearing I heard submissions from Mr Mc Vitie  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that :

   a) The Rule 24 response from Thornhills conceded that specified  evidence
      had not been submitted.

   b) The matter could be remedied by the making of a fresh application.
Finding on Material Error

11. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law in relation  to  the  production  of
   documents.

12. The evidential  requirement,  Appendix  FM-SE,  require  that  specified
   documents are produced as evidence of those matters that must  be  proved
   in immigration applications. In relation to specified documents paragraph
   39B provides

   a) Where these Rules state that specified documents  must  be  provided,
      that means documents specified in  these  Rules  as  being  specified
      documents for the route under which the applicant is applying. If the
      specified documents are not provided, the applicant will not meet the
      requirement  for  which  the  specified  documents  are  required  as
      evidence.

   (d) Specified documents must  be  originals,  not  copies,  except  where
   stated otherwise.

13. Appendix FM-SE paragraph 22-26 sets out the  requirements  for  evidence
   relating to Marriage or Civil Partnerships and this does  not  include  a
   proviso that notarized copy  documents  are  acceptable  alternatives  to
   originals.

14. The failure of the First-tier Tribunal to address and determine  whether
   a copy document was acceptable by reference to the  law  as  set  out  in
   paragraph 39B of the Rules constitutes a clear error of law. This error I
   consider to be material since had the Tribunal  conducted  this  exercise
   the outcome could have been different. That in my  view  is  the  correct
   test to apply.

15. In relation to the finding that the marriage was genuine and  subsisting
   the Judge made findings having heard evidence from the  Sponsor  and  his
   mother and brother and accepted that the print outs of Viber Messages and
   Whats App reflected  a  genuine  and  ongoing  relationship  between  the
   Appellant and Sponsor. I am satisfied that the error in relation  to  the
   copy Nika Nama does not infect these findings.

16. I therefore set aside the decision and  remake  it  in  respect  of  the
   production of the copy nika nama.
17. The burden of proof in this case is upon the Appellant and the  standard
   of proof is upon the balance of probability.
18.  I have determined this matter based upon facts that  were  appertaining
   at the time the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer on  23  May  2014
   being constrained by Section 85(5) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
   Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002  Act)  I  am  entitled  to  take  into  account
   evidence of matters occurring after the date of  the  decision  providing
   that they relate to and inform an understanding of facts in existence  at
   the time of the decision pursuant to DR   (Morocco ) [2005] UKIAT 00038.
19. The Appellant's appeal is pursuant to Section 82 of the 2002 Act.

20. The Appellant and the Sponsor claim that  they  married  on  25  January
   2014. An application was submitted on 8  April  2014  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant for settlement in the UK with the Sponsor. It is accepted  that
   the did not submit the original of their Nika Nama  as  required  by  the
   Rules although in correspondence with the Visa Application  Centre  dated
   17 December 2013 from those representing the Appellant it  was  confirmed
   that the original nika nama would be provided.

21. There is no explanation as to why the original has not been provided  as
   the matter is not addressed in the Sponsors statement or in  the  grounds
   of appeal nor did he attend court before me to explain it.
22. The Rule 24 notice argued that the Respondent should have exercised  the
   discretion available in  Appendix  FM-SE  D  which  provides  that  if  a
   specified document has been submitted, but it is in the wrong format,  or
   it is a copy rather than the  original,  or  does  not  contain  all  the
   necessary information, the caseworker may also contact the  applicant  to
   request the correct version.  However I am satisfied that in Sultana  and
   Others (rules: waiver/further  enquiry;  discretion)  [2014]  UKUT  00540
   (IAC) the  Tribunal  held  that  where  applicants  wish  to  invoke  any
   discretion of this kind, they should  do  so  when  making  the  relevant
   application, highlighting the specific provision of the Rules invoked and
   the grounds upon which the exercise of discretion  is  requested.  It  is
   clear in this case that the Appellants representatives were aware of  the
   requirement to produce the original document and not only did not  do  so
   but also did not provide an explanation of why it was  not  produced  nor
   did they ask that the evidential flexibility discretion was exercised  in
   the Appellants favour.
23. The Appellant therefore cannot succeed under the Rules.

24.  The grounds of appeal  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  rights  under
   Article 8 of the Convention are engaged. I have determined the  issue  on
   the basis of the questions posed by Lord Bingham in  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL
   27.


Will the proposed refusal be an interference by a public authority with  the
exercise of the applicant's right to respect for  his  private  (or  as  the
case may be) family life?


25. I have accepted that the Appellant and the  Sponsor  are  in  a  genuine
   relationship albeit they have failed to provide  the  original  of  their
   nika nama as required.


  If so, will  such  interference  have  consequences  of  such  gravity  as
potentially to engage the operation of Article 8?


26. I am satisfied that refusal of entry clearance would  have  consequences
   of such gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8.


If so, is such interference in accordance with the law?


27. I am satisfied that there is in place the legislative framework for  the
   decision giving rise to the interference with Article 8 rights  which  is
   precise and accessible enough for the Appellant to regulate their conduct
   by reference to it.


If so, is such  interference  necessary  in  a  democratic  society  in  the
interests of national security, public safety or the economic well-being  of
the country, for the prevention of disorder or crime, for the protection  of
health or morals, or for  the  protection  of  the  rights  and  freedom  of
others?


28. The interference does have legitimate aims since it  is  in  pursuit  of
   one of the legitimate aims set out in Article 8 (2) necessary in  pursuit
   of the economic well being of the country through the maintenance of  the
   requirements of a policy of immigration control. The state has the  right
   to control the entry of non nationals into its territory  and  Article  8
   does not mean that an individual can choose where  she  wishes  to  enjoy
   their private and family life.


If so, is such interference  proportionate  to  the  legitimate  public  end
sought to be achieved?


29. I have reminded myself that Lord Bingham in  Razgar  stated  that  in  a
   judgement on proportionality that the ultimate question is, "whether  the
   refusal of leave to enter or remain in circumstances where  the  life  of
   the family cannot reasonably be expected to be enjoyed elsewhere,  taking
   full account of all considerations weighing in  favour  of  the  refusal,
   prejudices the family life of the  applicant  in  a  manner  sufficiently
   serious to amount to a breach  of  the  fundamental  right  protected  by
   Article 8. If the answer to this question is affirmative, the refusal  is
   unlawful and the authority must so decide."


30. There is no evidence before me to suggest that the Sponsor,  who  is  of
   Pakistani origin himself could not enjoy family life  with  his  wife  in
   Pakistan. Moreover even if that were not the case there is no reason  why
   it would be disproportionate  to  expect  the  Appellant  to  provide  an
   original nika nama in support of a fresh application  as  these  are  the
   evidential requirements of Rules that govern entry clearance applications
   to  the  UK  and  underpin  the  system  of  immigration  control   whose
   maintenance  is  in  the  public  interest.  I  am  satisfied  that   the
   application failed to comply with the Immigration Rules and no compelling
   circumstances were identified why those Rules should not  be  applied  in
   the Appellants case in the usual way, there was nothing  disproportionate
   in applying the Rules in accordance with their  terms,  with  the  effect
   that Appellants application failed and she would have to make a new one.


31. I have considered the  issue  of  anonymity  in  the  present  instance.
   Neither party has sought a direction. The Appellant is an adult and not a
   vulnerable person. I see no reason to make any direction in this regard.


Decision

  32. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  as  containing  a
      material error of law. I substitute the following decision:

  33. The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules.

  34. This appeal is also dismissed on human rights grounds (Article 8)

Signed                                                              Date
20.3.2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

