
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07841/2015
                                                               HU/07061/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 29th November 2017                 |On 13th December 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES
                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                    (SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE)


                                   Between

                               MRS ALIYA BIBI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D O'Callaghan, Counsel,
     instructed by Fast Track Immigration Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by Aliya Bibi against two decisions to refuse her
    entry clearance to the UK as a spouse.  The appeals had an OA and an HU
    number and was heard at Hatton Cross on the 11th January this year by
    Judge Pedro.  The critical decision or refusal notice had been issued
    on the 12th February 2016 and so it is clear that there had been the
    best part of a year in which the case could be prepared.

 2. The Judge gave a lengthy and detailed decision.  He began by setting
    out the issues that he believed had to be decided, whether or not the
    marriage was genuine and subsisting, the question of employment and the
    ability to maintain the Appellant and the accommodation that was
    available.  Of course the primary and first issue that he would have to
    decide would be that of whether the marriage was genuine and
    subsisting.

 3. The Judge dealt with that from paragraph 8 onwards.  One of the issues
    that arose and concerned him was a lack of documentation that had been
    provided.  It was said before him that Skype call records had been
    produced to the Entry Clearance Officer but had not been returned.  He
    dealt with that issue at paragraph 13 of his decision where he noted
    that absence and said with regard to their not being returned to the
    Appellant if this were the case he "... could see no reason why the
    sponsor could not have reproduced/reprinted the evidence for the
    purposes of the appeal hearing before me".  He went on to say that Mr
    Irfan had indicated during his evidence he would have been able to do
    so but for some reason had not bothered.  The fact is that the Judge
    could only have regard to the evidence before him and no such evidence
    had been produced.  We would add this - if we accepted that those
    records existed we still had no evidence of their contents and any
    exercise would have been entirely speculative.

 4. This was not the only absence of evidence that the Judge had regard to.
     There were a selection of photocopied telephone cards, he referred to
    these in paragraph 10.  There appeared to be no more than were produced
    to the Respondent.  Those did not identify the persons involved in any
    conversations or their length although I understand that background
    evidence can be available.

 5. In paragraph 11 the Judge referred to the remittances.  It was noted
    there that remittances could have been printed from the computer as the
    witness indicated but that had not been done for the purposes of the
    hearing.  We found that explanation unsatisfactory.

 6. It is a Ground of Appeal that the Judge erred with regard to the case
    of Goudey on the issue of the genuine and subsisting nature of the
    marriage and that the Judge should have had regard to telephone phone
    cards.  The fact that he did have regard to the evidence but it does
    not necessarily follow that because those cards were produced it
    inevitably leads to the conclusion that is being forced on or erred on
    the Judge.

 7. The Judge looked at the evidence in the round.  He had made reference
    in regard to the evidence that was missing and concluded, for the
    reasons that he gave, that the evidence did not show that the marriage
    was genuine and subsisting.  We are satisfied having read paragraphs 8
    to 14 that that was the decision that was open to him on the evidence
    that was presented.  There was no error in the approach that he took
    and accordingly that would have disposed of the appeal in any event.

 8. The Judge did go onto consider the questions of maintenance and
    accommodation and noted correctly with regard to the employment of the
    Sponsor that there were significant differences; he set those out in
    paragraph 17.  In addition with regard to the accommodation he was
    faced with a similarly contradictory position whereby it appears that
    there were overlapping tenancies.  At paragraph 19 he noted that there
    was no corroborative documentary evidence of the payment of rent that
    could have been produced, and in the absence of that as well as the
    absence of any evidence that the Sponsor have actually lived in the
    addresses (whether council tax, utility bills or otherwise), we are not
    satisfied that he genuinely resided where he had stated.

 9. Those findings although not strictly necessary were open to the Judge
    and having found that the marriage was not genuine and subsisting it
    follows that article 8 was not engaged considering there was no family
    life.  For those reasons we are satisfied that the Judge did not err in
    law.  The decision was open to him.  The decision of the 25th January
    2017 stand as the disposal of this appeal.

10. We would that the effect of the decision of the Judge was to find that
    the evidence was insufficient to discharge the burden of proof. The
    findings did not amount to a positive rejection of the Appellant's
    case. On that basis it is open to the Appellant to re-apply with
    evidence that meets the requirements of Appendix FM and Appendix FM-SE
    and bearing in mind the observations of the Judge on evidence that
    might assist in supporting any application that is made.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 13th December 2017




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes

