
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/07643/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Determined on the papers                | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|                                        | On 19th March 2019                 |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                         NADA ABDULLAH OSMAN MANSOUR
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. By a decision dated 1 June 2018, I found that the  First-tier  Tribunal
    had erred in law such that its decision fell to be set aside:

    1.   I shall refer to the  appellant  as  the  respondent  and  to  the
    respondent as the appellant, as they appeared respectively  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The appellant, Nada Abdullah Osman  Mansour,  was
    born on 1 January 1977 and is a female citizen of Sudan.  The appellant
    had applied for admission  to  the  United  Kingdom  on  the  basis  of
    European Treaty rights.  She claimed to be married to Mr  Musa  Mohamed
    (hereafter referred to as the sponsor).  The appellant claims that  the
    sponsor is a citizen of the Netherlands and he  was  exercising  Treaty
    rights in the  United  Kingdom.   The  application  was  refused  by  a
    decision of the Entry Clearance Officer (Nairobi) dated 10 April  2014.
    The ECO did not accept that the marriage was valid given  that  is  was
    polygamous and also did not accept that the  sponsor  was  economically
    active in the United Kingdom.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal before which she argued that, in Sudan, polygamy is permitted.



    2.   Both parties agreed that the judge incorrectly relied on the Upper
    Tribunal decision in Kareem (Proxy Marriages  -  EU  Law)  [2014]  UKUT
    00024 (IAC).  Kareem has been overruled in the  Court  of  Appeal  (see
    Awuku [2017] EWCA Civ 178).  In the  circumstances,  I  set  aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision.  None  of  the  findings  of  fact  shall
    stand.

    3.   As regards disposal, I see no reason why this decision  cannot  be
    remade in the Upper Tribunal.  I refer to [21 - 23] of Awuku:

    Furthermore, I consider that the reasoning by which the Upper  Tribunal
    in Kareem arrived at its conclusions is flawed. In that case the  Upper
    Tribunal took as its starting point the proposition that rights of free
    movement and residence stem  directly  from  Union  citizenship,  which
    itself is derived from citizenship of a Member State. As a result,  the
    rights  of  free  movement  and  residence  of  a  Union  citizen   are
    intrinsically linked to that person's nationality of  a  Member  State.
    Furthermore, it is well established that under international law and EU
    law it is for each Member State to lay  down  the  conditions  for  the
    acquisition and loss of nationality. (See, for  example  Case  C-369/90
    Micheletti  [1992]  ECR  I-4239  at  [10]  and  [14]).   So   much   is
    uncontroversial. However, it does not follow that, because  a  person's
    rights of free movement  and  residence  are  linked  in  this  way  to
    nationality of a Member State, issues as to the marital status  of  his
    or her spouse or partner must also be governed by the law of his or her
    State of nationality. On the contrary, nationality and  marital  status
    are clearly distinguishable. Nationality is exclusively  a  matter  for
    the  law  of  the  Member  State  concerned.  Marital  status  and  its
    recognition in any given case, by contrast, are matters in  respect  of
    which the Directive contemplates that different Member States may  take
    different views. As a result, there is no need to defer to the  law  of
    the State of nationality  of  the  EU  national  when  determining  the
    marital status of his or her spouse or partner for the purposes of  the
    Citizens Directive.

    Moreover, the alternative route by which the Upper Tribunal  in  Kareem
    arrived at its conclusion is also open to objection. I accept  that  if
    it is open to a host Member State to determine by  its  law,  including
    its rules of private international  law,  whether  an  EU  citizen  had
    contracted a marriage, this could have an effect on freedom of movement
    and residence within the EU. A spouse would be able to move to a Member
    State which recognised the marriage but not to a Member State which did
    not. However, similar inequalities arise if the issue is determined  by
    the law of the State of nationality  of  the  EU  national.  Mr.  Malik
    provided  the  following  example.  Let  us  assume  that  German   law
    recognises proxy marriages in third states and  that  French  law  does
    not. In those circumstances, such spouses  of  German  nationals  would
    enjoy rights of free movement to and residence in  the  United  Kingdom
    (and indeed in other EU States) while such spouses of French  nationals
    would not. Whether marital status is determined by reference to the law
    of the home State or the law of the host State, it is at risk of  being
    determined  differently  by  different  Member  States.  This   is   an
    inevitable consequence of the fact that the Citizens Directive does not
    employ an independent rule for determining marital status. Once  again,
    it is not a reason for conferring the power to determine marital status
    on the law of the Member State of  nationality  of  the  qualifying  EU
    national.

    More fundamentally, I consider that in cases such as  the  present  the
    application of the rules of private international law  in  the  law  of
    England and Wales would not, on any view, result in any incompatibility
    with EU law. The law of England and Wales recognises proxy marriage  if
    valid by the lex loci celebrationis. Accordingly, a  spouse  of  an  EU
    national who has concluded such a marriage will  qualify  as  a  family
    member within Article 2 of the Directive. There  is  no  threat  to  EU
    rights here. As a result, there was simply  no  reason  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal in Kareem to create a new rule of  private  international  law
    requiring reference to the law of the State of the EU national.

    4.   I make the following directions with a view to  disposing  of  the
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal.

    A.   The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgation  on  24
    November 2016 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.

    B.   No later than 21 days from the date upon which the  parties  shall
    receive these directions, they shall file at the Tribunal and serve  on
    each other (and  send  by  email  to  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Lane:   [
           ] copies of any updating written evidence upon  which  they  may
    respectively intend to rely.

    C.   No later than 14  days  after  they  have  served  and  filed  any
    evidence in accordance with paragraph A above, the parties  shall  file
    at the Upper Tribunal and  serve  on  each  other  and  send  to  Upper
    Tribunal Judge  Lane  any  written  submissions  upon  which  they  may
    respectively intend to rely as regards the remaking  of  the  decision.
    Upon receipt of submissions or at the expiry  of  the  14  day  period,
    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane shall remake the decision on the basis of the
    evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  together  with  any  further
    updating evidence and without a further hearing.

 2. In accordance with the directions, the appellant's solicitors  sent  me
    an updated statement by the sponsor and written submissions prepared by
    Mr Richard Smyth. I have received no  further  communication  from  the
    Secretary of State. I have proceeded on the basis that  the  respondent
    does not take issue with the contents of the latest  statement  of  the
    sponsor. I have determined the appeal on the papers.

 3. As Mr Smyth's submissions state, the appeal turns on  the  question  of
    the domicile of the parties to the  marriage,  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor, as at the date of marriage, June 2012. The  sponsor  has  been
    permanently resident in the United Kingdom since 2015.  The  fact  that
    the appellant is making this application  which  will,  if  successful,
    result in her joining the sponsor in the United Kingdom would appear to
    indicate that the domicile of choice of both appellant and sponsor  the
    present time is the United Kingdom and not Sudan. However, that was not
    necessarily the case in 2012. At that time, the evidence clearly  shows
    that the appellant's domicile could  only  be  Sudan,  her  country  of
    nationality where she had resided since birth.  The  sponsor  had  some
    years earlier obtained humanitarian protection in the  Netherlands  but
    he claims that he has had achieved little, if any, integration  in  the
    society of that country; he does not and has not owned  property  there
    and, in 2012, he had spent only  a  matter  of  months  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  His  permanent  home  was  in  Sudan  where  he  married  the
    appellant.

 4. Domicile depends on both intention and residence. On the evidence  that
    has been produced, I am satisfied that in June 2012 the sponsor resided
    in Sudan and his domicile as evidenced by his intention as to where you
    then intended to reside and to focus his life was also Sudan. There  is
    no question, on the evidence, that his domicile at that  time  was  the
    United Kingdom and, although he had been achieved citizenship following
    a grant of humanitarian protection in the Netherlands, every indication
    was that his domicile at that time was Sudan.

 5. The appellant has produced evidence to show that,  notwithstanding  the
    fact that the sponsor's previous marriage had not been  dissolved,  the
    appellant and sponsor validly married in  Sudan  in  June  2012.  I  am
    satisfied, on the evidence, that the marriage was legally entered  into
    by the lex loci celebrationis. Consequently, for the reasons succinctly
    summarised by Mr Smyth in his submissions at [16], the appellant  is  a
    'family member' of the sponsor  a  Dutch  national  who  is  exercising
    Treaty rights in the United Kingdom as a worker. It  follows  that  the
    appeal should be allowed and that the Entry Clearance  Officer  should,
    pursuant to Regulation 12, issue to the appellant an EEA family permit.






Notice of Decision

 6. The appeal against the decision  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is
    allowed.






Signed                              Date 2 February 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane











