
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07854/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 August 2016                    |On 15 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                MR Imran Ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, a Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   The appellant in this case is  the  respondent  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FTT), i.e. the Secretary of State for the Home Department.  I
    will continue to refer to the respondent thus notwithstanding that  she
    is the appellant before the Upper Tribunal.

2.   The respondent appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  with  permission  of  a
    Judge of First-tier Tribunal Kimnell.  Having reviewed the decision  of
    the FTT Tribunal Judge Cox promulgated on 22 March  2016,  who  allowed
    the  appeal  under  the  Immigration  Rules  in  respect  of  a  spouse
    application, Judge of First-tier Tribunal Kimnell  found  it  at  least
    arguable that the judge had failed to give any reasons for his  finding
    that the applicant met the requirements of Appendix FM.   According  to
    paragraph 3 of the decision the ECO was satisfied the appellant met the
    requirements of Appendix FM but neither the notice of decision nor  ECM
    review contained any such concession.  The  respondent's  decision  was
    therefore based solely under paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration Rules
    which allowed the Immigration Judge to peremptorily  refuse  settlement
    under the relevant Rules on the basis that the appellant had "contrived
    in a significant way to frustrate the Immigration Rules by overstaying,
    absconding or not meeting  a  reporting  restriction  or  making  of  a
    frivolous application".  The respondent also rejected any human  rights
    application under Article 8 of the ECHR.  Judge of First-tier  Tribunal
    Kimnell noted that the  finding  of  the  Immigration  Judge  that  the
    appellant met the requirements of the Rules  consisted  of  "one  line"
    with no reasoning.

The Hearing

3.    At  the  hearing  Mrs  Pettersen,  a  Home  Office  Presenting  Office
    explained that whilst the respondent had not challenged the decision of
    the Immigration Judge under paragraph 320(11) of the Immigration  Rules
    her grounds did take issue with the finding that on the totality of the
    evidence he was  satisfied  at  the  date  of  the  decision  that  the
    appellant met all the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The
    respondent  noted  the  absence  of  any  finding  in  respect  of  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  being  met  and  criticised  the
    Immigration Judge for giving no or no adequate reasons for  a  material
    part of his decision.  The closest the Immigration Judge came to making
    a clear finding was at paragraph 19, where he noted that the respondent
    did not appear to have taken into account the appellant's  family  life
    with the sponsor. The Immigration Judge  went  on  to  make  a  further
    finding at paragraph 20 that the sponsor had  indicated  that  she  was
    working very hard to ensure that she met all the financial requirements
    of the Rules.  This was not adequate reasoning.

4.   Accordingly, Mrs Pettersen maintained that the  application  for  entry
    clearance ought to be remitted to the respondent  for  him  to  make  a
    fresh decision on the merits, as the ECO had determined the application
    peremptorily without consideration of the merits, because he considered
    the application qualified for refusal on the grounds that the appellant
    had contrived to frustrate the requirements of the Immigration Rules. I
    noted that the ECO had also made  findings  under  Article  8  but  Mrs
    Pettersen thought the decision of the ECO adequately  dealt  with  that
    and she noted that there was no cross  appeal.    There  was  no  cross
    appeal before me on behalf of the appellant.

Findings

5.   Having carefully considered the grounds put forward by  the  respondent
    upon which permission has been given and heard the submissions  by  Mrs
    Pettersen I agree that the decision of the FTT does not contain any  or
    any adequate reasoning for the decision  that  the  appellant  met  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules  and  specifically  Appendix  FM.
    Appendix FM contains detailed requirements before settlement  into  the
    UK which ought to have been gone through.

6.   No challenge is made to the finding in relation to the ECHR.

7.   Mrs Pettersen urged on  the  Tribunal  an  order  that  the  matter  be
    remitted back to the ECO for further consideration.  She  indicated  it
    was likely that  the  ECO  would  request  further  information  before
    reaching a decision.  I consider that to be the correct  course  having
    regard to the fact that the FTT  made  no  reasoned  decision  on  this
    important aspect of the case.

Notice of Decision

A material error of law is found in the decision of the FTT.   I  remit  the
matter to the ECO for a  fresh  decision  on  whether  the  requirements  of
Appendix FM were met at the date of the decision.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury     15 September 2016



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury     15 September 2016


