
[pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07213/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6th January 2016                  |On 14th January 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                           miss Arfa Akter Anguma
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Kamrul, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh whose appeal was dismissed by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Meah in a decision promulgated on  15th  June
    2015.

 2. The grounds of application were lodged primarily on the basis that  the
    Respondent had, in fact, issued the Appellant  with  a  Certificate  of
    Entitlement to the Right of Abode on 24th March 2015.   As  such  there
    had been a procedural error in the case in that given the Appellant had
    been issued a Certificate of Entitlement the appeal  should  have  been
    withdrawn.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted and in a Rule 24 notice the Respondent
    pointed out that the judge was clearly unaware of  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had been issued with a Certificate  of  Entitlement  and  was
    therefore wrong to proceed with the appeal in the absence of parties.

 4. The Rule 24 notice goes on to say that  the  appeal  should  have  been
    deemed to have been abandoned pursuant to Section 104(4A) of  the  2002
    Act.

 5. Before me the parties agreed that the  decision  of  the  judge  should
    simply be set aside and the  appeal  treated  as  abandoned.   This  is
    undoubtedly the correct outcome.  There is no  need  for  an  anonymity
    order.

Notice of Decision

 6. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

 7. I set aside the decision.

 8. The appeal is treated as abandoned.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

