

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: OA079202015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on    20.06.2017                              |25  on 25.07.2017            |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                                Nadia BALOUAH
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    PARIS

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the appellant:  Andrew Otchie (counsel instructed by Tremont Midwest)
For the respondent: Mr Sebastian Kandola (on 20 June); Miss Julie Isherwood
(on 24 July)

                           DETERMINATION & REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Ian Howard), sitting at Hatton Cross on 17 August 2016,
    to  an appeal against refusal of a wife visa, by a citizen of  Morocco,
    born 1988.

 2. The sponsor, also a citizen  of  Morocco,  had  entered  into  a  civil
    partnership with a Frenchman in this country in 2008,  following  which
    he remained in this country on an EEA residence card. In  2013  he  and
    the appellant married in Morocco; but it was not  till  2014  that  his
    civil partnership was dissolved. The respondent took the point that  he
    had not been free to marry the appellant when he did.


 3. This was one of the two points on which the judge dismissed the appeal,
    after finding that the appellant and the sponsor did  have  a  'genuine
    and subsisting relationship'.  The  other  involved  the  lack  of  the
    required TB certificate at the date of the decision. Since there is one
    now, and the decision involved the validity of the  parties'  marriage,
    that question needs to be decided, whether or not it could  affect  the
    result under the Immigration Rules.

 4. The judge dealt with the validity point in this way:

   11. [The applicant maintains] that it is a valid  Moroccan  marriage  as
       the sponsor's civil partnership, extant at the date of the marriage,
       would not be recognised in Morocco at all. I  have  no  evidence  to
       support this contention beyond  the  appellant's  assertion  in  her
       grounds of appeal.

   12. The marriage would not be recognised in the  UK  by  virtue  of  the
       civil partnership still being extant and in the absence of  evidence
       I must treat the legislation of the home country as being  the  same
       as that in the UK. Accordingly I am not satisfied  the  marriage  is
       legal.

    The grounds of appeal challenged his decision  on  the  basis  set  out
    there; but permission was given on the other point pleaded,  which  was
    that, contrary to the judge's paragraph 5, the sponsor  had  been  "...
    available to give oral evidence, had he been called to do so".

 5. While the grounds referred to Morocco being governed  by  shari'a  law,
    which does not recognize civil partnerships between  homosexuals,  they
    made no attempt to deal with the relevant  private  international  law.
    Under that, while questions of formal validity are governed by the  lex
    loci celebrationis[1], questions of capacity are to be decided  by  the
    lex domicilii[2]  of the parties; and each party must have the relevant
    capacity.

 6. It follows that, before the judge made any assumptions, right or wrong,
    about the law of Morocco, he needed to investigate the domicile of  the
    parties, in order to decide which was the relevant law.  While  it  was
    entirely for Mr Otchie to decide whether to call the sponsor or not, it
    was for the judge to make that inquiry.

 7. Mr Kandola argued that the judge had  nevertheless  reached  the  right
    result, if by the wrong route. In order to decide whether that is so or
    not, I need to reach my own views on the relevant law, so far as I  can
    without further evidence. The appellant clearly retains her domicile of
    origin in Morocco; and I am quite prepared to take judicial notice that
    the law of Morocco is based on shari'a, and  would  not  recognize  the
    sponsor's civil partnership. It follows that the appellant was free  to
    marry him when she did.

 8. The position, so far as the sponsor is concerned, is more  complicated.
    If he had  become  a  British  citizen,  then,  although  that  is  not
    conclusive evidence of his acquiring a domicile  of  choice,  it  could
    safely be assumed, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, that  he
    was at the time of the relevant events domiciled in England and  Wales,
    and  so  unable  to  marry  till  his  civil  partnership  was  finally
    dissolved.



 9. However, the sponsor's status in this country  depends  on  his  former
    relationship with an EEA citizen: on that basis, he may or may  not  be
    entitled to permanent residence. When I  raised  the  question  of  his
    domicile on 20 June, Mr Otchie invited  me  to  take  it  up  with  the
    sponsor directly; so I did. The sponsor very frankly told  me  that  he
    wanted to stay in this country, and looked forward to growing old here.
    While those were answers on which I might have taken the view  that  he
    had acquired a domicile of choice here, I decided that, as,  partly  by
    Mr Otchie's fault, and partly by the judge's, he had not so far had  an
    opportunity to give full oral evidence on this point, he ought  now  to
    be given one.

10. As it turned out, the documents submitted  with  the  visa  application
    form included a permanent residence card, issued on 28 May 2013:  this,
    together with his own  statement,  amounts  to  clear  and  unequivocal
    evidence that he had acquired a domicile of choice in this  country  by
    then. His marriage to the appellant took place on 6 September 2013, and
    the dissolution of his civil partnership  not  till  2014  (conditional
    order on 30 July, absolute 21 October).

11. Mr Otchie did not seek to put forward any further evidence or  argument
    on this point; so it follows that the basis for the visa application in
    this case was misconceived, since at  the  date  of  the  marriage  the
    sponsor was not free to marry by the law of  his  domicile,  since  his
    civil partnership had not yet been dissolved.

12. This of course forms no  bar  to  the  sponsor  going  through  another
    ceremony of marriage with the  appellant,  in  any  jurisdiction  which
    recognized a marriage taking place in those circumstances;  or  to  her
    making a fresh application on whatever basis may be available  to  her.
    In those circumstances, unless there were good reason for  saying  that
    things had changed, the entry clearance officer would  be  expected  to
    follow  the  judge's  findings  about  the  'genuine   and   subsisting
    relationship' between the appellant and the sponsor.

First-tier decision set aside

Appeal dismissed




                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                Signed: 24.07.2017


                               -----------------------
[1]    law of the place of celebration
[2]    law of the domicile

