

                                              [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/07103/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester             |Determination promulgated|
|On July 22, 2014                |On August 4, 2014        |
|                                |                         |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         MRS AMNA IDRIS MUSA ZAKARIA

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting
      Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr Dohkia (Legal Representative)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the  respondent  is  the  appealing  party,  I  shall,  in  the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.


 2. The appellant, born July 7, 1940, is a citizen of  Sudan.  On  November
    26, 2013 she applied for entry clearance under paragraph 319V(i)(a)  of
    the Immigration Rules. She claimed that she was over the age of 65  and
    wholly dependent on her son, Noorraddin Musa, for financial support and
    she had nobody else to turn to.

 3. The respondent refused her application on  February  19,  2013  on  the
    basis the appellant did not meet the Rules.

 4. On March 15, 2013 the appellant appealed under  Section  82(1)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 5. The matter was listed before Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Simpson
    (hereinafter referred to as "the FtTJ") on  March  7,  2014  and  in  a
    determination promulgated on March 21, 2014 she allowed the appellant's
     appeal finding the appellant was at least  65  years  of  age.  Having
    allowed it under the Rules she also allowed it under article 8 ECHR for
    the same reasons.

 6. The respondent appealed that decision on April 4, 2014.  Permission  to
    appeal was granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Cheales  on  May
    13, 2014. She found the FtTJ may have erred because she  did  not  give
    adequate reasons for finding the appellant was over the age of 65.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 7. Mr McVeety submitted the FtTJ had given no reasons  for  accepting  the
    appellant was aged over 65. When the sponsor applied for asylum he told
    the immigration officer that his father had told  him  his  mother  had
    been born in the early 1950's. This would have put the appellant at the
    very most 63 and that was if she was born in 1950. The FtTJ  found  she
    was over 65 because her passport had a date that suggested she was born
    in 1940 that was based on a doctor's assessment despite  the  fact  the
    report was not produced. He further submitted the FtTJ made no findings
    under article 8 and did not consider the approach set  out  in  Gulshan
    [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC). He submitted the decision should be set aside.




 8. Mr Dokhia submitted the FtTJ allowed the appeal  because  she  accepted
    the evidence of the passport and  she  was  entitled  to  do  this.  He
    accepted that if there was an error under the  Immigration  Rules  then
    there was also an error on article 8 ECHR.


    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT


 9. The FtTJ was not helped by a paucity of evidence but what she did  have
    was the sponsor's evidence that his mother was born in the 1950's. This
    evidence was given at a time when he  was  estranged  from  his  family
    having fled Sudan and was evidence that should  have  been  given  more
    weight especially as the only evidence to support the date of birth  in
    the passport was not submitted. The date in the passport was not  based
    on what the appellant claimed was her date of birth but was based on  a
    doctor's report. Like any age assessment report it needs to be properly
    considered and in this case the FtTJ was  not  provided  with  it.  Her
    finding in paragraph [17] that she must be at least 65 was without  any
    basis. She concluded she was 65 because-

        "... her minimum age was 60 and she could be any age  between  that
        and 74. Consequently, it is more likely than not she is over 65."

10. There is no legal or any other reasoning for this conclusion especially
    in light of the fact the sponsor had told the  authorities  his  mother
    was born in the 1950's.


11. I therefore find there was a material error  both  in  respect  of  the
    decision under the Immigration Rules and article 8 ECHR.


12. Having identified an error in  law  the  parties  agreed  that  if  the
    appellant could not satisfy paragraph 319V HC 395 then she  would  have
    to satisfy Section EC-DR of Appendix FM of the  Immigration  Rules.  In
    particular, the appellant would  have  to  show  she  satisfied  either
    Section E-ECDR 2.4 or E-ECDR 2.5 of  Appendix  FM.  Alternatively,  she
    would have to show there  were  good  arguable  grounds  or  compelling
    circumstances not  sufficiently  recognised  under  Appendix  FM  where
    refusal would  result  in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences  for  the
    appellant.

13. Mr Musa was called to give oral evidence. He adopted his statements and
    confirmed:

     a. The appellant would have no one to look after her or  take  her  to
        the market.
     b. Whilst she was not disabled she could not carry out everyday tasks.
     c. She was living in a temporary  apartment  in  Khartoum  whilst  her
        appeal was pending. She was previously living in a refugee camp.
     d. His sister lived in a refugee camp with her husband and  culturally
        her husband had refused to look after appellant
     e. She had given birth late in life, which was why she  had  only  had
        three children.




    SUBMISSIONS


14. Mr McVeety submitted that  little  weight  could  be  attached  to  the
    passport because the date of birth was not based on knowledge but on  a
    doctor's report that had never been produced. The sponsor had told  the
    authorities at a time when his mother's age did not matter that she was
    born in the early 1950's  and  there  was  nothing  to  undermine  that
    evidence now. If she did not qualify  under  paragraph  319V  then  she
    would have to show she satisfied either Section E-ECDR  2.4  or  E-ECDR
    2.5. No medical evidence had been supplied to show she  was  unable  to
    perform everyday tasks and there was no evidence she  needed  any  care
    with or without financial support. If the application was refused under
    the Immigration Rules then he submitted there was no reason to consider
    the case under article 8 because in this appeal the Rules  covered  the
    article 8 arguments.


15. Mr Dohkia accepted there was no age assessment report but submitted the
    passport was good evidence of her age. In the alternative he  submitted
    there  was  evidence  from  the  sponsor  about  his  mother's   living
    conditions and her ability to look after herself.  He  submitted  there
    was evidence to show she would be unable to look after  herself,  cook,
    shop or clean. Whilst his sister lived in Sudan her husband  would  not
    allow her to look after her and consequently she satisfied  the  Rules.
    If the Rules were not met then he submitted it would be  harsh  not  to
    allow her appeal under article 8 because she  was  likely  to  be  left
    alone because his wife's appeal had already been allowed.

    CONSIDERATION OF SUBSTANTIVE APPEAL

16. The issues in this appeal were as follows:-


     a. Was the appellant aged 65 or over?
     b. Was the appellant able to care for herself?
     c. Did she have any disability  or  illness  that  required  long-term
        personal care to perform everyday tasks?
     d. Even with the sponsor's practical and  financial  support  was  the
        appellant unable to obtain the required  level  of  care  in  Sudan
        because it as either not available or unaffordable.

17. If the appellant could show she was  65  or  over  then  the  remaining
    questions became irrelevant because she  would  be  entitled  to  entry
    clearance under paragraph 319V HC 395.


18. Unfortunately, there was no evidence to support the  appellant's  claim
    she was over 65 or born in 1940 as claimed. If the appellant's evidence
    was she knew her exact age then some weight could be  attached  to  the
    passport but the evidence presented to both myself  and  the  FtTJ  was
    that she went to see a doctor who provided  a  report  to  support  her
    claim to have been born in July 1940. This report was not produced  and
    in order to place any reliability on  the  age  in  the  passport  that
    report would have to be  considered  and  balanced  against  any  other
    evidence. The only other evidence was the sponsor's evidence  that  she
    was born in the early 1950's,  which  of  course  made  her  under  65.
    Although the sponsor's latest witness statement asks  me  to  place  no
    weight on what he had been told I find I am unable to do  that.  He  is
    not an expert and he gave the best evidence he could  when  questioned.
    In the absence of any other evidence I find the appellant is under  the
    age of 65 and she cannot therefore succeed under paragraph 319V HC 395.

19. In paragraph [17] above I set out what the appellant needed to show  in
    order to meet either Section E-ECDR 2.4 or E-ECDR 2.5 of Appendix FM.

20. Sadly, no medical evidence has been produced to show the  appellant  is
    unable to care for herself. I  would  expect  in  such  an  application
    medical evidence to support the contention she was unable to  care  for
    herself or perform everyday tasks. She produced no evidence to show she
    had a disability and in fact the sponsor confirmed she did not  have  a
    disability in his oral evidence to me.

21. Just because the appellant is over 60 does not mean she would be unable
    to care for herself or perform everyday tasks. She was currently  being
    financially supported and living in Khartoum. I accept her daughter-in-
    law would provide support and perhaps she will not remain there but the
    burden of proof is on the appellant to demonstrate on balance that  she
    comes within either Section E-ECDR 2.4 or E-ECDR 2.5.

22. The only evidence I have is written statements  of  witnesses  and  the
    oral evidence of the sponsor. If I had been provided with some  medical
    evidence then the appellant may well have  been  able  to  satisfy  the
    aforementioned Rules. I do not find the sponsor's evidence  or  written
    statements demonstrate the appellant could meet the Rules.

23. The appellant cannot satisfy Section E-ECDR 2.4 because she has  failed
    to demonstrate she requires long-term personal care to perform everyday
    tasks.

24. The appellant has also failed to show  she  is  in  need  of  care  and
    consequently the appellant cannot meet Section E-ECDR 2.5.

25. I dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

26. I am invited to consider the appeal under article 8 ECHR. The Courts in
    MM (Lebanon) & Ors, R (on the application of) v Secretary of State  for
    the  Home  Department  &  Anor  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  985  considered  the
    approaches in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC) and Nagre [2013] EWHC 720
    Admin and confirmed the approach to be taken.

  27. The Court of Appeal in MM examined numerous authorities and stated:


         "128. ... In Nagre the new  rules  were  themselves  attempting  to
         cover, generally,  circumstances  where  an  individual  should  be
         allowed to remain in the UK on Article 8 grounds... Nagre does  not
         add anything to the debate,  save  for  the  statement  that  if  a
         particular person is outside the rule then he has  to  demonstrate,
         as a preliminary to a consideration outside the rule, that  he  has
         an arguable case that there may be good grounds for granting  leave
         to remain outside  the  rules.    I  cannot  see  much  utility  in
         imposing this  further,  intermediary,  test.    If  the  applicant
         cannot satisfy the rule, then there either is or  there  is  not  a
         further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be  determined  by  the
         relevant decision-maker.


         134. Where the relevant group  of  Immigration  Rules,  upon  their
         proper construction, provide a "complete code" for dealing  with  a
         person's Convention rights in the context of  a  particular  IR  or
         statutory provision, such as in the case  of  "foreign  criminals",
         then the balancing exercise and the way the various factors are  to
         be taken into account  in  an  individual  case  must  be  done  in
         accordance with that  code,  although  references  to  "exceptional
         circumstances"   in   the   code   will   nonetheless   entail    a
         proportionality  exercise.    But  if   the   relevant   group   of
         Immigration  Rules  is  not  such  a  "complete  code"   then   the
         proportionality test will be more at large, albeit  guided  by  the
         Huang tests and UK and Strasbourg case law.


         159. ... It seems clear from the statement of Lord Dyson MR  in  MF
         (Nigeria) and Sales J in Nagre that a court would have to  consider
         first whether the  new  MIR  and  the  "Exceptional  circumstances"
         created a "complete code" and,  if  they  did,  precisely  how  the
         "proportionality test"  would  be  applied  by  reference  to  that
         "code".


         162. ... Firstly, paragraph GEN.1.1 of Appendix FM states that  the
         provision of the family route  "takes  into  account  the  need  to
         safeguard and promote the welfare of children  in  the  UK",  which
         indicates that the  Secretary  of  State  has  had  regard  to  the
         statutory duty.   Secondly, there is no legal requirement that  the
         Immigration Rules should provide that the  best  interests  of  the
         child should be determinative.   Section 55 is not a  "trump  card"
         to be played whenever the interests of a child arise..."


  28. I have to consider whether a refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably
      harsh consequences  for  the  individual  such  that  refusal  of  the
      application would not be proportionate.


  29. I have found the appellant is under 65 years of age and  I  have  also
      found the appellant has failed to demonstrate any of the needs set out
      in the Rules. In reality there is nothing else to consider that  would
      make the appellant's claim exceptional.  If  she  met  the  Rules  her
      appeal would be allowed.

  30. Based on the evidence presented I am  unable  to  find  good  arguable
      grounds or compelling circumstances not sufficiently recognised  under
      Appendix  FM  where  refusal  would  result  in  unjustifiably   harsh
      consequences for the appellant.

  31. In these circumstances I find there is no basis to allow  this  appeal
      under article 8 ECHR.

    DECISION


32. There is a material error of law and I set aside the original decision.




33. I have remade the decision and I dismiss  the  appeal  under  both  the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 ECHR.

34. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended) the  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order has been made and no request for an order was submitted to me.


Signed:                           Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as the appeal did not succeed.

Signed:                      Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
