
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07347/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 7 November 2016                   |On 8 November 2016                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                                 Haroon Azam
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  The Entry Clearance Officer in Islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Z. Nasim, instructed by Legal Rights Partnership
For the respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Ms Fijiwala conceded that  the  only  issue  before  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge was  whether  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
       relationship between the appellant and  his  sponsor  and  that  the
       couple  intended  to  live  permanently  together.   The  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge found in favour of the appellant on this score.
    2. Ms Fijiwala also conceded that the financial  and  English  language
       requirements were not in issue as the respondent had  accepted  they
       had been met.  Accordingly, the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision
       that there was no evidence to establish them  and  that  the  appeal
       failed for that reason alone amounted to an error on a point of law.
    3. I was invited by both parties to find there was an error of law  and
       to re-make the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal  in  line
       with the First-tier Tribunal Judge's sustainable  findings  of  fact
       that the appellant had made out his case to  be  in  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship.

DECISION

 1. The Judge made an error on a point of law and I re-make the decision in
    the following terms:
        a. the appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules;
        b. having made out the requirements of the Immigration Rules, the
           appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.



                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                                             7 November 2016
