
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07711/2014
                                                               OA/07728/2014
                                                               OA/07729/2014
                                                               OA/07730/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 April 2017                              |On 23 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

              miss prudence beatrice kusindika - 1st appellant
                miss grace greacia kusindika - 2nd appellant
               master gedeon harvey kusindika - 3rd appellant
                    master Henri Makileki - 4th appellant

                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Burrett, instructed by Nandy & Co
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS


INTRODUCTION

 1. The above appellants who were born January 1997, August 1998, May  2000
    and October 2003 are nationals of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo.
    They have been granted permission to appeal the  determination  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal who dismissed their appeals against the refusal  of
    entry clearance to join Naphta Dingangu in the United Kingdom (referred
    to as the sponsor). She is also a national of the  DRC  where  she  was
    born in December 1984.

 2. The sponsor came to the United Kingdom  on  22  October  2011  and  was
    granted asylum by the Secretary of State on 28  August  2013.  She  was
    pregnant when she reached the UK and her  daughter,  Bright,  was  born
    here on 3 May 2012. Another daughter, Brielle  (who  had  succeeded  on
    appeal to the FtT against refusal of her  entry  clearance  application
    having applied at the same time as the appellants) arrived in the UK on
    23 June 2015. The family now live in Tottenham London together with the
    sponsor's current partner. At time the applications for entry clearance
    were refused,  the  sponsor  was  living  with  alone  with  Bright  in
    Smethwick Birmingham.

 3. The first three appellants applied for entry on  the  basis  that  they
    were the sponsor's siblings and had formed part of her household before
    her flight to the United Kingdom.  The entry clearance officer  refused
    their applications under paragraph 319X of the Rules on the basis  that
    they were not related to the sponsor as claimed (319X(i)). Furthermore,
    he contended that these appellants had not provided evidence  of  their
    own  circumstances  in  the  DRC,  including  a  lack  of  evidence  to
    demonstrate they would be unable to continue with their current  living
    arrangements.  He  was  not  satisfied  that  there  were  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which  made  their  exclusion
    undesirable (paragraph 319X(ii)). The entry clearance officer  was  not
    satisfied as to the sponsor's ability to  accommodate  the  appellants.
    No evidence had been provided as to the size of the property which  she
    occupied in Birmingham nor was  there  a  written  authority  from  the
    landlord.  The entry clearance officer considered there was no evidence
    of the sponsor's income or financial circumstances and accordingly  was
    not satisfied that these  appellants  would  be  adequately  maintained
    without recourse to public funds (paragraph 319(vi), (vii)).

 4. The fourth appellant (and  Brielle)  applied  on  the  basis  that  the
    sponsor  is  their  mother.  Their  applications  were  refused   under
    paragraph 352D(i) of the  Immigration  Rules  as  the  entry  clearance
    officer did not accept that they were not related as claimed.

 5. Following a hearing on  2  February  2015,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Dhaliwal allowed the appeal by Brielle on the basis that  she  was  the
    daughter of the sponsor.  She dismissed the appeals  by  the  remaining
    appellants.  It was accepted by the  appellants'  representatives  that
    the fourth appellant was not the child of the sponsor (as  admitted  in
    the sponsor's first witness statement) and,  instead,  it  was  claimed
    that he was her brother. The sponsor gave evidence at the hearing.  The
    judge had before her a volume  of  material  which  included  DNA  test
    reports.  She was however not persuaded that the four  appellants  were
    the siblings of the sponsor and furthermore was not persuaded that  she
    could adequately maintain and  accommodate  them  without  recourse  to
    public funds.  She also  considered  the  cases  failed  on  article  8
    grounds as there was "no good arguable case on which to  consider  this
    [sic]".

 6. By a decision dated 16 March 2017, the President of the Upper  Tribunal
    sitting with Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mahmood set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal and gave directions for the  re-making.   It
    is on that basis that the appeals have come before me.

 7. It is the appellants' case that their father passed  away  in  February
    2002 due to malaria and ill health.  Following a  traditional  marriage
    in July 2002, the sponsor lived with her husband  in  his  house  where
    Brielle was born.  The appellants' mother died in  September  2005  and
    thereafter the appellants lived with the sponsor and her husband.

 8. The sponsor explains in her first witness statement  dated  16  January
    2015 that she treated the fourth appellant as her son; she did not want
    him to think that his mother had passed away "when he was very  young".
    Since she had left, a friend of hers called Amathou  had  been  looking
    after her siblings and Brielle although the sponsor had  provided  them
    with financial support. That friend has informed her that she is unable
    to care for them as she has commitments of her own.

 9. In a more recent statement dated 12 April 2017,  the  sponsor  explains
    that that her friend is continually pestering her to take the  children
    as she is unable to cope and has family pressures.  She  is  unable  to
    look after the sponsor's siblings in the way that she looks  after  her
    own children. Prudence is suffering from a mental stress condition  and
    had not been looked after properly.  A letter dated 4 April  2017  from
    Amathou has been provided in which she refers to her house having  only
    two rooms and that she has three children of her own; she had only  one
    child when she took the appellants in. The sponsor is asked to  find  a
    solution for the appellants otherwise they would be  "on  the  street".
    The sponsor also explains in her second statement that she is currently
    working through an agency and looking for permanent employment.

10. The grounds of challenge to the FtT were in  terms  that  DNA  evidence
    would be provided shortly although it is argued that  evidence  of  the
    relationships had been submitted  and  that  article  8  had  not  been
    considered as " it should have been".

11. The rule relevant  to  applications  by  children  related  to  someone
    recognised as a refugee is paragraph 319X is in these terms:

         "319X.   The requirements to be met by a person  seeking  leave  to
               enter or remain in the United Kingdom  as  the  child  of  a
               relative with limited  leave  to  remain  as  a  refugee  or
               beneficiary of humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom
               are that:
               (i)    the applicant is seeking leave to enter or remain  to
                    join a relative with limited leave to enter or remain as
                    a refugee or person with humanitarian protection; and:
               (ii)    the relative has limited leave in the United Kingdom
                    as a refugee or beneficiary of  humanitarian  protection
                    and there are serious and  compelling  family  or  other
                    considerations  which  make  exclusion  of   the   child
                    undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made for
                    the child's care; and
               (iii)  the relative is not the parent of the  child  who  is
                    seeking leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom;
                    and
               (iv)   the applicant is under the age of 18; and
               (v)    the applicant is not leading an independent life,  is
                    unmarried and is not a civil partner, and has not formed
                    an independent family unit; and
               (vi)   the applicant can, and will, be accommodated
                    adequately by the relative the child is seeking to join
                    without recourse to public funds in accommodation which
                    the relative in the United Kingdom owns or occupies
                    exclusively; and
               (vii)  the applicant can, and will, be maintained adequately
                    by the relative in the United Kingdom without recourse
                    to public funds; and
               (viii) if seeking leave to enter, the applicant holds a
                    valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry in this
                    capacity or, if seeking leave to remain, holds valid
                    leave to remain in this or another capacity."

THE ISSUES

12. During a review of matters at the beginning  of  the  hearing,  in  the
    light of the DNA reports, Mrs Aboni accepted that the first, second and
    third appellants are the siblings of the  sponsor.  She  also  accepted
    that although the fourth is related to her,  he  is  not  her  brother.
    Despite her reservations about the precise  blood  tie  of  Henri,  Mrs
    Aboni nevertheless accepted that that the  sponsor  was  the  de  facto
    mother of all four appellants and that they constituted a  family  unit
    before she came to the UK.

13. Mr Burrett accepted that having regard to the impact of s  85A  of  the
    2002 Act, based on the circumstances at the time of the ECO's decision,
    the maintenance requirements of the rule could not be met. The  sponsor
    was in receipt of housing benefit and income support. She  was  already
    living here with Bright who was born after arrival and would be  joined
    by five children. There was no evidence that the sponsor  received  any
    other income and so the  four  remaining  appellants'  financial  needs
    would inevitably result in recourse to public funds.

14. A tenancy agreement was provided to the entry clearance officer  for  a
    property in Smethwick but no report had been  provided  indicating  the
    extent of the accommodation. Even allowing for the fact that  three  of
    the four appellants are female, due to their ages, without evidence  of
    the size and number of rooms available,  Mr  Burrett  acknowledged  the
    difficulties this aspect faced. He relied therefore  on  grounds  under
    article 8 reflecting the basis of the initial  challenge  to  the  FtT.
    This was also in line with Mrs Aboni's report that an inability to meet
    the rule was acknowledged at an earlier hearing in 2016.

15. I heard evidence from the sponsor whose  initial  nervousness  subsided
    after she was given a break. Mr Burrett had  no  questions  apart  from
    inviting  her  to  adopt  her  two  statements  as  true.  Under  cross
    examination, the sponsor explained the following matters:

      a) Her siblings first went to live with Amathou in Kisanto  after  she
         had told one of the guards in her prison to take them to  her.   By
         the time the appellants made their applications for entry clearance
         Amathou's  household,  including  the  appellants,  had  moved   to
         Kinshasa.  They were not attending school when  those  applications
         were  made,  the  sponsor  explaining  that  they  had  never  been
         schooled.  This was because of the cost which she could not afford.

      b) None of the appellants had any health issues in 2014.

      c) At the time of application, it was proposed  the  appellants  would
         live with her in Smethwick.  Other than Bright, there  was  no  one
         else living with her then.  As to how she was going to maintain the
         appellants, the sponsor explained  that  when  she  first  came  to
         England, the Job centre had given  her  the  opportunity  to  learn
         English.  As to how she would afford and feed them,  she  explained
         how she had been "dividing" her money and forwarding funds.

16. Mr Burrett had no questions arising out of these responses.

17. My questions for clarification  related  to  the  statements  that  the
    appellants  had  relied  on  in  the  First-tier   Tribunal   and   the
    circumstances of Amathou.  As to the former, the sponsor explained that
    the appellants had done statements which  had  been  sent  to  her  for
    translation which she had paid for.  The statements were then sent back
    to the appellants (with the implication this  was  for  signing).   Her
    older siblings could read and write but they did  get  some  help  from
    Amathou.  When the sponsor was living in the DRC, the  appellants  were
    attending school.  Amathou was 32.  She is married and she  gave  birth
    to her third child in 2015.

18. Finally, I observed to Mr Burrett that there was no evidence before  me
    regarding any steps that had been taken to check up on the children  in
    the DRC.  He had no questions on this aspect.

19. By way of submissions, Mrs Aboni argued that there were no  exceptional
    or compelling circumstances that warranted the grant of  leave  outside
    the Rules.  The appellants had a legal guardian as indicated  in  their
    applications.  It was now claimed that the friend could not longer look
    after them but there was no evidence of this at  the  time  of  refusal
    apart a statement that post-dated the decision.  There was no  evidence
    of any medical issues at that time.  The  parties  had  could  maintain
    contact  and  she  did  not  consider   that   any   interference   was
    disproportionate, including consideration under s.55.   She  relied  on
    the Tribunal decisions in T (s.55 BCIA 2009 - entry clearance)  Jamaica
    [2011] UKUT 00483(IAC) and Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f) [2013] UKUT
    00088 (IAC), the latter in respect  of  the  meaning  of  "serious  and
    compelling  family  or  other  considerations".   There   were   stable
    arrangements in place for the appellants and there was nothing to alert
    a concern.  She pointed out that the letter from  the  solicitors  that
    accompanied the applications  did  not  refer  to  any  concerns.   She
    accepted that it was in the best interests of the appellants to be with
    their sister.  Additionally, Mrs Aboni argued that the  appellants  had
    failed to demonstrate that there  would  be  adequate  maintenance  and
    accommodation which the public interests required.

20. By way of response Mr Burrett emphasised the relevance of the sponsor's
    refugee status  which  had  resulted  in  the  separation.   The  entry
    clearance officer had failed to recognise this.  The test should not so
    much be whether there was a stable situation  for  the  appellants  but
    instead an examination why the children should  not  be  reunited  with
    their refugee de facto parent.  The children should not be left without
    their carer.   Mr Burrett submitted that it was the reason  behind  the
    separation which created the exceptional circumstances under article 8.



CONCLUSIONS

21. The only evidential dispute of any substance is limited to  the  status
    of the fourth appellant.  The explanation for the  deception  when  the
    application was made for entry  clearance  that  the  sponsor  had  not
    wanted him to discover he had lost his mother is understandable but not
    one that required a misrepresentation in the  application  itself.   It
    was misleading of the sponsor to indicate in cross-examination that the
    appellants had never been to school only to explain in response  to  my
    questions that the older ones could read and write and  they  had  been
    attending school when the sponsor was in the DRC.  This indicates to me
    that she has not been entirely truthful.   My  conclusion  is  that  on
    balance the fourth appellant is more likely to be the sponsor's  nephew
    being the second of the two possibilities identified in the DNA report.
     This finding has only limited relevance in the light  of  Mrs  Aboni's
    acceptance of the role of the sponsor as de facto  mother  to  all  the
    appellants when she left the DRC.

22. Consideration of article 8 grounds requires the familiar  Razgar  steps
    to be followed. The appellants rely on family  arrangements  that  were
    established on  the  death  of  the  sponsor's  mother  in  2005  until
    disrupted by the sponsor having to leave the DRC.   Given  Mrs  Aboni's
    acceptance that the sponsor was de facto mother, I  am  satisfied  that
    there was family life between the sponsor and  the  appellants  at  the
    time the sponsor left. After her departure, there is  no  dispute  that
    the day to day care for the children was taken over by her  friend  and
    the family group have remained united with her.   I am  satisfied  that
    the sponsor has continued to maintain a role in the  appellants'  lives
    through social media.  Their family life with the sponsor is sufficient
    to engage article 8. The impact of the separation on  the  sponsor  and
    Brielle are also relevant factors. Thus article 8 is engaged.

23. There is no dispute that the decision by the  entry  clearance  officer
    was in accordance with the law in terms of  process  based  on  clearly
    defined rules reflecting the Secretary of State's policy on immigration
    control that set out the basis on which applications such as those made
    by the appellants. Those rules reflect a legitimate  aim.  This  leaves
    the issue of proportionality which is at the heart of these appeals.  A
    balancing exercise is required between  the  public  interest  and  the
    individual rights in play  taking  account  of  the  acknowledged  best
    interests and the acceptance of the pre -flight family life.

24. Children of a refugee are treated  differently  under  the  Rules  from
    minor relatives. Paragraph 352D sets out the requirements to be met  by
    a person seeking leave to enter in  order  to  join  a  parent  who  is
    currently a refugee.  Such a person needs to  demonstrate  that  he  or
    she:

          i) Is the child of a parent who is currently  a  refugee  granted
             status as such under  the  Immigration  Rules  in  the  United
             Kingdom; and

         ii) Is under the age of 18; and

        iii) Is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is not  a
             civil partner, and has not formed an independent family  unit;
             and

         iv) Was part of the family unit of the person  granted  asylum  at
             the time that the person granted asylum left  the  country  of
             his habitual residence in order to seek asylum;

         ... "

25.  Whether  this  provision  included  de  facto  adopted  children   was
    considered by the Court of Appeal in AA (Somalia)  v  ECO  Addis  Ababa
    [2012] EWCA Civ 563.  The argument before the court was that any  child
    who had, pre-flight, become a child of the family should be regarded as
    an adopted child of the parent who had been granted asylum.   Paragraph
    6 of the Immigration Rules was not attempting to be exhaustive  of  the
    notion of what the child of "a parent" may be.  Paragraph 352D is to be
    read by reference to a "broader  concept  of  family"  to  achieve  the
    objectives of promotion of family reunion and the best interests of the
    child and to reflect the modern reality.  It was argued that a "parent"
    can cover a wide range of persons.

26. Davis LJ was not persuaded.  At [29]ff he made these observations:

        "29. I am in no real doubt that the purpose  of  interpretation  to
             paragraph 352D advanced (with care and elaboration) by Mr  Gill
             cannot be sustained.  It is my view contrary to the  plain  and
             unambiguous language of the Immigration Rules.

        30.  I can see no proper basis for saying that there  can  be  some
             notion of adoption applicable to entry  clearance  applications
             under paragraph 352D which  can  operate  separately  from  and
             outside the  meaning  otherwise  given  to  it  for  the  other
             purposes of the Rules.  Indeed, adoption, whether de   jure  or
             de facto, is a very serious and sensitive  matter.   It  cannot
             readily be expected, for some purposes but not  others,  to  be
             left, in the modern  immigration  and  asylum  context,  in  an
             undefined state.

        ...

        33.  In all  these  circumstances  I  can  see  no  basis  for  the
             assertion that the interpretive provisions of paragraph 6  (and
             thereby the provisions of  paragraph  309A)  do  not  apply  to
             paragraph  352D.   In  my  judgement,  they  clearly  do.    At
             paragraph  6,  with  regard  to  "a  parent"  it  is  the  word
             "includes" and not "means" is, in my view of real  significance
             in this context.  The interpretation  is  plainly  setting  out
             exhaustively who is to be regarded  for  the  purposes  of  the
             Rules as an "adoptive parent": and there is nothing  either  in
             that paragraph or  in  paragraph  352D  itself  to  indicate  a
             contrary  intention  for  the  purpose   of   entry   clearance
             applications under paragraph 352D.

        ...

        41.  Nor, in my view, does this interpretation of  the  Immigration
             Rules lead to any great lacuna.  It must not be forgotten  that
             Article 8 of the Convention is always available to be relied on
             in an  appropriate  case  -  indeed  AA  in  the  present  case
             succeeded on precisely that ground.  Further, it  may  be,  for
             example that applicants in corresponding circumstances  may  in
             some cases be able to claim eligibility for family  reunion  on
             compelling compassionate grounds."

27. There is a marked difference between the provisions of  paragraph  352D
    and the requirements of paragraph 319X. The former does not contain the
    hurdles of serious and compelling family or other considerations or any
    maintenance  and  accommodation  requirements.   Paragraph  352D  gives
    effect  to  the  United  Kingdom's  obligations   under   the   Refugee
    Convention.  The Qualification Directive (Council Directive 2004/83/EC)
    provides in Article 3 that:

         "1.   Member  States  shall  ensure  that  family  unity   can   be
             maintained.

         2.    Member  States  shall  ensure  that  family  members  of  the
             beneficiary of refugee or subsidiary protection status, who do
             not individually qualify for such status are entitled to claim
             the benefits referred to in Articles 24 to 34,  in  accordance
             with national procedures and as far as it is  compatible  with
             the personal legal status of the family members.

         ...

         5.   Member States may decide that this  Article  also  applies  to
             other close relatives who live together as part of the  family
             at the time of leaving the country of  origin,  and  who  were
             wholly or mainly dependent on the beneficiary  of  refugee  or
             subsidiary protection status at that time."

28. Family members as defined in Article 2 of the  Qualification  Directive
    as including "the minor children ... of the beneficiary of refugee  ...
    status,  on  condition  that  they  are  unmarried,   independent   and
    regardless of whether they were born in or out of wedlock or adopted as
    defined under national law".  Accordingly, a de facto mother  of  minor
    children comes under the category of close relatives for whom there  is
    no mandatory provision in the Qualification Directive for the issue  of
    residence permits under Article 24.

29. The Immigration Rules are not law but a statement of the  Secretary  of
    State's administrative practice.  They give effect to policies  of  the
    Secretary of State - see Lord Reed at [17] in his  judgment  in  Hesham
    Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60.  Thus the Rules are an indication  of  where
    the public interest lies.

30. As observed by Richards LJ in SSHD v SS (Congo) [2015] EWCA Civ 387  at
    [17] ...

         "... where the Secretary of State has sought to fashion the content
         of the Rules so as to strike what she regards  as  the  appropriate
         balance under Article 8 and any gap  between  the  Rules  and  what
         Article 8  requires  is  comparatively  narrow,  the  Secretary  of
         State's formulation of the Rules may allow the  court  to  be  more
         confident  that  she  has  brought   a   focussed   assessment   of
         considerations of the public interest to bear on the matter.   That
         will in turn allow the court more readily to give  weight  to  that
         assessment when making its own decision pursuant to Article 8."

31. Paragraph 319X has not received the same  judicial  scrutiny  that  the
    family provisions  under Appendix FM.  But it  seems  to  me  that  the
    principles set out in MM (Lebanon) v SSHD [2107]  UKSC  10  as  to  the
    approach to be taken are equally valid to cases such as those before me
    where appellants are unable to meet the requirements of the Rules.   As
    Lady Hale and Lord Carnwath observed at [44]:

         "The issue is always whether the  authorities  have  stuck  a  fair
         balance between the individual and public interests and the factors
         identified by the Strasbourg Court have to be taken  into  account,
         among them the "significant weight" which has to be  given  to  the
         interests of children."



  32. Neither party provided copies of any relevant policy however I was
      able to locate during a short break, Family reunion: for refugees and
      those with humanitarian protection Version 2 which was updated in July
      2016. Page 19 considers de facto adopted children as follows


         "A de facto adoption is one where a child has been incorporated
         into another family
         than the one into which they were born, and has been cared for in
         that family. Unlike
         formal adoptions which can be established on the basis of
         documentary evidence,
         de facto adoptions are likely to require an assessment of the
         overall picture of the
         circumstances surrounding the 'adoption', often with little or no
         documentary
         evidence.  The onus to establish a de facto adoption is on the
         applicant.
         There is no provision in the Immigration Rules to consider a
         sponsor who has
         requested family reunion for a child who is the subject of a de
         facto adoption.
         Applications involving de-facto adoptions must be refused under the
         rules and
         caseworkers must then go on to consider the family exceptional
         circumstances
         guidance or whether there are any compassionate factors which may
         warrant a grant
         of leave outside the Immigration Rules."

33. The hyper link "the family exceptional  circumstances  guidance"  takes
    the  reader  to  Immigration  Directorate  Instructions,    Chapter   8
    CHILDREN. Part 3 of the Instructions  deals  with  leave  to  enter  or
    remain as the child of a relative with limited leave to enter or remain
    in the UK as a refugee or beneficiary of  humanitarian  protection  and
    refers to paragraph 319X of the Rules. In reality, it does no more than
    repeat the rule and adds nothing of substance.

34. The Qualification Directive permits the Secretary of State to treat  de
    facto adopted  children  differently  under  the  Rules  however  I  am
    satisfied that paragraph 319X does contain the focussed  assessment  of
    the public interest as contemplated in SS(Congo). It is  relevant  that
    the maintenance requirements in 319X are modest in comparison with  the
    more demanding financial threshold in conventional  family  situations.
    The question is whether on the facts of these appeals the  requirements
    of the rule strike a fair balance in the competing interests. In  other
    words, are there compelling circumstances not catered for in  the  rule
    that require a different result?  The  fact  that  the  separation  was
    triggered by the need for the sponsor to flee is  an  important  factor
    but paragraph 319X expressly provides for such situations.  The fact of
    the sponsor's flight  for  protection  cannot  of  itself  dictate  the
    outcome of the article 8 exercise since that would disable  the  public
    interest in treating children  as  opposed  to  minor  relatives  of  a
    refugee differently. I am unable to accept Mr Burrett's key  submission
    on this aspect.

35. The best interests of  the  children  are  unquestionably  a  paramount
    consideration and as acknowledged by Mrs Aboni,  it  was  in  the  best
    interests of the appellants to remain together with their sister. Those
    interests do not dictate the outcome of  the  proportionality  exercise
    but require significant weight to be given to them. The calibration  of
    that weight is informed by the consequences of the separation and  what
    would follow if the children were to  come  to  the  UK.  Although  the
    children were no longer able to benefit from the parental role  adopted
    by  the  sponsor  after  her  mother  died  in  2005,  she   instigated
    alternative arrangements with someone she knew  and  no  doubt  trusted
    with their care.  There was no evidence at the  time  of  the  decision
    that Amathou was unwilling to continue with  this  role.  There  is  no
    evidence that the children's welfare has been  jeopardised  because  of
    the new arrangements; they had no health issues at the time of decision
    and there is no evidence that they were not adequately accommodated and
    cared for in the absence of the sponsor.  The  sponsor's  role  has  de
    facto parent had been assumed at some point in 2005 and therefore  over
    a period of six years. At the date of decision, Amathou had been caring
    for the children for some three years and it is likely that during that
    time a good measure of stability will have been  established  in  their
    lives. By the date of decision, the eldest appellant will have been  17
    and no doubt a source of emotional support for her younger siblings  as
    she matured. The children have remained together as a family unit;  had
    this been otherwise there may have been a cause for concern.  Coming to
    the UK would be a considerable upheaval for the appellants and would be
    a profound change; they would be reunited with their sister  but  in  a
    country  where  they  do  not  speak  the  language  and  in  uncertain
    accommodation with doubt over the ability of the sponsor to financially
    support them beyond a basic standard. There is  no  evidence  that  the
    arrangements in place in the DRC have resulted in a lower  standard  of
    living from the  appellants'  peers.  The  sponsor's  evidence  at  the
    hearing was that the children are not being schooled. There was a  lack
    of evidence on how the  children  spend  their  days  and  no  evidence
    whether schooling is routinely available in the  DRC  or  whether  such
    schooling as there is, needs to be paid for.  This  incomplete  picture
    does not contribute much to the  proportionality  exercise.  Given  the
    evident care with which the statements from the children were  prepared
    and taking account of the participation of  Amathou  in  that  process,
    there was ample opportunity for any  difficulties  or  concerns  to  be
    highlighted.

36. There was no evidence of the arrangements that had been  made  for  the
    appellants' care in the UK apart from joining the sponsor.  The wish of
    the sponsor to be joined by her minor siblings and  her  nephew  is  an
    entirely natural and understandable ambition. I  accept  that  she  and
    Brielle would be heartened by the presence of the appellants here.  The
    desirability of the family being reunited is undoubtedly  a  compelling
    factor when taken with the best interests of the  children.  But  there
    were no serious reasons at the time of decision why  the  reconstituted
    family arrangements in the DRC could not continue.  There is nothing in
    the appellants' circumstances after giving full  weigh  to  their  best
    interests to render the consequent interference with their family  life
    disproportionate to the permissible aims of  the  Secretary  of  State.
    There is nothing over and above the  rule  that  requires  a  different
    outcome. Accordingly, the appeals on Article 8 grounds cannot succeed.

37. The sponsor has produced  more  recent  evidence  indicating  that  the
    willingness of her friend to provide accommodation  and  care  for  the
    children has changed. It is open to those of  the  appellants  who  are
    still minors to re-apply in the light of  there  no  longer  being  any
    question over their relationship to the sponsor.




NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeals are dismissed.
No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date     22 May 2017

[pic]



Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

