
[pic]
IAC-BFD- MD

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07620/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31st July 2015                    |On 18th August 2015                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        upper tribunal JUDGE roberts


                                   Between

                           mr biruk ytayal negatu
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Little, from Iris Law Firm (Middlesbrough)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant Biruk Ytayal  Negatu  is  a  national  of  Ethiopia,  now
    resident in Uganda. He has been given permission to appeal against  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hands,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the Respondent's refusal of 1st April 2014 to grant  him  entry
    clearance to the UK for family reunion.

 2. The Appellant applied, in March 2013, for entry clearance to the UK  to
    join Hiwot Gebru (the sponsor) who had been granted refugee status here
    on 31st May 2013. She is a national of Eritrea. After  leaving  Eritrea
    she travelled to the United Kingdom via Yemen, Saudi Arabia (where  she
    stayed for two years working illegally) and France.

 3. The Appellant's application was refused on the grounds  that  he  could
    not meet the requirements of paragraph 352A of  the  Immigration  Rules
    (spouse/civil Partner of a refugee) and that there were no  exceptional
    circumstances justifying a grant of leave outside the Rules.

 4. In coming to her decision to refuse  the  application,  the  Respondent
    took into account the following facts and factors:

       . The Sponsor had claimed asylum on the basis of her fear  to  return
         to Eritrea on account of her Christianity.

       . It was accepted she had made mention in her asylum  application  of
         the Appellant whom she described as her husband.

       . She stated in her asylum application that she and the Appellant met
         in Saudi Arabia and that he is an Ethiopian national who  was  also
         living there illegally. He has now crossed into Uganda where he has
         claimed asylum.

       . Most  particularly  the  Respondent  was  not  satisfied  that  the
         Appellant could establish that he formed part of the Sponsor's pre-
         flight family. There was no evidence  of  a  wedding  having  taken
         place in Saudi  Arabia  as  claimed  and  no  documentary  evidence
         supporting this claim.

 5. The Appellant's appeal came before FtT Judge  Hands  on  18th  February
    2015. In a decision promulgated on 3rd March 2015 the judge found  (and
    made clear findings) that the Appellant could not meet the requirements
    of the Immigration Rules either  under  Rule  352A  nor  352AA  (person
    seeking leave to enter as the  unmarried  or  same  sex  partner  of  a
    refugee).

 6. She did accept however that there was a subsisting relationship between
    the Appellant and his Sponsor,  which  was  evidenced  by  the  Sponsor
    sending remittances to the Appellant in Uganda  and  by  contact  being
    maintained on Facebook. In addition there was evidence the Sponsor  has
    undertaken a visit to Uganda to see the Appellant.

 7. The Judge also noted at [3]. "The Respondent was satisfied the decision
    he had made did not breach the Appellant's rights under  Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights  (ECHR).  The  details  of  the
    refusal are contained within the refusal  notice  dated  1st  April  14
    which was served on the Appellant" After consideration of  matters  she
    dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.

 8. The grounds seeking permission focus entirely on the claimed failure of
    FtT Judge's to consider the Appellant's case outside the  Rules,  under
    Article 8 ECHR.

 9. Permission was granted in the following terms:

         "An arguable error of law has arisen in relation to the absence  of
         consideration by the Judge of whether there would be  a  breach  of
         Article 8. At paragraph 3 of the decision the Judge has referred to
         the Respondent being satisfied  that  the  decision  made  did  not
         breach  the  Appellant's  rights  under  Article  8  ECHR.  At  the
         conclusion of the decision the Judge has dismissed the appeal under
         the Immigration Rules and referred to no anonymity direction  being
         made. No decision has been made as to  whether  there  would  be  a
         breach of Article 8."

    Thus the matter comes before me for  hearing  on  whether  the  Judge's
    decision discloses an error of law such that the decision needs  to  be
    set aside and remade.

UT Hearing/Error of Law

10. Ms Little submitted that the Judge had not considered Article  8  ECHR.
    She made no challenge to the findings made by the Judge concerning  the
    Immigration Rules. When  asked  to  identify  why  she  considered  the
    Appellant's case to be one which would allow the Judge to stray outside
    the Immigration Rules, her submission  amounted  to  this.  There  were
    compelling circumstances in this case, because family  life  cannot  be
    enjoyed elsewhere else other than  the  UK.  This  is  because  of  the
    Appellant's status as an asylum seeker in Uganda. There  was  an  added
    reference to the Sponsor suffering  medical  problems,  which  included
    shortness of breath.

11. Mr Diwnycz responded robustly. He submitted that the  FtT  judge  could
    not have done more than she did. She conducted an oral hearing and made
    clear findings. Those findings were that the Appellant  had  failed  to
    provide satisfactory evidence that he lived with the Sponsor  in  Saudi
    Arabia; had failed to establish that he had been legally married to the
    Sponsor and importantly considering the above, had not  shown  that  he
    and the Sponsor are excluded from  enjoying  family  life  together  in
    Uganda. There was no evidence identified before the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge which could be said to amount to evidence  of  a  compelling  and
    exceptional nature not covered by the relevant Immigration Rules.

12. The only facts that the First-tier Tribunal Judge accepted amounted  to
    this. The  Sponsor  had  visited  the  Appellant  in  Uganda  and  sent
    remittances. There was evidence that they enjoyed family life there.

13.  Against that she had  travelled  there  only  after  she  was  granted
    refugee status. Whilst the Judge was satisfied that she did  not  doubt
    their intention to live together permanently should  the  appellant  be
    granted entry, that did not amount   to  compelling  and  compassionate
    circumstances such as to bring a case outside the Immigration Rules.

Consideration and Findings

14. It is argued on behalf of the Appellant that his circumstances  at  the
    date of decision were sufficiently exceptional and compelling  that  it
    was open to the Tribunal  to  exercise  discretion  and  consider  (and
    allow) the appeal on Article 8 grounds. It is said  that  there  was  a
    failure on the part of the First-tier  Tribunal  by  not  so  doing.  I
    disagree with that.

15.  The Judge was plainly aware, what was before her was an out of country
    entry clearance application. The relevant date in  an  entry  clearance
    matter is the date of decision. That holds good for any out of  country
    human rights appeal  A good deal of the evidence put before the  First-
    tier Tribunal post-dated the date of  decision. Post decision  evidence
    should only be considered if it sheds  a  light  on  the  circumstances
    appertaining at the date of decision.

16. Returning to submission that Article 8  should  have  been  considered,
    such a submission demonstrates an erroneous application of the case law
    relevant to Article 8 outside the Rules,  since  an  appellant  has  to
    establish  not  simply  that  his  circumstances  were  compelling   or
    exceptional, but that there existed compelling circumstances which  had
    not been covered by the Rules and which  therefore  existed  above  and
    beyond the Rules outweighing any public interest  considerations.  This
    has been clarified most recently in the case of the Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department v SS (Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 385.

17. Even if I am wrong about that and the Judge was at  fault  because  she
    made no decision as to whether there would be a breach of Article 8  it
    is hard to see how, in this particular case any such default would have
    been material.  It is hard to see how, on the evidence which was before
    her, the Judge could have properly allowed the appeal under Article  8.
    Ms Little submitted that the Judge was under a duty to consider Article
    8 because the original grounds of appeal mentioned it. However when one
    looks at the  decision  as  a  whole  it  is  clear  that  Ms  Little's
    submissions before the FtT focussed very much on  the  claim  that  the
    Appellant could meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules.  The
    Judge has set out at some length Ms Little's submissions before her  in
    [9] and [10]. Those submissions make no mention of Article 8.

18. With regard to the Appellant's particular  case  the  question  of  the
    subsistence of the relationship was dealt with by the Judge who  simply
    said that she was satisfied that the parties had formed an intention to
    live together and had a subsisting relationship. There was  no  finding
    that the parties are married or that she accepted the evidence of their
    claimed relationship in Saudi Arabia.

19. What she does seem to have accepted is that the  sponsor  was  able  to
    visit the Appellant in Uganda. She has already done  so  and  no  doubt
    continued their relationship there. The judge was told the parties keep
    in touch via facebook.  So far as I can see there was  no  evidence  to
    demonstrate any circumstances existing so as  to  justify  a  grant  of
    leave outside the Rules. Article 8 cannot be used simply to  circumvent
    the requirements of the Rules, nor can it  be  used  as  a  country  of
    choice for those intending to live together.

20. For those reasons I find that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains no error of law to merit the  decision  being  set  aside  and
    remade.

Decision

21. This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made


Signature     Dated

Judge of the Upper Tribunal



Fee Award

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signature     Dated

Judge of the Upper Tribunal

