
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07907/2013
                                                               OA/07908/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 14 August 2014                               |On 19 August 2014          |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                       Joshua Matovu (FIRST APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                     JOHNATHAN MULIKA (SECOND APPELLANT)
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr. E. Eluwa, Solicitor.
For the Respondent:    Mr. E. Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Uganda born respectively on 23 September
    1999 and 25 January 1997.  They appealed  against  a  decision  of  the
    Entry Clearance Officer for Nairobi made on 13 February  2013  refusing
    to grant entry clearance to enter the United Kingdom as the children of
    a person with limited leave to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  under
    paragraph 301 of the Immigration Rules HC 395 (as amended).

 2. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mr
    Ian Howard dismissed their appeals.

 3. The appellants were granted permission to appeal by Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Chohan for the following reasons:-

         "1.   Permission  is  sought  to  appeal,  in  time,  against   the
             determination  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   I   Howard,
             promulgated on 4 April 2014, dismissing the appellants' appeal
             against a decision of the respondent to refuse to grant  entry
             clearance.

         2.   In essence the grounds argue that the judge failed to consider
             the  leading  jurisprudence  and  that  he   drew   inaccurate
             conclusions on factual issues.

         3.   The judge was not satisfied that the sponsor, the  appellants'
             mother, had responsibility for the appellants.   At  paragraph
             19 the judge states, '... the majority of the  decisions  that
             have to be taken on behalf of these two teenage boys are being
             taken by an aunt and not their mother'.  However, at paragraph
             14 of the determination the judge found that  the  appellants'
             mother and her husband 'play a role in the appellants' lives'.
              It seems the judge found that on a day-to-day basis the  aunt
             made the decisions.  The day-to-day decisions may well be made
             by the aunt on a practical level, however,  it  is  not  clear
             from the determination whether the judge found the appellants'
             mother had totally abdicated parental  responsibility  to  the
             aunt.

         4.   Accordingly, there is an arguable error of law and all grounds
             may be argued."

 4. Mr Eluwa relied on all the  grounds  put  forward  in  the  application
    seeking permission to appeal contending amongst other things  that  the
    determination revealed fundamental errors of law and  approach  thereby
    rendering it unsafe.  The two broad challenges he put forward are  that
    the judge failed to correctly apply the leading jurisprudence  in  this
    case to  the  facts  that  he  had  accepted  which  in  turn  infected
    consideration of Article 8.  Secondly that the  judge  drew  inaccurate
    conclusions on some factual matters  resulting  in  unfairness  to  the
    appellants.

 5. Mr Tufan argued that  the  judge  had  directed  himself  properly  and
    clearly considered the evidence and was not satisfied on the  basis  of
    that  evidence  that  the  sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  for  the
    appellants albeit that she and her husband  may  play  a  role  in  the
    appellants' lives.  Further that the judge's  findings  are  adequately
    reasoned and not irrational.  No material errors of law  are  disclosed
    within the determination and that the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
    appeal are no more than a disagreement with the judge's findings.

 6. I am satisfied that for all the reasons asserted  in  the  grounds  the
    judge has materially  erred  and  in  coming  to  his  conclusions  has
    provided inadequate reasoning.  The conclusion that he came relating to
    the authenticity of a death  certificate  of  the  appellants'  father,
    which was provided at the hearing, was not  open  to  be  made  on  the
    evidence.  Moreover, in coming to his conclusions the judge appears not
    to have taken account of the  authority  of  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):
    "sole responsibility")  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  00049  and  the  guidance
    therein as to how to approach the issue of "sole responsibility".

 7. Further it is  difficult  to  glean  from  the  determination  why  the
    appellants' appeals did not succeed.  Inadequate reasons  for  findings
    on material matters prevail, coupled with a  failure  to  take  account
    and/or resolve conflicts of fact or material matters.   All the reasons
    put forward in the grounds seeking permission to appeal,  cause  me  to
    conclude the judge materially misdirected himself in law.

 8. The determination is therefore set aside in its entirety and the appeal
    will proceed to a de novo hearing.

 9. In deciding whether  to  set  aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under Section 12 of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act
    2007, I can dispose of the  appeal  in  one  of  two  ways,  either  by
    remitting the case to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or  by  remaking  the
    decision.  The choice is regulated by paragraph 7  of  Part  3  of  the
    Practice Directions of the Immigration and Asylum Chamber of the  Upper
    Tribunal   which   only   contemplates   remittal   in   very   limited
    circumstances.  This  though  is  such  a  case.   The  effect  of  the
    cumulative errors detailed above has been to  deprive  a  party  -  the
    appellants - before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing, or other
    opportunity for the parties' case to be put to and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Moreover  the  appellants'  solicitor  seeks  the
    opportunity of submitting the death certificate to the  respondent  for
    enquiries regarding its authenticity.  In  all  these  circumstances  I
    remit the case to the  First-tier  Tribunal  subject  to  the  attached
    directions.  I do so with the consent of both representatives before me
    today.

10. Anonymity direction not made.





Signed                              Date 19 August 2014.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

