
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:  OA/07020/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th September 2015               |On 21st September 2015               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

                              Mrs Clay Mukundwa
                        [No Anonymity Direction Made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THe Secretary of state for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Doerfel, Counsel instructed by International
Care Network
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Mrs Clay Mukundwa date of birth the 12th December  1990,
    is a citizen of Zimbabwe.  Having considered all the circumstances I do
    not make an anonymity direction.

 2. The appellant had applied for entry clearance to the United Kingdom  as
    the spouse of a person or present and settled in the United Kingdom  in
    accordance with Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules. By decision taken
    on the 23rd April 2014 the ECO refused that application. There had been
    an EC Manager's review of that  decision  and  the  reasons  given  for
    maintaining the refusal were that the appellant  had  not  proved  that
    this was a  genuine  and  subsisting  marriage  and  that  the  parties
    intended to live together permanently in the United Kingdom.

 3.  The original refusal letter by the ECO had also taken issue  with  the
    employment of the sponsor and the ability  of  the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor to meet the financial requirements of appendix FM and  appendix
    FM-SE. However documentation had been submitted  with  the  application
    and all of the documentation was reviewed by the ECM. On reviewing  the
    documentation the ECM had conceded that the financial  requirements  of
    the rules were met. It appears that a letter required under  the  Rules
    had been provided from the  employer  and  that  letter  confirmed  the
    sponsor's employment and his salary and other  documentation  supported
    his claimed salary. The  only  outstanding  matter  was  therefore  the
    requirements relating to the marriage being genuine and subsisting  and
    the parties intending to live together.

 4. The appellant had appealed against the decision  to  refuse  her  entry
    clearance. The  appeal  was  heard  by  Judge  Trevaskis.  By  decision
    promulgated on 12 February 2015 the  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on Immigration Rules grounds.

 5. By decision made on 30 April 2015 leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    was granted. Thus the matter now appears before me as an appeal in  the
    Upper Tribunal to determine in the first instance whether or not  there
    were any material errors of law in the decision. If I find  that  there
    are material errors of law, in accordance with the direction sent out I
    could determine whether or not to re-determine the appeal on the  basis
    of the evidence already lodged.

Consideration of Grounds of Appeal

 6. The first point taken within the grounds of appeal is  that  the  judge
    has raised paragraph 320 (11)(iv) of the Immigration Rules.  It  was  a
    paragraph that was not raised within the  refusal  letter  nor  was  it
    raised by the ECM review. Rule 320(11)(iv) provides:-

        '320      In addition to the grounds of refusal of entry  clearance
        or leave to enter set out in Parts  2  -  8  of  these  Rules,  and
        subject to paragraph 321  below,  the  following  grounds  for  the
        refusal of entry clearance or leave to enter apply:

        Grounds on which entry clearance leave to enter the United  Kingdom
        should normally be refused:- ...

        11 where the applicant has previously contrived  in  a  significant
        way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules by...

        (iv) using deception in an application for entry  clearance,  leave
        to enter or remain  or  in  order  to  obtain  documents  from  the
        Secretary of State or a third-party  required  in  support  of  the
        application (whether successful or not), and

        there are other aggravating circumstances, such as absconding,  not
        meeting  temporary   admission/reporting   restrictions   or   bail
        conditions, using  an  assumed  identity  or  multiple  identities,
        switching  nationality,  making  frivolous  applications   or   not
        complying with read documentation process.'

 7. The circumstances in which the judge raised the  issue  relate  to  the
    address given by the appellant on the visa  application  form.  In  the
    form at part 3 an applicant  is  expected  to  fill  in  their  contact
    details. Part 3 commences by  requiring  an  individual  to   "  Please
    provide your contact details in your home country". It then  starts  at
    Paragraph 3.1 requires an applicant to  put  in  the  full  residential
    address and postal/zip code. The appellant has put  in  an  address  in
    Harare as a residential address and has stated in  paragraph  3.2  that
    she has lived at the address since 2010.

 8. Other family details are completed in Part 4 including identifying that
    her mother's family appear to emanate in part from Chimanimani.

 9. During the course of the sponsor giving  evidence  the  sponsor  stated
    that the address of the  appellant  was  in  Chimanimani.  The  sponsor
    indicated that the address on the form was the  address  of  a  friend,
    which was used as a postal address because postal delivery in the rural
    areas was not reliable.

10. In dealing with that issue judge has noted the respondent's submissions
    at paragraph 17. There the  respondent  submits  that  the  application
    should be dismissed because false information had been  provided  about
    her address in the present application. The judge in paragraph 32 finds
    that by virtue of rule 320 (11) (iv) that appellant has  made  a  false
    statement in the application and has failed to  explain  that  she  had
    given that address in order to obviate postal difficulties.  The  judge
    finds that this is one of those grounds therefore where entry clearance
    should normally be refused.

11. A number of issues can be taken with the approach of the judge to  that
    issue. The judge has considered the matter under immigration rules  320
    (11)(iv). It is clear from the wording of the specific  rule  that  the
    rule is intended to deal with the situation  in  which  in  a  previous
    application an applicant has acted in a manner intended  to  circumvent
    or frustrate the intentions of the rules. The conduct complained of  in
    this case relates to the specific  application  itself  and  not  to  a
    previous application.  If  the  issue  of  dishonesty  in  the  present
    application were going to arise the issue would properly be  considered
    under paragraph 320(7A) but even there there would be a requirement  of
    dishonesty.

12. As pointed out by the representative in the grounds of appeal there has
    to be a requirement  of  dishonesty  in  any  finding  with  regard  to
    paragraph 320(11). The requirement for  dishonesty  emanates  from  the
    case of A v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773. There appears to  be  no  finding
    that the appellant had acted dishonestly.

13. There appears to have been an explanation  for  an  address  in  Harare
    being given as the residential address. According  to  the  information
    provided the appellant living in the countryside the postal service  is
    problematic and therefore the address in  Harare  was  the  appropriate
    contact address. Nothing of any  significance  arises  from  giving  an
    address in Harare or in Chimanimani.

14. Further with regard to the requirements of paragraph 320 (11) itself it
    does indicate that additionally to  the  false  document  or  statement
    there have to be aggravating features as well. There do not  appear  to
    be any further aggravating features.

15. Accordingly in so far as the judge has found his decision in part  upon
    paragraph 320(11) it appears that the judge has made a  material  error
    of law. It has to be said that such factors may have been  relevant  in
    assessing the issue of credibility of the appellant and had  the  judge
    limited himself to doing that it may be  that  no  objection  could  be
    taken to what the judge has done. However the  judge  appears  to  have
    invoked paragraph 320(11) as a basis for dismissing the application but
    failed to notice the paragraph did  not  apply  in  the  circumstances,
    failed to apply the requirement of dishonesty and failed  to  find  any
    aggravating features.

16. As part of his basis for making adverse credibility findings the  judge
    has relied upon the fact that  the  sponsor  was  reluctant  to  answer
    question about a conviction that he had over ten years ago.  The  judge
    at paragraph 21 refers to the sponsor being  reluctant  to  answer  the
    questions which is understandable but also to the fact that he took the
    view that a more  serious  charge  had  not  been  proceeded  with.  He
    suggests that he is entitled to take  the  fact  that  a  more  serious
    charge was dropped into account. He also takes into  account  the  fact
    that the sponsor had been convicted of a criminal offence and sentenced
    to a term of imprisonment of eight months.

17. With regard to the Rehabilitation of Offenders Act 1974 the periods  of
    imprisonment in  excess  of  six  months  at  below  2  1/2  years  the
    rehabilitation period appears to be 10 years. According  to  Section  4
    once the rehabilitation period has been reached an individual cannot be
    asked questions about it.

18. Further in examining the evidence it is suggested that  the  judge  has
    failed to look at the evidence presented. In paragraph 24 the judge had
    claimed that  the  only  evidence  of  communication  which  have  been
    produced related to the periods since their marriage in September 2013.
    However in paragraph 26 the judge actually refers to  the  printout  of
    communications beginning on 28 September 2012  and  ending  on  3  June
    2013. That clearly is inconsistent with what is set  out  in  paragraph
    24.  The documents produced in that  regard  are  quite  extensive  and
    clearly show the developing relationship and the fact that the  parties
    arranged to meet each other in South Africa.

19. The judge within paragraph 24 had also referred to the fact that  there
    were no alleged photographs of the marriage ceremony.  Again  this  was
    incorrect in that there were 19 photographs from the wedding which  had
    been included in the respondent's bundle at E51

20. On the basis of the challenges made  to  the  determination  there  are
    clear errors of law. I  have  decided  that  the  determination  cannot
    stand.

21. At the hearing I invited the parties to make submissions with regard to
    how I should deal with the appeal if I were to  find  that  there  were
    clear errors of law. The respondent's representative submitted that  he
    stood by the refusal letter and the review by the ECM. The  appellant's
    representative  pointed  out  that  substantial  amount   of   evidence
    submitted on behalf of the appellant and the sponsor.

22. There is a material error of  law  within  the  determination  and  the
    appropriate courses for the appeal to be re-determined.

23. The only issues, which are genuinely  live  between  the  parties  with
    regard to this appeal, are whether this is  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship  and  whether  the  parties  intend   to   live   together
    permanently. In assessing  that  one  has  to  look  not  only  at  the
    relationship as it develops before the  parties  married  in  September
    2013 but their conduct after.

24. The parties have known each other. The evidence indicates that prior to
    the sponsor coming to the UK the sponsor was brought  up  in  the  same
    village as the appellant. Their families  knew  and  know  each  other.
    Indeed the appellant is currently looking after the sponsor's  children
    who have been left in Zimbabwe. The children will continue to be  cared
    for by the parents of the appellant once she comes to the UK.

25. There is within the documentation submitted 82  pages  of  printout  of
    communications from 'Whatsapp'. Those commence on 28 September 2012 and
    run to 3 June 2013. While some of them have brief messages and  replies
    it is clear that the parties have a developing relationship  over  that
    period of time. There are substantial communications above  and  beyond
    that which one would expect between merely friends. The conversation is
    clearly of individuals  that  are  developing  a  substantial  personal
    relationship and are more than mere friends.

26. Thereafter there are visits to see each  other  specifically  to  South
    Africa. On the second visit to South Africa the wedding took  place  by
    arrangement. There are a number of photographs the  appellant  and  the
    sponsor. Reference to those photographs and indeed to  phone  cards  is
    acknowledged in the reasons for refusal letter.

27. There is also a reference to the fact that the parties appear  to  have
    gone to Dubai and the United Arab Emirates for the period of 23 October
    to 4 November 2014.

28. This is a couple that have known each other  before  the  sponsor  left
    Zimbabwe.

29. The parties married in September 2013. The documentation  confirms  the
    marriage  and  confirms  that  they  entered  into  a  valid  marriage.
    Thereafter the additional documentation goes on to prove that there was
    a relationship that developed before the marriage between  two  people,
    who knew each other well. The documentation continues to  show  contact
    and involvement  between  the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  after  the
    marriage. That includes the parties meeting in order to be together.

30. There is reference to the fact that the  appellant  had  a  stillbirth.
    There is no reason to question that. There is  no  reason  to  question
    either that the sponsor was the father of that tragic child.

31. Taking all the evidence into account I find that I  am  satisfied  that
    the appellant and the sponsor have entered into  a  valid  marriage.  I
    find that this is a genuine relationship between people that knew  each
    other for a long period of time and have renewed their relationship and
    that relationship has developed. They have married and I  am  satisfied
    that it is a genuine  and  subsisting  marriage.  Further  taking  into
    account all the evidence I am satisfied that it is  the  intentions  of
    the parties that the parties will live together in the future.

32. Accordingly having considered  the  issues  raised  by  the  ECO  I  am
    satisfied that all of the requirements of appendix FM and appendix  FM-
    SE are satisfied. It has been conceded that  all  of  the  requirements
    other than those set out above were satisfied. The  appellant  met  the
    requirements with regard to eligibility and suitability under  appendix
    FM save for the challenges made. The sponsor has  the  financial  means
    required under the rules.

33. Accordingly taking all the  evidence  into  account  I  find  that  the
    appellant meets all the requirements of the rules.  I  therefore  allow
    the appeal under the immigration rules.

Decisions

34. There is a material error of law in the original decision. I substitute
    the following decision

          a) I allow the appeal under the immigration rules.

          b) I make no anonymity direction.

          c) I make no fee award.


Signed   Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure
