
[pic]
IAC-fH-nl-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07380/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 October 2015                   |On 28 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - NAIROBI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         mrs asha mohamed abdullahi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Pretzell, Counsel, instructed by Makka
Solicitors Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Maka in which he allowed the appeal of Mrs
    Abdullahi.  Her appeal was in turn against the decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer, dated 26 March 2014, refusing  her  application  for
    entry clearance as an adult dependent relative under Appendix FM to the
    Immigration Rules.  Judge Maka considered the appeal first of all under
    Appendix FM of the Rules and then on the basis of Article 8 outside  of
    the Rules.  In respect of Appendix  FM  Judge  Maka  found  that  a  TB
    certificate from an approved tester had in fact been  provided  to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer.  The judge then found that the  Appellant  was
    indeed the mother of the sponsor in the United Kingdom, that being  her
    daughter, Ms Hussein.  In respect of compliance with  Appendix  FM  the
    judge found that Mrs Abdullahi  required  long-term  personal  care  in
    order to perform everyday tasks.  This was based upon medical  evidence
    and the evidence of the sponsor.  Judge Maka found that  Mrs  Abdullahi
    required a full-time carer to look after her in Somalia.  It  was  also
    found that the required level of care would  not  have  been  available
    even with the practical and financial help of the sponsor in the United
    Kingdom.  It was said that there were no other close family members  to
    provide help to Mrs Abdullahi and that  she  could  not  rely  on  clan
    members for such help.  On this basis  the  appeal  was  allowed  under
    Appendix FM.

 2. In considering Article 8 outside of the Rules  Judge  Maka  found  that
    there was family life as between Mrs Abdullahi and her sponsor.  It was
    found that the Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance was an interference with that family life and in light of all
    the  circumstances  the  refusal   amounted   to   a   disproportionate
    interference with the family life. Accordingly,  the  appeal  was  also
    allowed on the basis of Article 8 outside of the Rules.

 3. The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission to appeal  on  the  basis
    that Judge Maka had failed to direct himself properly to Appendix FM-SE
    to the Rules, in particular the evidential requirements relating to  an
    application under Appendix FM based upon the adult  dependent  relative
    route.  The grounds of appeal also challenged Judge Maka's  conclusions
    on Article 8 outside of  the  Rules.   Permission  to  appeal  on  both
    grounds was granted by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Murray by a
    decision dated 30 July 2015.

 4. At the hearing before me Mr Pretzell very fairly  accepted  that  Judge
    Maka had indeed materially erred in law by failing to have  any  regard
    to Appendix FM-SE of the Rules.  That issue was a live one  before  the
    judge given his conclusions that Appendix FM applied to Mrs  Abdullahi.
    On that basis Mr Pretzell accepted that  the  decision  of  Judge  Maka
    should be set aside and he suggested that the appeal be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Mr Tufan was happy to accept that  remittal  would  be  an  appropriate
    disposal of the appeal in this particular case given that there  are  a
    number of issues which have not  been  adequately  addressed  by  Judge
    Maka.

Decision on error of law

 6. I informed the parties at the hearing before me that there was indeed a
    material error of law in this case.

 7. The specific element of Appendix FM-SE in question is paragraph 35,  in
    which an inability to receive required levels of  care  in  one's  home
    country should be supported by evidence  from  a  health  authority,  a
    local authority, or a doctor or other health  care  professional.  This
    evidential provision simply has not been dealt with at all, whether  in
    form or substance. It is a material error because on the face of it Mrs
    Abdullahi's evidence did not comply with Appendix FM-SE, and  certainly
    no reference was made to the requirements of those  provisions  in  the
    decision of Judge Maka.

 8. In addition, I conclude that Judge Maka's assessment of the  Article  8
    case was fundamentally flawed insofar as he failed to have  any  regard
    to the public interest to which significant weight ought to be attached
    when assessing appeals under Article 8 outside of the  Rules.  He  also
    failed to have any regard to the fact that Mrs Abdullahi had failed  to
    meet all of the evidential requirements under Appendix FM-SE.

 9. The decision of Judge Maka is therefore set aside.

Disposal

10. I have considered the factors set out in paragraph 7  of  the  Practice
    Statement regarding remittal. In this case I have decided to remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  Both representatives agreed to this
    route, and it is appropriate given the lack of findings on core  issues
    in the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Substantive Directions

      1. The appeal will be heard afresh with no preserved findings from the
         decision of Judge Maka;

      2. On re-hearing the appeal the issues to be  addressed  will  include
         Appendix FM as  they  relate  to  adult  dependent  relatives,  the
         requirements of Appendix FM-SE, and Article 8 outside of the Rules.

Procedural Directions

      1. A Somali interpreter will be required in respect of  oral  evidence
         to be given by the UK-based Sponsor;

      2. The matter is not to be listed  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Maka;

      3. No hearing date for the remitted hearing  will  be  fixed  at  this
         stage due to the difficulties in listing faced by hearing  centres.
         A new date will be a matter for the Hatton Cross hearing centre  to
         deal with in due course.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date: 24 October 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

