
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07224/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2015                          |On 20 January 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                     Entry Clearance Officer - pretoria

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Cheryl Carmen Ribeli
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G O'Ceallaigh, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Cheryl Carmen Ribeli, was born on  8  August
    1953 and is a female citizen of South Africa.   The  appellant  is  the
    mother of Mrs Carmen Steenkamp who is a British citizen living  in  the
    United Kingdom.   The appellant applied for entry clearance  to  settle
    in the United Kingdom as her daughter's dependant but  her  application
    was refused by the respondent on 14 May 2014.  The  appellant  appealed
    to the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Napthine)  which,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 31 March 2015 allowed the appeal under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  The Entry Clearance Officer now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Napthine found that the appellant satisfied the  requirements  of
    paragraph E-ECDR (eligibility for entry clearance as an adult dependent
    relative):

    Section E-ECDR: Eligibility for entry clearance as an  adult  dependent
    relative E-ECDR.1.1. To meet the  eligibility  requirements  for  entry
    clearance as an adult dependent relative all  of  the  requirements  in
    paragraphs E-ECDR.2.1. to 3.2. must be met.

    Relationship requirements E-ECDR.2.1. The applicant must  be  the-  (a)
    parent aged 18 years or over; (b) grandparent; (c)  brother  or  sister
    aged 18 years or over; or (d) son or daughter aged 18 years or over  of
    a person ("the sponsor") who is in the UK.

    E-ECDR.2.2.If the applicant is the sponsor's parent or grandparent they
    must not be in a subsisting relationship with  a  partner  unless  that
    partner is also the sponsor's parent or grandparent and is applying for
    entry clearance at the same time as the applicant. E-

    ECDR.2.3. The sponsor must at the date of application be- (a)  aged  18
    years or over; and (b) (i) a British Citizen in the UK; or (ii) present
    and settled in the UK; or  (iii)  in  the  UK  with  refugee  leave  or
    humanitarian protection.

    E- ECDR.2.4. The applicant or, if the applicant and their  partner  are
    the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must as
    a result of age, illness or disability require long-term personal  care
    to perform everyday tasks.

    E- ECDR.2.5. The applicant, or if the applicant and their  partner  are
    the sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must be
    unable, even with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,  to
    obtain the required level of care in the country where they are living,
    because- (a) it is not available and there is no person in that country
    who can reasonably provide it; or; (b) it is not affordable.

    Financial requirements E- ECDR.3.1. The applicant must provide evidence
    that they can be adequately maintained, accommodated and cared  for  in
    the UK by the  sponsor  without  recourse  to  public  funds.  This  is
    detailed in Appendix FM-SE. E- ECDR.3.2. If the applicant's sponsor  is
    a British Citizen or settled in the UK, the applicant must  provide  an
    undertaking signed by the sponsor confirming that the 5 applicant  will
    have no recourse  to  public  funds,  and  that  the  sponsor  will  be
    responsible for their maintenance, accommodation and care, for a period
    of 5 years from the date the  applicant  enters  the  UK  if  they  are
    granted indefinite leave to enter.

 3. In addition, Appendix  FM-SE  specifies  the  evidence  which  must  be
    produced in support of such an application:

Adult dependent relatives

    33. Evidence of the family relationship between the applicant(s) and the
    sponsor should take the form of birth or adoption certificates, or other
    documentary evidence.
    34. Evidence that, as a  result  of  age,  illness  or  disability,  the
    applicant requires long-term personal care should take the form of:
    (a) Independent medical evidence that the applicant's physical or mental
    condition means that they cannot perform everyday tasks; and
    (b) This must be from a doctor or other health professional.
    35. Independent evidence that the applicant is unable,  even  with  the
    practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK,  to  obtain  the
    required level of care in the country where they are living  should  be
    from:
        (a) a central or local health authority;
        (b) a local authority; or
        (c) a doctor or other health professional.
    36. If the applicant's  required  care  has  previously  been  provided
    through a private arrangement, the applicant must  provide  details  of
    that arrangement and why it is no longer available.
    37. If the applicant's required level of care is not, or is no  longer,
    affordable because payment previously made for arranging this  care  is
    no longer being made,  the  applicant  must  provide  records  of  that
    payment and an explanation of why  that  payment  cannot  continue.  If
    financial support has been provided  by  the  sponsor  or  other  close
    family in the UK, the applicant must provide an explanation of why this
    cannot continue or is no longer sufficient to enable the required level
    of care to be provided.




    The word "independent"  referring  to  the  medical  evidence  required
    regarding an  applicant's  physical  and  mental  condition  (paragraph
    34(a)) was inserted from 6 April 2014 (HC 1138 as amended by HC 1201).

 4. There is one ground of appeal. The ECO noted that the appellant, as  at
    the date of the refusal, had not been in receipt of  any  care  despite
    claiming that assistance was required.  It is unclear from the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal what care or assistance the judge found will
    be required by the appellant.  The judge noted [14] that the  appellant
    is aged 60 and is approaching old age and may have "declining  physical
    abilities".  However, the judge failed to make a clear  finding  as  to
    the actual  care  needs  of  the  appellant.   Further,  there  was  no
    explanation in the decision as to  what  emotional  support  was  being
    provided at the current  time  to  the  appellant  by  the  sponsor  or
    otherwise and what her future needs in this regard would be.   Finally,
    at [23] the judge appeared to  accept  that  certain  services  may  be
    available in South Africa but that there  was  a  question  as  to  the
    reliability of delivery of these services.  At  [24]  the  judge  found
    that the ECO had been wrong to find that the  required  level  of  care
    would be available in South Africa.  Also, paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-
    SE has not been properly addressed by the judge.  At [12-13]  and  [24]
    no reference has been made to  any  independent  evidence  which  might
    indicate the availability or otherwise of care in South  Africa.  There
    was no proper basis for the judge finding that the ECO was in error  to
    conclude there had been "no substantial evidence that  care  cannot  be
    provided locally [in South Africa]."

 5. I find that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal should be  set
    aside.  I have reached that conclusion for the following reasons.

 6. First, it is clear that E-ECDR2.4 was  concerned  with  an  applicant's
    inability as a result of age, illness or disability to perform everyday
    tasks without long term personal care as at the date of the immigration
    decision.  Much of Judge Napthine's  decision  is  concerned  with  the
    possible future, rather than the  situation  as  at  the  date  of  the
    immigration decision.   At  [14],  he  noted  that  the  appellant  "is
    approaching old age and she is in ill health  with  declining  physical
    abilities as set out in her medical report.  Her health and ability  to
    look after herself will not improve with age.  Her sense  of  isolation
    and vulnerability will not improve."  I acknowledge that the use in the
    paragraph of the expression "long term personal care" indicates a  need
    to project an applicant's requirement for care into the future; a  need
    for short term personal care as a result of an  illness  or  disability
    from which an applicant would recover would not fulfil the  requirement
    of the Rules.  However, at [17] the judge wrote:

         One can have unmet needs.   A  person  could  struggle  to  survive
         against the odds and manage to survive but still have  their  needs
         unmet.  And they will ill-fed,  inadequately  washed  and  dressed,
         lacking care and attention to the extent that their life is nothing
         more  than  physical  existence  in  circumstances  of   pain   and
         discomfort.

 7. The ECO was  concerned  that  the  applicant  had  given  contradictory
    evidence.  In answer to question 1.9 of the application, the  appellant
    stated that she was not currently receiving care  but  had  enclosed  a
    letter  with  her  application  stating  that  "[The  appellant]  needs
    assistance with  tasks  as  basic  as  cooking,  shopping  and  washing
    herself"[my emphasis].  The judge has not resolved  that  contradiction
    satisfactorily in favour of the appellant  but  has,  instead,  assumed
    that (i) the appellant does not receive care at the present  time  but;
    (ii) is nonetheless in need of such care.  The failure of the judge  to
    resolve the apparent contradiction in the appellant's evidence  to  the
    ECO amounts to an error of law.  Further, it is clear that E-ECDR2.4 is
    written in the present tense; the requirement for  long  term  personal
    care should exist at the date of the  application/immigration  decision
    as well as be required in the future..

 8. Secondly, the ECO was concerned that such care  as  the  appellant  may
    require was also available in South Africa.  A letter enclosed with the
    application indicated that "The availability of elderly  care  services
    is limited in the Table View area where [the appellant] lives".   There
    was no evidence to show the availability of care within Cape Town  more
    generally or, indeed, within South Africa as a whole.  The judge should
    have concluded that paragraph 35 of Appendix FM-SE had not been met  in
    that there was no independent evidence that the appellant  was  unable,
    even with the practical and financial help of the sponsor in the UK, to
    obtain the required level of care in the country where they are  living
    [my emphasis].

 9. Thirdly, at [23] the judge wrote:

         Whilst such services [providing care] may be available the  problem
         is whether the appellant is in a position to access them  and  then
         the liability of delivery of services without the  oversight  of  a
         close relative/interested party.  It is not just that  such  things
         come at a cost, but will people turn up when they are meant to  and
         will they be trustworthy people who can  be  relied  upon  to  look
         after an increasing frail elderly person?

10. With respect to the judge, his comments have the flavour of advocacy on
    the appellant's  behalf  rather  than  a  reasoned  assessment  of  the
    evidence.  The  judge did not refer to any independent evidence  before
    him to support his assertion that, without the  oversight  of  a  close
    relative, the delivery of care services in South Africa would be wholly
    unreliable.

11. Mr O'Ceallaigh complained at the hearing that Mr Jarvis had widened the
    scope of the ECO's appeal to include reference to  Appendix  FM-SE  and
    should not form part of the original refusal.  However,  as  Mr  Jarvis
    correctly pointed out the refusal of the ECO  did  not  indicate  that,
    other than those parts of the Rules referred to in the refusal  notice,
    he/she  was  satisfied  that  the  remaining  Rules  were  met  by  the
    appellant.  It was for the appellant to show, on appeal, that  she  was
    able to meet all relevant requirements of the Immigration Rules.

12. In the circumstances, I have set aside the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and I now remake the decision.  For the reasons which  I  have
    given above, I do not find that the appellant meets the requirements of
    the Immigration Rules.  The care requirements of the  appellant  as  at
    the date of the application remain unclear, as noted by  the  ECO.   In
    order to  succeed  in  her  appeal  against  the  ECO's  decision,  the
    appellant  is  required  to  satisfy  all  the  requirements   of   the
    Immigration Rules including those set out in Appendix  FM-SE.   I  find
    that there is no independent evidence that  the  appellant  is  unable,
    even with the practical  and  financial  help  of  the  United  Kingdom
    sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in South Africa.  If  the
    appellant has been receiving  care,  then  there  was  no  evidence  to
    satisfy paragraph 37 of Appendix FM-SE.  I agree with  Mr  Jarvis  that
    the admission of adult dependent relatives under the Immigration  Rules
    is intended to be subject to a rigorous  and  demanding  test  both  as
    regards the care requirements themselves but also  the  evidence  which
    must be provided to establish those requirements.  It may well  be  the
    case in the future that the appellant may meet the requirements of  the
    Immigration Rules but I am not satisfied that  she  has  addressed  the
    concerns of the ECO regarding inconsistencies in  her  application  nor
    has she provided, in the current application,  sufficient  evidence  of
    the type required by the Immigration Rules to establish  that  she  has
    care needs.  In the circumstances, I  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
    against the ECO's decision.

13. Article 8 ECHR was pleaded in the original grounds  of  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal but was not referred to by Judge  Napthine  in  his
    decision.  In the appellant's Rule 24 notice dated 9  June  2015  under
    the heading "cross appeal" the appellant "seeks to appeal  the  failure
    [of the First-tier Tribunal] to consider her claim under Article 8 ECHR
    and the EU law."  It is also  stated  that  "the  appeal  will  not  be
    pursued should the appellant's appeal [in respect  of  the  Immigration
    Rules] fail."  At the Upper Tribunal hearing, Mr  O'Ceallaigh  made  no
    reference at all to Article 8.  Insofar as the  appeal  is  pursued  on
    Article 8 grounds, I am satisfied that no evidence  has  been  produced
    which would lead the Upper  Tribunal  to  allow  the  appeal  on  those
    grounds where it has decided to dismiss it under the Immigration Rules.
     Some mention is made in the evidence of the appellant's  isolation  in
    South Africa and a need for the emotional support of the United Kingdom
    sponsor but I note (as did the ECO) that the  evidence  submitted  with
    the application for entry clearance indicated that the  United  Kingdom
    sponsor "will have to  leave  the  United  Kingdom  to  care  for  [the
    appellant] if the instant application is not approved."  That statement
    indicates a willingness on the part of the United  Kingdom  sponsor  to
    travel to South Africa to care for her mother if necessary.  I find  it
    would be reasonable for her to do so.  In  those  circumstances,  there
    would be no disproportionate breach of  the  rights  of  the  appellant
    protected under Article 8 ECHR.  In so far as it is pursued, the appeal
    is dismissed on Article 8 grounds also.

Notice of Decision

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 31 March 2015 is
    set aside.  I have remade the decision. The appellant's appeal  against
    the ECO's decision dated 14 May 2014 is dismissed under the Immigration
    Rules and on human rights grounds (Article 8 ECHR).

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                              Date 1 January 2016


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



