
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07810/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Delivered orally at Field House               |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 7 February 2014                            |On 14 February 2014          |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GOLDSTEIN

                                   Between

                         mary nielle rueda macalanda

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Richardson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal by the Appellant, a citizen of the Philippines,  born
    on 10 June 1995 appeals against the decision of the Respondent dated 28
    February 2013 refusing to her, entry clearance for  settlement  as  the
    child of a parent or parents given limited leave to enter or remain  in
    the United Kingdom with a view to settlement under paragraph 301 of  HC
    395 of the Immigration Rules (as amended).

2.   The Appellant's appeal was  determined  on  the  papers  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge V A  Cox  who  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  19
    November 2013 dismissed the appeal of the Appellant on both immigration
    and human rights grounds.

3.   The Appellant's application for  leave  to  appeal  that  decision  was
    successful and in granting permission  to  appeal  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Brunnen had this to say insofar as it is relevant to the  present
    appeal:

         "2.  The grounds on which permission to appeal  is  sought  contend
             that the Judge erred in law in that she (1)  failed  to  apply
             the correct burden  and  standard  of  proof;  (2)  failed  to
             consider the Appellant's best interests; (3)  failed  to  take
             account of material evidence; (4) failed to give reasons for a
             central finding of fact; (5) misdirected  herself  by  finding
             that Article 8 was not engaged because of the long  separation
             of the Appellant from her father; (6) assessed proportionality
             by reference to the wrong point of law."

4.   Thus the appeal came before me on 7 February 2014 where my  first  task
    was to  decide  whether  the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Judge
    disclosed an error or errors on  a  point  of  law  such  as  may  have
    materially affected the outcome of the appeal.

5.    For  the  purposes  of  this  determination  it  will  suffice  if   I
    concentrate on item 3 of the grounds upon which permission was granted,
    namely the contention that the First-tier Judge failed to take  account
    of material evidence.

6.   Although I was presented with substantial and  clearly  argued  grounds
    on the part of Mr Richardson, following EK V ECO (Colombia) [2006] EWCA
    Civ 926 I do not have to determine each point raised.  My  task  is  to
    decide if the determination of the First-tier Tribunal is right in  law
    and for the reasons to which I will shortly refer and  as  indeed  most
    helpfully conceded by Mr Walker, it is not.

7.   The guidance of their Lordships in EK whilst  given  in  terms  of  the
    reconsideration process applicable to the previous jurisdiction of  the
    Immigration Asylum Tribunal still has relevance today.  They held  that
    it was not necessary at  the  first  stage  of  reconsideration  to  go
    through each of the grounds of appeal and decide whether the  error  of
    law asserted could be made out.  It was enough if one  of  the  grounds
    disclosed an error of law.  The "second" stage of  the  reconsideration
    might then encompass all of the issues raised in the original appeal.

8.   In the present case there was before the First-tier Judge a  voluminous
    bundle of documents prepared by the Respondent and in fairness  to  the
    Judge that bundle was not as one would normally  expect  numbered,  and
    indexed and as indeed I found in conjunction with Mr Richardson in  the
    course of the hearing before me, in consequence  it  was  difficult  to
    locate relevant documents within that bundle for proper  consideration.



9.   Nonetheless,  that  bundle  contained  amongst  other  things,  a  full
    statement from the Sponsor dated and signed by him on 24 November 2012.

10.  The bundle also contained  medical  certificates  in  relation  to  the
    current health (albeit as at the date of decision) of  the  Appellant's
    maternal grandparents with whom she had been formerly living.

11.  I do not intend to go through the whole of the Sponsor's statement  but
    it is highly relevant to identify that throughout that  statement,  the
    Sponsor provided details of the way in which he had considered  himself
    to be the person with sole responsibility for his  daughter's  welfare.
    I give  some  examples,  some  of  which  were  indeed  most  helpfully
    identified for me by Mr Richardson in the course of the hearing;

         "I decided to enrol her to the same school where she  attended  her
         elementary years because it is near the house of  her  grandparents
         where we used to live before.  During  her  school  years,  I  have
         acted again as her sole guardian because  her  mother  was  working
         abroad... I am also responsible in checking  and  signing  all  the
         waivers for school field trips and other outdoor activities  relate
         to her studies...


         I have asked Myra's parents to look after Mary  Nielle  because  my
         daughter was on her final year in  High  School  and  it  would  be
         difficult for her  to  transfer  to  another  school.   I  told  my
         daughter to finish her studies in the same school and stay with her
         grandparents in Quezon City for the  meantime...before  I  let  the
         Philippines I accompanied her to some universities in  Quezon  City
         to enquire about course admissions.


         Even though I am here in the UK, me and my daughter discuss  things
         concerning her studies, social life, etc. just like  the  old  days
         but now we usually communicate through  Skype,  e-mails  and  phone
         calls.  (Please see phone cards,  e-mail  and  Skype  communication
         records DOC.5).  My daughter and I send e-mails 4-5 times a week...
         we took advantage of the free service on Skype, that is why we have
         a lot of chances discussing important things such as her education,
         health conditions, financial needs, problems and many more...


         I told her to move in the boarding house  so  she  can  concentrate
         more on her studies.  During my holiday to the  Philippines  (June-
         July 1912), I personally  inspected  the  boarding  house  just  to
         ensure the safety and well-being of my daughter.  I chose this  one
         for her because the place was nice, clean  and  very  near  to  her
         school... I accompanied her to see a dentist for a dental  check-up
         which I usually do when she was still younger...

         I have instructed my daughter to visit and stay with my mother... I
         told my mother to tell Mary Nielle to come to Muntinlupa  City  and
         see her every month for her to get the money...


         I decided to set (the money transfer receipts) up this way so I can
         monitor and control the spending activities  of  my  daughter.   My
         financial obligation to my daughter  commenced  from  birth  up  to
         present.  I am the one responsible for  her  school  tuition  fees,
         budget for food, dental/medical check-up, clothing etc.  I  started
         sending money to her through my mother by  money  transfer  when  I
         left Philippines to  the  UK  last  September  2010...."  (Emphasis
         added)


12.  As Mr Richardson rightly pointed out in his opening submissions to  me,
    it was apparent from the determination of the First-tier Judge that  he
    had not considered this statement at all.  Indeed, having  checked  the
    determination of the  First-tier  Judge  there  is  at  paragraph  6  a
    reference at 6(e) to the fact that the Judge had considered "an undated
    witness statement from Daniel Macalanda".

13.  It is right to say that within the Respondent's bundle  there  appeared
    a document which was described as a "notice of  appeal"  and  dated  25
    March 2013.  Although it sets out the grounds of appeal it does  appear
    to be somewhat in the form of a statement.  Nonetheless the details  of
    that "statement" are not referred to  in  the  determination.   In  any
    event there is also the dated statement o which I have above  referred.
    That latter statement was clearly an important and  material  piece  of
    evidence in terms of determining  the  central  issue  in  this  appeal
    namely as to whether the Appellant to the requisite standard  of  proof
    had demonstrated that her father, the Sponsor, had sole  responsibility
    for her.

14.  At this stage in the hearing before me, Mr Walker  most  helpfully  and
    realistically informed me that having  considered  the  material  above
    referred, he was satisfied that this was  a  most  important  piece  of
    evidence that the  First-tier  Judge  appeared  to  have  ignored.   In
    fairness Mr Richardson  had  accepted  that  whether  it  was  evidence
    determinative of the appeal  was  another  issue  but  it  was  plainly
    positive and relevant evidence that the  First-tier  Judge  had  simply
    failed to take into account.

15.  Mr Walker continued:

         "This was evidence for the First-tier Judge that went to  the  crux
         of the issue as to whether the Sponsor had sole responsibility  for
         the Appellant in her schooling  and  upbringing  yet  he  had  made
         adverse findings when the evidence appeared to point the other way.
          The Respondent thus accepts that the  failure  of  the  First-tier
         Judge to take proper account if any,  of  this  important  evidence
         amounts to a material error of law."

16.  I would agree with Mr Walker for like  reason  and  indeed  the  matter
    does not end there, because elsewhere in the determination  the  First-
    tier Judge concluded that there was no satisfactory, if  any,  evidence
    as to the health of the Appellant's maternal grandparents, when in fact
    there was evidence as to their medical condition in  the  form  of  two
    documents within the Respondent's  bundle  that  the  First-tier  Judge
    would appear to have overlooked.

17.  Mr Walker informed me that given that this was  an  appeal  against  an
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision he was not in a position to consider
    whether or not to concede the appeal but he was in  agreement  with  Mr
    Richardson who had submitted that the  errors  identified  demonstrated
    that the interests of justice warranted that a further consideration of
    this appeal required that it should be heard afresh before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and I agreed with that proposal for like reason.

18.  I also agreed with the parties that in light of the material errors  of
    law identified none of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings  should
    in the circumstances, be preserved.

19.  In consequence of my findings,  it  follows  that  there  has  been  no
    satisfactory hearing of the substance  of  this  appeal  at  all.   The
    scheme of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  does  not
    assign the function of primary fact-finding to the Upper Tribunal.   In
    such circumstances Section 12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires us to  remit
    the case to the First-tier or re-make it ourselves.   For  the  reasons
    that I have given above and with the agreement of the parties,  I  have
    concluded that the decision should be remitted to a First-tier Tribunal
    Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge V A  Cox  to  determine  the
    appeal afresh, with all  issues  at  large,  at  Hatton  Cross.   I  am
    satisfied that there are  highly  compelling  factors,  falling  within
    paragraph 7.2(b) of the Senior President's Practice Statement that  the
    decision should not be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.  It is clearly in
    the interests of justice that the appeal  of  the  Appellant  be  heard
    afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

20.  For that purpose and so as to ensure the expedition of the  hearing  in
    the interests of justice, I have arranged for the matter to  be  listed
    at Hatton Cross for substantive hearing with a time estimate  of  three
    hours.  I understand that the Sponsor will give oral evidence  at  that
    hearing but that there will be no requirement for  an  interpreter  for
    this purpose.

Decision

21.  The First-tier Tribunal erred in law such that their  decision  in  the
    present appeal should be set aside.   I  remit  the  re-making  of  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross to be heard before  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal V A Cox.

22.  No anonymity direction has been made.




Signed                                  Date 14 February 2014



Upper Tribunal Judge Goldstein

