
[pic]
IAC-AH-KEW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07389/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 March 2016                               |On 24 March 2016              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                              MT (SIERRA LEONE)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Heybroek, Counsel instructed by Nasim & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals on procedural fairness/irregularity grounds  from
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge J  Bartlett  sitting  at
    Richmond Magistrates' Court on 2  March  2015)  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the decision of an Entry Clearance Officer to refuse her  entry
    clearance as the child of a person present and settled here.  The First-
    tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity  direction.   However,  as  the
    central issue in this appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  the  medical
    condition of the sponsor, I consider that it is  appropriate  that  she
    and her sponsor are accorded anonymity for  these  proceedings  in  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Sierra  Leone,  whose  claimed  date  of
    birth is 25 December  1994.   The  birth  certificate  relied  upon  as
    evidence of her date of  birth  was  only  issued  in  September  2012,
    shortly before she submitted an online application on 10 October 2012.

 3. In her application form, the appellant said that she was under the  age
    of 18.  She had first met her sponsor on 25 December 1994 in  Freetown.
    The last time she had seen him was on 1 January 2008.  In answer to the
    question of how often they met, she said "not  often."   They  kept  in
    touch on the telephone.  She was asked whether she had ever lived  with
    her sponsor.  She answered no, as he had left Sierra Leone  immediately
    after her birth.

 4. Her passport had been issued to her in Freetown on 10  September  2012.
    She had lived at her current residential address in  Freetown  for  the
    last sixteen years.  She did not have a home landline, but  she  had  a
    mobile telephone number which she gave.  She also had an email  address
    at yahoo.com.  Her father, the sponsor, had been born in Freetown on 18
    January 1970.  Her mother, Felicia, had  been  born  in  Liberia  on  7
    February 1970.  Her father had become a British national in  2007.   He
    had been issued with a British passport on 6 August 2007.

 5. The application was accompanied by a typed letter from the sponsor, who
    has the same surname as the appellant.  He said the decision  to  bring
    his daughter to the UK was due to  his  continuous  ill-health  in  the
    United Kingdom, as could be verified from his doctor's  report.   Also,
    his daughter "virtually" did not have any  guardian  in  Sierra  Leone.
    This was because her paternal grandmother had taken  the  appellant  to
    Liberia due  to  the  appellant's  mother's  ill-health.   Her  mother,
    Felicia Daniel, had passed away a couple of years ago.  The appellant's
    paternal grandmother had later decided to come back to Freetown because
    of the many constraints she faced in Liberia.  She had arrived back  in
    Freetown with his daughter earlier this year (2012). But she had  since
    died, leaving his daughter with a family friend at her current address.

 6. In a letter dated 30 August 2012 Dr Lwin confirmed that the sponsor had
    been registered with his practice since April 1995.  He suffered from a
    severe mental health problem and spastic paraplegia and  was  receiving
    treatment from his  practice  and  the  hospital.   His  condition  was
    getting worse and he needed help from another person for his  care  and
    health.  The sponsor had informed him that his daughter, who was living
    in Sierra Leone, was keen to stay with  him  in  the  UK  and  to  give
    support for his health and daily activities.




The Reasons for Refusal

 7. On 7 January 2013 an Entry Clearance Officer in Accra  (post  reference
    Accra\764374)  gave  his   reasons   for   refusing   the   appellant's
    application.  She had submitted no evidence that she was related to her
    sponsor as stated.  She had submitted no evidence of  contact  with  or
    financial support from her sponsor.  It was reasonable to  expect  that
    in a genuine, subsisting,  supportive  and  affectionate  relationship,
    there would be evidence of regular  contact,  signs  of  companionship,
    emotional support, affection and an abiding interest  in  each  other's
    welfare and wellbeing.  This was lacking. So he was not  satisfied  she
    was related to the sponsor as stated, and thus met the requirements  of
    paragraph 297(i) of the Rules.

 8. She stated that her mother and grandmother, with whom  she  had  lived,
    were both deceased.  But she had submitted no evidence of this, and  so
    he was not satisfied she met the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(d).

 9. She stated her sponsor was unemployed and in receipt of state benefits,
    but she had submitted no evidence of this from The Department  of  Work
    and Pensions.  Therefore he was not satisfied she would  be  maintained
    adequately by her sponsor without recourse to public funds.

The Grounds of Appeal

10. In her notice of appeal, the appellant said she was providing  receipts
    for maintenance from her dad and also providing proof of  contact  with
    her dad.  She spoke with her dad on the phone twice a week and he  sent
    her �100 every month.  Her dad had spoken to her daily after her mother
    passed away and also when she had lost her grandmother.   She  did  not
    have any other relatives remaining in Freetown.  Her dad was  her  only
    living relative.  She had not seen her dad since 2008, but they were in
    touch with each other constantly.

The Entry Clearance Manager's Review

11. On 28 February 2014 an Entry Clearance Manager  gave  his  reasons  for
    upholding the refusal decision despite the evidence which the appellant
    had provided with her notice of appeal.   The  appellant  had  provided
    details of her sponsor's disability benefits.  He had  also  looked  at
    the sponsor's bank statement submitted at the time of application.   He
    was now satisfied that the appellant would be adequately maintained  in
    the UK without further recourse  to  public  funds.   But  he  was  not
    satisfied on the other issues raised by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.
    He noted the appellant had provided her birth certificate, but this was
    issued almost eighteen years after  her  birth.   Some  money  transfer
    receipts had been submitted showing funds sent from the sponsor to  the
    appellant between 2011 and 2012.  But these all appeared to  have  been
    recently issued.

12. Death certificates for the mother and grandmother  had  been  provided.
    But the mother's death  certificate  was  issued  in  2013,  after  the
    decision to refuse was taken.  He also noted that the death certificate
    stated that she died in 2005, yet the sponsor in  his  letter  of  2012
    said that she had died "a couple of years ago".

13. The grandmother's death certificate was undated  and  incomplete.   The
    documents indicated that the appellant was almost 18 years old  at  the
    time the application was made, and it was not clear why  she  would  be
    unable to care for herself in Sierra Leone without the  supervision  of
    another adult.

The Hearing before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

14. Neither party was legally represented before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    In a letter dated 15 April 2014, which I found floating  loose  in  the
    file, the appellant purportedly authorised her father  to  act  on  her
    behalf  as  her  non-legal   representative,   and   asked   that   all
    correspondence should be sent through him.

15. Although the letter was  purportedly  written  by  the  appellant,  her
    signature was written in capital letters, and the address given at  the
    top of the letter was  not  her  home  address  in  Freetown,  but  the
    sponsor's address in London, E6.

16. In her subsequent decision, the judge recorded that the sponsor had not
    prepared a witness statement.  She said she took  the  sponsor  through
    the grounds on which the respondent had  refused  the  application  and
    asked  him  what  he  had  to  say  on  each  point  and  what  written
    documentation he had.  She said she gave the sponsor the opportunity to
    say anything else that he wished.

17. At paragraph [9], she recorded that the sponsor stated he suffered from
    ill-health such that he could not work.  Before that he had worked  all
    the time that he was in the United Kingdom.  He was in the  receipt  of
    DLA at the higher rate for care and mobility.  He  said  the  appellant
    would be able to look after him in the United  Kingdom  and  that  they
    would be able to bond more if she was here.

18. The judge gave her reasons for dismissing the appeal at paragraphs [11]
    to [14].  The appellant was born on 25 December  1994.   The  appellant
    would therefore have had to have been conceived approximately 40  weeks
    before this date, which was around the middle to the end of March 1994.
     However, the sponsor said he had first entered the United  Kingdom  in
    February 1993.  If the date given by the sponsor was correct, it  would
    be impossible for him to be the appellant's  father.   The  appellant's
    application form stated that  the  sponsor  first  entered  the  United
    Kingdom on 1 April 1995.  It also stated the appellant  first  met  the
    sponsor on her date of birth.  This  contradicted  the  sponsor's  oral
    evidence that he left Sierra Leone before the appellant  was  born  and
    that they had only met for the first time in 2007.  These were  serious
    inconsistencies which created issues with the  veracity  of  the  claim
    that the sponsor was the appellant's father.

19. The judge found that there was very  little  evidence  to  support  the
    claimed relationship of father and daughter.  There was very little and
    haphazard evidence of financial support and almost no other  supporting
    evidence.  No DNA test had been provided.

20. Taking all the evidence in the round, she concluded that the  appellant
    had failed to discharge the burden of proof in relation to establishing
    that the sponsor was her father.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

21.  Ms  Heybroek  of  Counsel  settled  the  appellant's  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  In summary, she  submitted
    the judge had failed to take full account of the appellant's mental and
    physical disabilities, and should have considered adjourning  the  case
    to enable the sponsor to give evidence through  an  intermediary.   She
    also submitted that the judge had made inadequate findings in  relation
    to "serious and compelling family or other reasons."

The Initial Refusal of Permission

22. On 2 June 2015 First-tier Tribunal Judge Heynes refused  permission  to
    appeal, as there was nothing in the Record of  Proceedings  or  in  the
    correspondence submitted to the Tribunal by the sponsor which indicated
    that he required an intermediary to assist him.  The  judge  had  given
    comprehensive reasons for concluding that the relationship between  the
    appellant and the sponsor had not been proved.

The Eventual Grant of Permission

23. On 5 August 2015 Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Archer granted  permission
    to appeal on a renewed application:

         The  sponsor  attended  the  oral  hearing  alone.   There  was  no
         reference to the sponsor's mental  or  physical  condition  in  the
         decision.  The judge found that the appellant had not  proved  that
         the sponsor was her father, based upon inconsistencies between  the
         oral evidence of the sponsor and the documentary evidence.  I  find
         that it is arguable the judge failed to follow relevant guidance in
         relation to the treatment of vulnerable witnesses, particularly the
         Joint Presidential Guidance Note number 2 of 2010.   Permission  to
         appeal is granted on all grounds.

The Grant of an Adjournment to Obtain DNA Evidence

24. The error of law hearing was originally due to take place in 2015,  but
    the appellant's solicitors successfully applied to the  Upper  Tribunal
    for an adjournment so as to enable the appellant to obtain DNA evidence
    to show that she was related to the sponsor as claimed.  Upper Tribunal
    Judge Jordan granted an adjournment for this purpose.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

25. On the morning of the hearing before me to determine whether  an  error
    of law was made out, the appellant's solicitors  served  on  the  Upper
    Tribunal and the Specialist Appeals Team a DNA report which showed that
    the probability of the sponsor being the father of  the  appellant  was
    extremely high, well over 99.99%.

26. On the topic of the sponsor's mental health, I  pointed  out  that  the
    letter from the GP in the ECO bundle did not specify the nature of  the
    sponsor's severe mental health problem,  and  it  did  not  necessarily
    follow that he suffered  from  any  cognitive  impairment  which  would
    affect his ability to give oral evidence.  Ms Heybroek indicated  that,
    based on her personal experience of interactions with her  lay  client,
    alarm bells should have sounded with the judge.  At my invitation,  she
    produced for my inspection the additional  medical  evidence  that  her
    instructing solicitors had obtained  on  the  topic  of  the  sponsor's
    medical condition.

27. In a report dated 1 February 2016, consultant psychiatrist Dr  Babalola
    informed the appellant's  GP  that  the  sponsor  had  a  diagnosis  of
    paranoid schizophrenia ICD10 F20,  and  spastic  paraparesis.   He  was
    receiving drug medication for both conditions.   He  had  reviewed  the
    patient in his out-patient clinic on 26 January 2016.  The patient felt
    that overall things were generally moving at a good  pace  although  he
    still experienced some auditory hallucinations.  The patient  said  the
    auditory hallucinations had  improved  and  he  was  able  to  distract
    himself and ignore what the voices were saying.  He  remained  adherent
    with his depot and was due to have his next dose  today.   He  was  not
    experiencing any side effects from the medication.   His  appetite  was
    good, and he was generally sleeping well and his energy  and  mood  was
    normal.  Unfortunately he did not do very much by the way of structural
    activities and he  spent  a  lot  of  time  at  home  watching  TV  and
    occasionally going to local shops.  He did not interact with his family
    or friends very much.

28. On a mental state examination, he described the  patient  as  being  an
    appropriately dressed Afro-Caribbean  male.   He  was  well-kempt  with
    reasonable eye contact and rapport.  His speech was coherent, there was
    normal tone,  rate  and  volume  and  his  mood  was  subjectively  and
    objectively  euthymic.   There  was  no  formal  thought  disorder,  no
    delusions, phobias or thoughts of suicide or homicide.  He continued to
    experience perceptual abnormalities by way of  auditory  hallucinations
    in the second and third person making derogatory remarks about him, but
    there was no associated passivity or made actions and he  was  able  to
    distract himself and ignore the voices: "his cognition remains intact."



29. There had  been  no  concerns  raised  with  regards  to  inappropriate
    behaviour towards his neighbours, which showed  that  he  had  improved
    mentally.  On the topic of risk, there were no  identifiable  risks  to
    self or others, and  he  remained  adherent  to  his  medication.   The
    patient was going to be reviewed again on 21 June 2016.

Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

30. I am not persuaded that there was procedural unfairness or irregularity
    in the conduct of the proceedings.  In particular, I am  not  persuaded
    that the sponsor presented as a vulnerable witness  to  Judge  Bartlett
    such that her conduct of the proceedings breached the relevant guidance
    given in the Joint Presidential Guidance Note number 2 of 2010  or  was
    otherwise irregular.  Of particular significance in this regard is  the
    report of the consultant psychiatrist who  states  that  the  sponsor's
    cognition remains intact. So I am not persuaded that alarm bells should
    have sounded, as Ms Heybroek put it, and that  the  judge  should  have
    adjourned the hearing of her own motion so as to enable the sponsor  to
    give his evidence through an intermediary.

31. However, as I explained to the parties at the hearing, I find an  error
    of law is made out on an alternative ground.  Through no fault  of  her
    own, the judge made a fundamental mistake of fact.  She found that  the
    appellant and the sponsor were not related as  claimed,  when  in  fact
    they are, as shown by the DNA evidence which  the  Upper  Tribunal  has
    allowed the appellant to obtain in order to support her  error  of  law
    challenge.

32. As Mr Staunton confirmed, it is now an agreed fact that the sponsor  is
    the appellant's father.  The judge's main  reason  for  dismissing  the
    appeal was the appellant's failure to discharge the burden  of  proving
    the gateway requirement that the sponsor was her father. Now  that  the
    main  reason  for  dismissing  the  appeal  falls  away,  there  is  in
    retrospect a lack of adequate reasoning to underpin the conclusion that
    the appellant had not made  out  her  case  under  the  Rules,  and  in
    particular  under  the  "exclusion  undesirable"  provision   in   Rule
    297(i)(f).

The Re-Making of the Decision

33. In re-making the decision I have the benefit of additional  documentary
    evidence that was not  available  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   This
    comprises the DNA report, the letter from the consultant  psychiatrist,
    and an unsigned witness statement from the sponsor, in  which  he  says
    that during the hearing in the First-tier Tribunal he could not  recall
    dates as he has  mental  health  issues.   He  also  says  that  he  is
    "terminally ill" and thus not in a condition  that  he  can  visit  his
    daughter in Sierra Leone.

34. The sponsor was present at the hearing before me, but Ms Heybroek chose
    not to call him to give evidence.  This was because,  as  she  candidly
    declared, she was concerned  that  he  would  make  matters  worse  not
    better.  One of the particular problems  that  she  identified  in  the
    witness statement was that the sponsor repeated the evidence  which  he
    had given to the First-tier Tribunal that he had come to the UK  on  20
    February 1993, whereas his daughter was born on 25 December 1994.

35. Since it is the appellant's case by way of appeal to the Upper Tribunal
    that the sponsor is an unreliable witness on account of his mental ill-
    health, I attach little weight to what is said in the unsigned  witness
    statement.  I also  attach  little  weight  to  what  is  said  in  the
    statement for two other reasons.  The first is that the sponsor was not
    called as a witness in order to adopt it, and so his evidence  was  not
    tested in cross-examination.  A further  reason  for  attaching  little
    weight to it is that there are self-evident inaccuracies.  As submitted
    by Ms Heybroek, there cannot be a gap of nearly two years  between  the
    sponsor's departure to the UK and the birth of the appellant, now  that
    it is demonstrated that the sponsor is the appellant's  father.   Also,
    the evidence does not support the claim attributed to the sponsor  that
    he is "terminally ill" or that his condition is getting  worse  day  by
    day.

36. While the appellant has discharged  the  burden  of  proving  that  the
    sponsor is her father, she is  no  further  forward  in  showing  on  a
    balance of probabilities that at the date of decision  her  father  had
    been exercising sole responsibility for her  upbringing.   There  is  a
    stark discrepancy between the appellant's account of where she has been
    living for the last sixteen years as at the date of application (namely
    in Freetown) and the sponsor's account of her movements in  the  letter
    which he wrote in support of the application.  The sponsor  contradicts
    the appellant. He says that his daughter had gone to  live  in  Liberia
    with her paternal grandmother because of her mother's  ill-health,  and
    that she had then returned to Freetown with  the  paternal  grandmother
    relatively recently.

37. Also, the address which the appellant gives as her residential  address
    for the last sixteen years in Freetown (27 B[ ] Street) does not  match
    the address given in the either of the two death certificates, which is
    6 S[ ] Street.  For the avoidance of  doubt,  the  grandmother's  death
    certificate describes 6 S[  ]  Street  as  being  her  usual  place  of
    residence.

38. The evidence of contact between father and daughter is remarkably thin,
    given that it is claimed that he has provided regular financial support
    to her for a number of years leading up to the  date  of  refusal,  and
    that they are also in regular contact over the telephone.

39. There is no documentary evidence of the father visiting  the  appellant
    in Sierra Leone  in  2007  or  2008  or  at  all.   Enclosed  with  the
    application was a photocopy of  an  entry  visa  to  Nigeria  dated  29
    October 2008. The ECO bundle does not contain an entry visa  to  Sierra
    Leone.

40. There is also nothing to indicate that the appellant is  aware  of  her
    father suffering  from  any  form  of  ill-health,  whether  mental  or
    physical.  The limited evidence emanating  from  Sierra  Leone  is  not
    consistent  with  there  being  a  subsisting   father   and   daughter
    relationship, let alone with the sponsor being solely  responsible  for
    the appellant's upbringing in the period  leading  up  to  the  refusal
    decision, and beyond.

41. On the issue of serious and compelling family or  other  considerations
    which make exclusion of the child undesirable, Mr Staunton accepts that
    the considerations to be taken into account may relate  either  to  the
    child and her circumstances in the country in which she  lives;  or  to
    the person who is settled  here.  As  stated  in  the  IDIs  quoted  at
    paragraph 14 of the application for permission to appeal:

         The circumstances  surrounding  a  child  must  be  exceptional  in
         relation to those of other children living in that country, but ...
         circumstances relating to the parent here, both of an emotional and
         of  a  physical  nature,  may  be   taken   into   account.    Such
         circumstances may  include  illness  or  infirmity  which  requires
         assistance.

42. On the evidence of the  report  of  the  consultant  psychiatrist,  the
    sponsor is coping adequately with his mental  and  physical  conditions
    without requiring the  practical  assistance  of  his  daughter.   With
    regards to the sponsor's emotional  needs,  there  is  no  satisfactory
    evidence that at the date of the refusal decision, or indeed leading up
    to the refusal decision, the sponsor was looking  to  his  daughter  in
    Sierra Leone to provide him with emotional support in coping  with  his
    paranoid schizophrenia.  As previously noted, the appellant appears  to
    be wholly unaware of her father's ill-health.

43. Finally, there is no evidence as to who registered the appellant's date
    of birth, or as to what evidence (if any) this person  brought  forward
    so as to satisfy the authorities in Sierra Leone that the appellant was
    born on 25 December 1994, as opposed to some earlier date  which  would
    make her over the age of 18 at the date of her  application  for  entry
    clearance.  On the appellant's case, both her  mother  and  grandmother
    were dead at the time of registration, and it is not suggested that the
    sponsor was involved in the registration of her birth.

44. In conclusion, the appellant has not discharged the burden  of  proving
    that she qualifies for entry clearance under Rule  297.   By  the  same
    token, the evidence does not disclose compelling circumstances such  as
    to justify the appellant being granted Article  8  relief  outside  the
    Rules.  While  the  effect  of  the  interference  is  to  prevent  the
    appellant from enjoying family reunion with  her  father,  the  refusal
    decision is plainly proportionate having regard to Section 117B of  the
    2002 Act and the appellant's inability to  bring  herself  within  Rule
    297(i)(f).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of law due  to  a
material mistake of fact, and accordingly the decision is set aside and  the
following decision is substituted: this appeal is dismissed under the  Rules
and also outside the Rules under Article 8 ECHR.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed this appeal, there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson

