
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07574/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 8 January 2014                               |On 17 April 2014           |
|                                                |...........................|
|                                                |............               |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE conway

                                   Between

                                    z d p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Waheed
For the Respondent:    Mr Deller

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born in 1969.  She appealed against
    a decision of the Respondent made on 25  February  2013  to  refuse  to
    revoke a deportation order made on 28 November 2008.  She  was  removed
    from the UK on 6 November 2009.

 2. In brief, her history is that she entered on a visit visa in 2002.  She
    married a British citizen just before her leave expired and was granted
    leave to remain until 2004.  In 2003 she was charged  with  immigration
    offences.  She failed to attend court  and  fled  to  India.   She  was
    convicted in absence in 2004.  In India she obtained an Indian passport
    in a false name and in 2005 married another  British  citizen  (Mr  O).
    That year she was granted a visa as the spouse  of  Mr  O  valid  until
    2007.  A son (Y O) was born to them in 2006. He is a  British  citizen.
    In 2007 she sought ILR as the spouse of a person  settled  here,  which
    was granted that year.  She was  rearrested  soon  after  and  in  2008
    convicted and sentenced for immigration and  bail  offences.   She  was
    sentenced to a total of 24  months'  imprisonment  on  the  immigration
    matters and three months for breach of bail, the bail sentence  running
    consecutively. She was recommended for deportation. After  unsuccessful
    appeals she was deported.

 3. In her application for revocation of the deportation order she said she
    regretted her behaviour.  Her relationship with her second husband,  Mr
    O was strong and subsisting.  Her greatest punishment is not to be able
    to care for her son.  He has been living on and off in  India  and  UK.
    However it was decided this arrangement was not fair on him as  he  was
    not able to settle in either country.  He has been  living  permanently
    in the UK since early 2011 with his  father  who  has  been  a  British
    citizen since 1974.  Her son has developed close ties with other family
    members in the UK.

 4. In refusing the application the Respondent accepted that the  Appellant
    is in a genuine and subsisting relationship with Mr O.  However,  being
    of Indian ancestry he could relocate or visit as he has been doing.  It
    was also accepted that there is a genuine and  subsisting  relationship
    between her and her child.  He is young enough  to  relocate  to  India
    where he has lived on and off.  If that course of action was not chosen
    he could visit or keep in touch with his  mother  by  modern  means  of
    communication.  His father is well able to care for him here.   It  was
    accepted that the child, were he to relocate to India would be deprived
    of the benefits of living as  a  British  citizen  but  the  Respondent
    considered his  interests  were  outweighed  by  the  serious  criminal
    aspects of the case.  There were no exceptional circumstances  in  this
    case.  The criminal conduct was so serious that  in  the  interests  of
    protecting the public from harm it  was  considered  conducive  to  the
    public good not to revoke the deportation order.

 5. She appealed.  Following a hearing at Taylor House on  30  August  2013
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andonian  dismissed  the  appeal.   In
    summary, he found that he did not believe the spouse, Mr O  in  respect
    of his evidence, in particular, that he was unaware of the  Appellant's
    previous history and that her arrest in 2007 came as a  shock  to  him.
    He found that the son sees a lot of both parents variously in India and
    in the UK and has both sides of the family here and there: 'he is  free
    to go to India at any time and indeed does  do  that  frequently'.   He
    speaks his native language and English fluently and has a home in India
    and in the UK.  When in India he is in communication with his father by
    phone.  When in the UK the family speak on the  phone  to  each  other.
    The judge did not consider there would be  a  serious  interference  to
    family life if the status quo was preserved and the Appellant  was  not
    permitted to come to the UK for the  full  length  of  her  deportation
    order.  Furthermore any interference  would  be  proportionate  to  the
    permissible aim of preventing crime and disorder and maintaining proper
    immigration control.  There was no breach of Article 8 nor  were  there
    serious circumstances that amount to compelling factors which  outweigh
    the need for continuation of the deportation order.  (Paragraph 390 and
    391 of the Immigration Rules).

 6. She sought permission to appeal which was granted on  reapplication  to
    the Upper Tribunal on 24 October 2013.

 7. At the error of law hearing before me on 28 November 2013 it was agreed
    by both parties that the judge had materially  erred  in  law.   First,
    while it was not contended that the judge had not taken some account of
    the situation of the child by finding, for example, that  he  sees  his
    mother regularly when his father takes him to  India  and  he  is  able
    there to attend school, the judge did not consider the  issue  of  what
    the child's best interests were, let alone treat those  best  interests
    as a primary consideration.  Had he done so he would have been required
    to consider issues such as whether it is in the child's  best  interest
    not to have undisturbed and continuous proximity to both parents in one
    country or that it is reasonable to expect the child to have to  go  to
    India to see his mother to receive any  sort  of  consistent  education
    only to be returned to the UK to see his father and where, as the judge
    appeared to find, his education is compromised by  poor  attendance  at
    school because of his father's work commitments.

 8. Second, the judge's assessment of factors relevant  to  the  Article  8
    enquiry was contrary to the evidence and findings of previous  judicial
    proceedings which  should  have  constituted  at  the  very  least  the
    starting point for his deliberations  on  similar  issues.   The  judge
    rejected the husband's position that when he first met and married  the
    Appellant and until her most recent  arrest  he  had  no  idea  of  her
    criminal history.  This is contrary to the findings of both  the  judge
    who sentenced and the findings of the  Tribunal  that  dealt  with  her
    appeal against deportation historically, both of  which  accepted  that
    the husband was wholly unaware of his wife's history of deception.  The
    judge's contrary findings do not address at all the finding made by the
    previous Tribunal and Court.  It is significant because it appeared  to
    weigh heavily on the  mind  of  the  judge  when  deliberating  on  the
    Appellant's instant appeal and the evidence of the husband  in  support
    of it (see [10, 14]).   In  any  event,  whilst  considering  that  the
    husband had knowledge of her criminal past the  judge  failed  to  take
    account of the fact that the child was in no way to blame for, and  had
    no  knowledge  of,  his  mother's  past  behaviour  when  reaching  his
    conclusion on the proportionality  of  disrespecting  the  family  life
    sought to be enjoyed by the child and his parents.

 9. The judge also made errors of fact stating for example (at  [12])  that
    there was no evidence as to the school the Appellant has been  enrolled
    in here in the UK.  Yet at [14] he referred to  such  evidence  (itself
    appearing at pp16-18 of the Appellant's bundle).

10. Third, aspects of the judge's findings are irrational.  Thus, at  [11],
    the judge rejected  the  husband's  evidence  that  the  Appellant  had
    learned her lesson having served her time in custody  and  having  been
    absent from her husband and child for the past four years, on the basis
    that she had failed to appear in court  and  fled  to  India  and  then
    returned using a false name.  Clearly the matters referred  to  by  the
    judge predated the period in custody and the period of separation  from
    her husband and child and were therefore not a rational basis to reject
    the grounds upon which it  was  said  the  Appellant  had  learned  her
    lesson.

11. By consent the determination was set aside to be reheard.  No  findings
    stood.

12. At the resumed hearing I had before me statements by the Appellant, the
    Sponsor (Appellant's husband) and the Sponsor's mother (Mrs F O) also a
    medical letter in connection with Mrs F O.  I allowed  to  be  received
    after the hearing a number of items which it was said were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal but, for reasons unclear, were not with the papers.
     They were resubmitted by the representatives  in  a  letter  dated  14
    January 2014.  Most of the items concern the  Appellant's  son  (Y  O).
    They include letters from his school and from various medical sources.

13. I heard brief oral evidence first from the Appellant's husband, Mr R O.
     He adopted his statement.  In cross-examination he was asked about his
    son's behaviour.  He said it was erratic, and he  was  liable  to  mood
    swings.  At school he had been showing a lack of attention and had been
    the victim of bullying.  There had been problems also with getting  him
    to school on time.  He (the witness) was  often  on  shift  work.   His
    mother on whom he relied on such occasions is elderly and  ill  so  was
    not always able to ensure the boy's attendance.  Recently the situation
    had improved.  He has been allocated  a  school  nearer  to  where  the
    family live.  He is now attending, is happy, and  is  no  longer  being
    bullied.  He has also been assessed and is receiving counselling from a
    child psychologist.

14. Asked in re-examination when the boy's behavioural problems began,  the
    witness said he had had such all his life.  He had been hospitalised as
    a baby.  I then heard from Y O the son of the Appellant and of Mr R  O.
    He is 7 years old.  He said that what was contained  in  his  statement
    was the truth.  He said that in recent years he has spent part  of  his
    time in India where his mother lives.  He does not  like  living  there
    because of the insects and the heat.  He prefers living in the UK.   He
    misses his mother.

15. I heard finally from Mrs  F  O,  the  Appellant's  mother-in-law.   She
    adopted her statement.  She said that her grandson's behaviour at  home
    had been 'abnormal'.  He does not listen to her or his  father  and  no
    one disciplines him.  She puts down his behaviour  to  his  mother  not
    being with him.  He misses her.  When his mother phones he is sometimes
    angry and aggressive with her telling her  to  come  to  the  UK.   The
    witness accepted that there had been difficulties getting  the  boy  to
    school.  His father was often away at work  and  she  herself  is  ill.
    They now paid a carer to take him.

16. In submissions, Mr Deller said the Appellant's history  showed  serious
    criminality.  In the normal course she  would  be  expected  to  remain
    outside the UK for at least ten  years  before  the  deportation  order
    could be revoked.  Here the issue was whether  the  Appellant's  family
    life and in particular the best interests of the child were  sufficient
    to overcome the serious criminality.  Reference  to  psychological  and
    health difficulties of the child  were  likely  to  be  important.   Mr
    Deller did not seek to argue that it would be reasonable for the family
    life to continue abroad.  The husband had a long history in the UK  and
    the son had the material benefits of being a British citizen.

17. In reply Mr Waheed said that the oral evidence  was  that  the  child's
    problems were in part contributable to the lack  of  his  mother.   The
    sins of the mother were being visited on her son.  Were she  to  remain
    abroad for ten years the boy would be much older and  would  have  lost
    the benefit of having her as a parent.  The human rights of  the  child
    were crucial.  Also, her husband was suffering by not having  his  wife
    by his side.  There was also strain on the mother-in-law who is elderly
    and ill.

18. The Immigration Rules deal with revocation of a  deportation  order  at
    paragraph 390ff

         '390.    An application for revocation of a deportation order  will
               be  considered  in  the  light  of  all  the   circumstances
               including the following:


                (i)    the grounds on which the order was made;

                (ii)   any representations made in support of revocation;


                (iii)   the  interests  of  the  community,  including   the
                    maintenance of an effective immigration control;


                (iv)    the  interests  of  the  applicant,  including   any
                    compassionate circumstances.


         390A.    Where paragraph 398 applies [the Respondent] assessing the
               application will consider  whether  paragraph  399  or  399A
               applies and, if it does not, it will only be in  exceptional
               circumstances that the public interest  in  maintaining  the
               deportation order will be outweighed by other factors.

         391.     In the case of an applicant  ...  who  has  been  deported
                following  conviction  for  a  criminal  offence   continued
                exclusion ...


                (i)    in the case of a conviction which is capable of being
                    spent under the Rehabilitation of  Offenders  Act  1974,
                    unless the conviction is spent  within  the  meaning  of
                    that Act or, if the conviction is spent in less than ten
                    years, ten years have elapsed since the  making  of  the
                    deportation order; or


                (ii)   in the case of a conviction  not  being  spent  under
                    that Act, at any time,  unless  refusal  to  revoke  the
                    deportation order would be contrary to the Human  Rights
                    Convention ...


               will  normally  be  the  proper  course.   In  other   cases
               revocation of the order  will  not  normally  be  authorised
               unless the situation has been materially altered, either  by
               a change of circumstances since the order was  made,  or  by
               fresh information coming to light which was not  before  ...
               the appellate authorities, or the Secretary of  State.   The
               passage of time since the person was deported  may  also  in
               itself amount to  such  a  change  of  circumstances  as  to
               warrant revocation of the order ...'

19. In this case it was not disputed that the Appellant's convictions  were
    not spent.  As the convictions were for less than 30  months  they  are
    capable of being spent.

20. Paragraph 398 (b) applies. Paragraph 399 does not  apply:  the  child's
    father is able to care for the child in the UK.   Paragraph  399A  also
    does not apply.

21. The Secretary  of  State  considered  the  circumstances  mentioned  in
    paragraph 390.  I note first the grounds on which the deportation order
    was made.  In January 2008 at Leicester Crown Court the  Appellant  was
    convicted of two counts of obtaining leave to enter or remain in the UK
    by deception and was sentenced to twelve months' imprisonment.  She was
    also sentenced to twelve months'  imprisonment  for  conspiracy  to  be
    knowingly concerned in making or carrying out arrangements for securing
    or facilitating entry of illegal entrants, to  run  concurrently.   She
    was previously convicted of this crime in February 2004 but  failed  to
    appear at her trial having fled to India.  She was  also  sentenced  to
    three months' imprisonment for breach of bail,  that  sentence  to  run
    concurrently with the others.

22. The Respondent noted in detail the sentencing judge's  remarks.   These
    included:

         'The reality is this - this has been the second time round for this
         defendant because she cheated the system  on  two  occasions.   She
         knew well what she was getting into and she has shown herself to be
         a thoroughly devious person ... The first indictment clearly was  a
         well planned and sophisticated scam  involving  recruitment,  false
         documents and activities in India and substantial funding.'

23. The Respondent went on to note the comments of the tribunal  panel  who
    considered the appeal against deportation:

         'We find that there are some deportation cases such as  this  where
         the personal criminal conduct of the proposed deportee is  such  by
         its very nature  that  it  is  said  that  public  policy  requires
         deportation even though there may be no evidence of a propensity to
         re-offend.  This Appellant's conviction comes within such category.
          We would again refer  to  the  particular  circumstances  of  this
         Appellant's serious offending and the judge's  sentencing  remarks.
         We note that this Appellant was guilty of a number of very  serious
         offences.  We find that the Respondent is correct in her conclusion
         that the public interest requires deportation.'

24. The Respondent also noted that the Appellant had used three alias names
    whilst living in the UK.

25. The Respondent went on to consider  the  representations  made  by  the
    Appellant.  In summary, that she had remarried Mr R O in  January  2011
    under Islamic law since it was alleged that she was not  divorced  when
    she married her present husband in 2005.  They have a son born in  2006
    who is a British citizen.  The relationship between Appellant  and  her
    husband is strong and subsisting.  She deeply regrets her  actions  and
    has a great feeling of guilt at not being able to see and care for  her
    son and this is the greatest punishment in itself.

26. Their son has been living on and off in  India  so  that  both  parents
    could  spend  time  with  him.   However  it  was  decided  that   this
    arrangement was not fair on him as he was not able to settle in  either
    country.  He has been living permanently  since  early  2011  with  his
    father.  The child has developed close ties to the UK with his extended
    family.  It is not reasonable for the child and his father to  relocate
    to India.  The father   has lived in the UK since 1974 and as a British
    citizen since 1979.  He has worked for a railway company since 1974 and
    has developed many close ties over the last 37 years.  He has  siblings
    and other relatives here to whom he is close.

27. The Respondent in her letter  accepted  that  the  Appellant  is  in  a
    genuine and subsisting relationship with her husband and that  she  has
    at least some degree of financial dependency on her husband.   However,
    it was considered that it was open to her husband to relocate to India,
    or that if he chose not to, he could visit and otherwise keep in  touch
    through modern means of communication as he had, indeed, done since she
    was deported in 2009.

28. The Respondent also accepted that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her son but took the view that he  was  of
    an age when he would be able to adjust to life in India.  He  had  been
    doing so on and off and there was no indication that  he  had  suffered
    undue hardship.  He could integrate into the Indian educational system.
     There was no indication of medical,  social,  financial  circumstances
    that would prevent relocation of the child and his father to India.

29. The Respondent noted that the child was a British citizen by birth  and
    that such conferred substantial rights on him.  However, the Respondent
    concluded that his interests were outweighed by the criminal aspects of
    the case.

30. The Respondent concluded, as the judge who dealt with  the  deportation
    had concluded, that the criminal conduct was  so  serious  that  public
    interest in maintaining the deportation outweighed other factors.

31. The  Respondent  ended  by  stating  that  there  were  no  exceptional
    circumstances which warranted departure from that  position,  repeating
    that her husband could relocate to live in India, being able to  return
    as he wished to visit family members here.

32.  As  indicated,  paragraph  390A  states  that  'it  will  only  be  in
    exceptional circumstances that the public interest in  maintaining  the
    deportation order will be outweighed by other factors'.

33. Paragraphs 40-46 of MF (Nigeria)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  are
    particularly pertinent to the question of  'exceptional  circumstances'
    and public interest.

       34. At [43]     'The word "exceptional" is often used  to  denote  a
           departure from a general rule.  The general rule in the  present
           context is that, in the case of a foreign prisoner to whom paras
           399 and 399A do not  apply,  very  compelling  reasons  will  be
           required to outweigh the public interest in  deportation.  These
           compelling reasons are the "exceptional circumstances".

         [44]     We would, therefore,  hold  that  the  new  Rules  are  a
           complete code and  that  the  exceptional  circumstances  to  be
           considered in the balancing exercise involve the application  of
           a  proportionality  test   as   required   by   the   Strasbourg
           jurisprudence. ...

         [45]     Even if we were wrong about that, it would  be  necessary
           to apply a proportionality test outside the new Rules ... Either
           way, the result would be the same.'

35. I note also at this stage the importance of deterrence, in  considering
    the public interest.  As the Court of Appeal said in AM v  SSHD  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 1634:

         'In measuring proportionality the public interest in deterrence  is
         a material and necessary consideration.  ...  It  is  an  indelible
         feature of the balancing exercise that the  decision  maker  weighs
         the consequences of deportation against  the  full  import  of  the
         legitimate aim to be achieved. ...'

36. In considering this case I may say that no issues of  credibility  were
    taken against  the  witnesses  who  gave  evidence  or  indeed  of  the
    Appellant,  through  her  statement.   In  summary,  I  find  that  the
    relationship between the Appellant  and  her  husband  is  genuine  and
    subsisting.  It is clear that he was not aware until her arrest in 2007
    of her previous history. It is accepted that he and the  Appellant  are
    lawfully married.

37. I find that the child has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with
    the Appellant.  It is clear that efforts have  been  made  to  continue
    family life by the father and son spending  time  each  year  with  the
    Appellant in India until  2011  when  it  was  felt  that  it  was  too
    unsettling for the child and was discontinued.  I accept that the child
    did not find living in India easy particularly due to the heat. I  have
    no doubt that he misses his mother.

38. I require to consider the best interest of the child, who  is  7  years
    old, as a primary consideration.  As Lady Hale said in ZH (Tanzania)  v
    SSHD [2011] UKSC 4:

         'This does not mean  (as  it  would  do  in  other  contexts)  that
         identifying  their  best  interests  would  lead  inexorably  to  a
         decision in conformity with  those  interests.  Provided  that  the
         Tribunal did not treat any other consideration as  inherently  more
         significant than the best  interests  of  the  children,  it  could
         conclude that the strength of the other  considerations  outweighed
         them.  The important thing, therefore, is to  consider  those  best
         interests first.'

39. She then asked what is encompassed in the best interests of the  child,
    concluding that it will involve asking  whether  it  is  reasonable  to
    expect the child to live in another country.  Relevant to this  include
    the level of the child's integration in this country and the length  of
    absence from the other country.  Lady Hale  also  said:  'Acknowledging
    that the best interests of the child must be a primary consideration in
    these cases raises the question of how these are to be discovered.   An
    important part of this is discovering the child's own views'.  Further,
    she noted that a child is not to be  held  responsible  for  the  moral
    failures of either of his parents.

40. In this case I consider that the correct starting point in  considering
    the welfare and best interests of a young child is that he should  live
    with and be brought up by his  parents,  subject  to  any  very  strong
    contra -indication.  It is generally in the interests  of  children  to
    have both stability and continuity of social and educational  provision
    and the benefit of growing up in the cultural norms of the  society  to
    which  he  belongs.   Lengthy  residence  in  a  country  can  lead  to
    development of social, cultural and educational ties that it  would  be
    inappropriate to disrupt, in the absence of compelling reasons  to  the
    contrary.

41. In this case the child is nearly 8  years  old.   He  has,  apart  from
    periods in India with both parents until 2011, spent his whole life  in
    the UK where he was born.  Such is lengthy residence.  He is no  longer
    a very young child focused solely on his parents rather than his peers.
     He is also importantly, a British citizen.  As Lady Hale said  in  ZH:
    'Although nationality is  not  a  "trump  card"  it  is  of  particular
    importance in assessing the best interests of a child'.   The  benefits
    that citizenship brings must not readily be discounted.

42. Here, there is evidence that the child  has  behavioural  difficulties.
    The oral evidence to that effect  is  supported  by  letters  from  his
    school and from medical sources.  It was not suggested that these  were
    solely the consequence of the  absence  of  his  mother.   He  has  had
    problems since birth.  However, I find of some assistance a letter from
    a child psychologist at Homerton University Hospital  (9  August  2013)
    stating that the child is unsettled by living in both  countries,  here
    and abroad with his mother.  Also, a letter from the Deputy Head of his
    primary school in which she states: 'With  regard  to  the  impact  his
    mother not being with him is having: this could only be my  opinion,  I
    do feel it would definitely have a positive impact to have  his  family
    back together'.

43. I conclude on the evidence before me looked at in the round that it  is
    in the best interests of the child to live with both parents and to  do
    so in the UK. This is a young child, thus not at an  age  where  he  is
    starting to establish an independent  life,  but  rather  an  age  when
    maternal support is expected and necessary. He wants to lives with  his
    mother as well as his father.

44. Contrary to what was stated in the Explanatory Statement, Mr Deller did
    not seek to argue that the child and his father could reasonably go and
    live with his mother in India.  In my judgment he was correct  to  take
    that view.  As  indicated,  the  intrinsic  importance  of  citizenship
    should not be played down.  As a British citizen the child  has  rights
    which he would not be able to exercise if he moved to another  country.
    He would lose the advantage of growing up and being educated in his own
    country, his own culture and his own language.

45. The father is also a British citizen who has lived and worked in the UK
    for 37 years. All his ties, other than with his wife, are with the UK.

46. I have given significant weight to the child's British nationality  and
    sought to assess his best interests, concluding that these are that  he
    continues to live in the UK, and that he does so with both parents.  It
    cannot, in my judgement, be the case that  the  child  and  his  father
    could maintain contact with the Appellant by, as the Respondent puts it
    in the Explanatory  Statement,  visiting  and  by  'modern  methods  of
    communication'. Families normally live together. Family  life  consists
    of the interdependent bonds between  spouses  or  stable  partners  and
    between parents and children with particular strength being placed upon
    the interests and welfare of minor  children.  It  is  not  normal  for
    family life to be enjoyed by correspondence and occasional visits.

47. However, it is necessary to take account  of  the  whole  circumstances
    which include the undisputed fact that the Appellant's history involved
    serious dishonesty.

48. In considering deterrence and the public interest  I  note  first  that
    there is no suggestion that the Appellant is likely to reoffend.

49. The Appellant has been absent from this country for nearly five  years.
    I see no reason to doubt her comment in her statement:

         'I will never be making the same mistake again and neither  will  I
         be reoffending as the passage of time has taught me the biggest and
         most painful lesson of all and that is not being able to be with my
         innocent son.  He does not even know why I am not  in  the  country
         with him.'

50. Her son was, of course,  born  in  2006  which  is  after  her  initial
    dishonesty which resulted in her fleeing to  India  in  2004  to  avoid
    trial, and also after her dishonest  return  to  the  UK  in  2005.  In
    finding mitigating factors the sentencing judge, as well as noting  her
    early plea of guilty to  the  second  indictment,  her  otherwise  good
    character, a letter of remorse, also noted that 'events have  moved  on
    because she has remarried and now has a young son'. As  indicated,  she
    has also been out of the country a considerable length of time.

51. I have no doubt from the evidence before me  that  the  effect  on  the
    Appellant of being separated from her child  for  most  of  his  recent
    formative years has been  particularly  severe.  I  consider  that  the
    deterrent effect on her has been very significant. In no sense has  she
    got away with her criminality, nor would she be seen as such by others.
    Whilst having little sympathy with her as an individual, the high  risk
    is that by her continued exclusion it is  the  child  who  increasingly
    suffers as he grows up.

52. I cannot see an argument that, in light of the  circumstances  of  this
    particular case, early revocation of the deportation order would weaken
    the principle of deterrence as viewed by wider society.

53. In looking at the evidence as a whole it does seem to me that there are
    'exceptional circumstances' in this  case  which  outweigh  the  public
    interest in maintaining the deportation order.

54. The appeal succeeds under the Rules.

55. I note  finally  paragraph  392  which  states  that  revocation  of  a
    deportation order does not entitle the person concerned to re-enter the
    UK: it renders the person eligible to apply  for  admission  under  the
    Rules.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material error  of  law.
It is set aside and remade as follows:

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 45(4)(i) of the Asylum and  Immigration
Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


