
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07868/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30 September 2015                 |On 23 October 2015                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          THE HONOURABLE LORD BURNS
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     AHM
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Adebayo, Counsel, instructed by A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant, who claims to be a stateless Kuwaiti Bidoon, applied
         on 9 April 2014 for entry clearance under  family  reunion  in  the
         United Kingdom under paragraph 352A of the Rules.   The  respondent
         refused his application by letter dated 4 June 2014.   He  appealed
         to the  First-tier  Tribunal  who  heard  evidence  and  considered
         documents at a hearing on 31 March 2015 and thereafter refused  the
         appeal.

      2. The respondent had refused  the  application  because,  first,  the
         appellant had not produced the documentation which the  Immigration
         Rules required in order to establish identity and nationality  and,
         secondly, had not  satisfied  the  respondent  that  he  was  in  a
         subsisting relationship and intended to live permanently within the
         UK.

      3. Before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant, who was  represented,
         contended that the respondent had failed to take into consideration
         the guidance on  the  situation  of  "undocumented  Bidoons".   The
         marriage contract, the original of which was produced, was the only
         form of evidence available to  prove  his  marriage.   Bidoons  are
         denied other original documents.  He offered to provide evidence of
         contact and ongoing relationship with his wife (the sponsor).

      4. Evidence was led from the appellant, the sponsor and her sister.  A
         birth document was produced showing the appellant's date  of  birth
         in 1975 but this bore to have been issued by a health centre rather
         than the ministry of  health.   It  was  dated  2007.   A  marriage
         certificate was also produced.  The sponsor spoke to  the  marriage
         which took place in May 2010 as did her sister, who claimed to have
         been present.  It was said that the couple lived together in Kuwait
         until April 2013 when  the  sponsor  fled  to  the  UK  because  of
         persecution.  She has been granted refugee status.

      5. The sponsor spoke to continuing contact by telephone after a period
         during which the appellant had been in detention in Kuwait.

      6. On consideration of the documents produced, the Tribunal noted that
         the terms of rule 320(3) of the Immigration Rules  were  mandatory.
         The failure to produce "a valid national passport or other document
         satisfactorily establishing his  identity  and  nationality"  is  a
         ground on which entry  clearance  or  leave  to  enter  "is  to  be
         refused".  It found that the documents provided, namely  the  birth
         certificate and marriage contract, did not satisfactorily establish
         identity or nationality and agreed with  the  reasons  for  refusal
         given in the refusal letter of 4 June 2014. It went on to find that
         the relationship between the appellant  and  the  sponsor  did  not
         comprise a genuine and subsisting marriage and that  they  did  not
         intend to live together permanently in the UK.  Article 8  was  not
         therefore engaged.  There was  no  family  or  private  life.   The
         Tribunal therefore dismissed the appeal under the Rules  and  under
         Article 8.

      7. Before this  Tribunal,  Mr  Adebayo  argued  that  the  First  tier
         Tribunal  had  misinterpreted  Rule  320(3)  of  the   Rules.    By
         definition, the appellant could have  no  documentation  a  literal
         interpretation of the Rules should not have been imposed.

      8. What the First-tier Tribunal did, it appears to us, was to identify
         that the provision of documentation  establishing  identity  was  a
         requirement of  the  rules.   However,  it  was  not  necessary  to
         provide, for example, a valid passport.  What is required  is  some
         documentary evidence which, in the  view  of  the  decision  maker,
         "satisfactorily" establishes nationality or  identity.   The  First
         tier Tribunal adopted the correct approach. What was offered up  to
         it was a  marriage  contract  and  a  birth  document.   Those  are
         described by the tribunal at paragraph 18(1) and 18(2) and it gives
         cogent and sustainable reasons why it found  that  those  documents
         did not meet the  requirement  of  the  rules.   The  tribunal  was
         entitled to reach that view.  It then  went  on  to  examine  other
         evidence which was, or might have  been,  available  and  commented
         that there was no evidence given as  to  the  appellant's  identity
         from, for example, parents, siblings or wider family.

      9. It was legitimate for the  Tribunal  to  test  the  provenance  and
         reliability of the  documents  that  were  before  it  against  the
         presence or  absence  of  other  documentation  or  evidence.   For
         example, it is stated at 20.2(ii) that no explanation was given  as
         to whether the appellant carried a security card.  That is not used
         as a discrete reason for refusal but is simply a comment  that  the
         appellant's possession of a security card is left unexplained.   It
         was for the appellant to prove his case.  The tribunal  decided  on
         the basis of its analysis of the evidence that he had failed to  do
         so.  We cannot fault that conclusion.  Nor do we consider that  the
         Tribunal fell into error by treating this case  as  if  it  was  an
         asylum appeal, as was argued before us.  It is plain that  what  it
         did was to test the provenance of  these  documents  against  other
         factors in reaching the conclusion that they  failed  to  meet  the
         requirements of the rules.

     10. So far as the relationship between the sponsor and the appellant is
         concerned,  having  found  that  the  appellant   had   failed   to
         demonstrate that he fell within Rule 320(3), it was  not  necessary
         for the tribunal to consider the relationship between the appellant
         and the sponsor. But we consider, contrary to the submissions made,
         that the tribunal took  into  account  all  the  relevant  evidence
         available which is adequately summarised  at  paragraph  21.2,  but
         considered, having viewed the matter in the round, that because  of
         the findings in relation to the marriage contract and the  lack  of
         evidence regarding communication, the  factors  prayed  in  aid  in
         support of  the  relationship  did  not  tip  the  balance  in  the
         appellant's favour.

     11. It is set out at paragraph 18.3 what the evidence of  communication
         between the parties was and it is pointed out  that  there  was  no
         evidence regarding those communications prior  to  the  application
         date or of a shared life together in Kuwait.

     12. Having made that finding, and having found that there was no  proof
         of marriage, the tribunal was justified in  concluding  that  there
         was no evidence of family life.  No evidence of  private  life  was
         provided in any event.

     13. In the circumstances we consider that the First-tier  Tribunal  did
         not err in law and we will  accordingly  refuse  this  appeal.  The
         decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appeal  is
         maintained.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date

Lord Burns
Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal

