
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: OA/07800/2014
                                                               OA/07806/2014
                                                               OA/07809/2014
                                                               OA/07811/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 3 February 2016                   |On 17 February 2016                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                             IMAM TURKI ALSHAMRY
                                    H AF
                                    M AF
                                    A AF
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr S Saeed, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants who claim to be stateless Bidoons from  Kuwait  appealed
    against the decisions of the respondent refusing to  grant  them  entry
    clearances as a spouse and children  of  their  sponsor  who  has  been
    granted humanitarian protection  in  the  United  Kingdom  pursuant  to
    paragraph 352 of the Immigration Rules. First-tier Tribunal Judge James
    dismissed all the appellants' appeals in  a  decision  dated  7  August
    2015.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by first-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler on
    16 December 2015 who found that it is arguable that the Judge failed to
    give separate consideration and to make findings in relation to  family
    reunion on the part of a child and to make proper findings  in  respect
    of those requirements. It is also arguable that the Judge erred in  her
    assessment of the mother's appeal by reference to Article 8.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge at paragraph 12 of the determination sets
    out all the evidence provided by the appellant. This  was  their  birth
    certificates issued by the Ministry of  Health  in  Kuwait.  The  birth
    certificates confirmed that  each  of  the  appellants  are  non-Kuwait
    stateless Bidoons. The marriage certificate of the  appellant  and  his
    wife confirming they married in 2003 and that their nationality is "non-
    Kuwaiti"  and  issued  by  the  Imam  of  the  mosque.  UNCHR  document
    confirming registration of the spouse and her three  children  27  July
    2014 (confirming their status position) and the respondents card issued
    by UNHCR for  a  further  appointment  on  2  July  2015,  DNA  results
    confirming the relationship of the sponsor and the  children  as  their
    father and were also the children of the mother. The  sponsor's  asylum
    interview on 4 January 2012 in which he gave the details  of  his  wife
    and children at his interview on and confirmed he was a Kuwait  Bidoon.
    A  detailed  asylum  interview  of  the  sponsor   sitting   down   his
    statelessness and that of his  family,  the  threats  and  deprivations
    experienced due to their statelessness in Kuwait, and  details  of  his
    marriage to the first appellant. Photographs of  the  sponsor  and  the
    first appellant wedding ceremony.

 4. The Judge accepted that the DNA tests were undertaken  by  an  credited
    scientific laboratory  authorised  by  the  respondent,  Cellmark.  The
    sponsor in his witness statement confirmed that his wife travelled from
    Kuwait to Syria after he obtained refugee status but due to civil  war,
    she travelled to Jordan and their  children  as  a  refugee  using  the
    services of an agent. The  Judge  took  judicial  note  of  the  Syrian
    humanitarian crisis.

 5. The Judge stated, "taking the entirety of the evidence before  me  into
    account, except the documentary and oral evidence submitted in  support
    of the fact the appellant's stateless Bidoons, I am satisfied that  the
    appellants  have  provided  credible  documentary   evidence   of   the
    nationalities and identities under paragraph 320 (3) and therefore  the
    mandatory  grant  the  refusal  of  entry  clearance  does  not  apply.
    Considering the positive finding that these  appellants  are  stateless
    Bidoons the respondent should consider accepting the appellant's claims
    and documents under the discretionary power of paragraph 320 (10).  The
    Judge  also  accepted  the  marriage  certificate   and   the   wedding
    photographs, which together with the birth of the children confirm that
    the couple's relationship was ongoing up to the conception and birth of
    the youngest child in January 2010, when  the  sponsor  then  fled  and
    claimed asylum in the United Kingdom in 2011.

 6. The Judge however found that he  cannot  accept  that  documents  which
    include conversations from "what's  up"  because  they  have  not  been
    translated. He found that in the absence of evidence of contact between
    the appellant and his wife, there is nothing  to  show  that  they  are
    ongoing and subsisting relationship since the sponsor  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom and therefore the appeal fails under the Family  Reunion
    Rules.

 7. I find this to be a remarkable conclusion given the evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge. It is perverse for the Judge to  dismiss  an
    appeal where  the  appellant  has  provided  all  documents,  including
    documents from UNHCR which state  that  the  appellants  are  stateless
    Bidoons. The appellant's sponsor also gave the names of  his  wife  and
    children at his asylum interview in 2012 as his pre-flight family. This
    was clearly the pre-flight family of the sponsor who has  been  granted
    humanitarian protection in the United Kingdom.

 8. The Judge accepts  that  the  relationship  was  subsisting  until  the
    conception of the last child in 2011 when the sponsor left the country.
    The Judge gave no reasons for why he thought that the relationship  has
    ceased to subsist and upon what evidence he had a  suspicion  that  the
    relationships no longer subsists. The very fact  that  the  application
    has been made for the appellants to join their sponsor  in  the  United
    Kingdom is indicative of a subsisting relationship.

 9. The Judge failed to take into account the guidance given in the case of
    Goudey (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan [2012] UKUT  00041  (IAC)
    where Mr Justice Blake stated that the matrimonial relationship  is  to
    continue at the relevant time rather  than  just  the  formality  of  a
    marriage, but it does not require the production of particular evidence
    of mutual devotion before entry clearance can be granted. It also  said
    that evidence of telephone cards is capable of  becoming  corroborative
    of the contention of the parties that they  communicate  by  telephone,
    even if such. I cannot confirm the particular number  the  sponsor  was
    calling in the country in question. It is not a  requirement  that  the
    parties  also  right  or  text  each  other.   Where   there   are   no
    countervailing factors generating suspicion as to the intention of  the
    parties, such evidence may be sufficient to  discharge  the  burden  of
    proof on the claimant.

10. The Judge placed a great deal of reliance on untranslated  "what's  up"
    messages and even then, said that they do not prove that the appellants
    and the sponsor are in a continuing relationship. The  Judge  also  did
    not give reasons for why he considered that  the  appellant's  children
    are no longer in a relationship with their sponsor who is their father.
    He gave no reasons for why he came to this conclusion  given  that  the
    appellants provided credible documents to prove their case.

11. I therefore find that there has been an error of law in the  assessment
    of this case as to whether the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    have been met. I therefore set aside the decision in its  entirety,  as
    it is infected by a material error of law.

   Remaking the decision

12. Everything is neutral in this case as there was no  evidence  of  lies,
    poor immigration history of deception. I am satisfied that the evidence
    as a whole that the Immigration Rules have been complied with and  that
    the appellant and her children  are  the  pre-flight  family  of  their
    sponsor who  has  been  granted  humanitarian  protection  in  in  this
    country. They have provided ample and cogent  evidence  to  demonstrate
    this.

13. I therefore find that the appellants meet the requirements  of  352  of
    the Immigration Rules and are entitled to entry clearance as  the  pre-
    flight family of  their  sponsor  who  has  been  granted  humanitarian
    protection in the United Kingdom.


Signed by
A Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Mrs S Chana

Dated this 15th day of February 2016

