
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07348/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 27 May 2014                                |On 07th July 2014            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                               mr Amman Urfan

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair, instructed by Prolegis Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   This is an appeal against the decision of the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    of 22 January 2013 refusing entry clearance to the appellant who sought
    leave to enter the United Kingdom and remain as a  dependent  relative.
    He is a child of 9 who wants to join his  mother  and  brother  in  the
    United Kingdom.

2.   The judge set out under the heading "Paragraph 297" under  paragraph  2
    of the determination the basis upon which the appeal  was  made,  three
    particular provisions of paragraph 297 of HC  395,  subparagraphs  (a),
    (e) and (f), and also Article 8, and he heard oral  evidence  from  the
    sponsor and, as I think  is  common  ground  between  Ms  Mair  and  Mr
    McVeety, essentially concentrated  too  much  on  earlier  DNA  reports
    concerning the parentage of the appellant, and as Mr McVeety says, this
    was a matter that had been determined previously by  Judge  Edwards  in
    July  2011.   The  evidence  was  clear.   It  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant's claimed mother is his mother.  About his claimed father the
    evidence was somewhat ambiguous and the judge found that neither did it
    show that he was his father nor did it show that he was not.

3.   He rather thereafter glossed over the key issues  in  this  case.   The
    297A point is  effectively  determined  by  the  conclusion  about  the
    father.  It had not been shown  that  both  parents  were  present  and
    settled in the United Kingdom because it had not been  shown  that  his
    purported father was his father but on the  sole  responsibility  point
    the judge really said no more than as  is  set  out  at  paragraph  22,
    noting that he  was  living  with  his  grandmother  and  an  uncle  in
    Pakistan.  Taking into account the contents of the DNA reports and  all
    the other facts of this appeal he found that he could not conclude that
    the appellant had shown that both his parents were present and  settled
    in the  UK  and  that  his  mother  had  sole  responsibility  for  his
    upbringing despite his acceptance of her evidence that she did take  an
    active part in it and did send funds to her mother in Pakistan.

4.   On that Ms Mair has helpfully set out effectively paraphrasing what  is
    recorded pleasingly legibly in the judge's Record of  Proceedings,  the
    oral evidence of the sponsor, the appellant's mother, at  the  hearing.
    The witness statement which she had put in did not really  address  key
    matters which needed to be  brought  out  in  examination-in-chief  and
    cross-examination, and as  I  say,  these  matters  are  helpfully  and
    effectively summarised at paragraph 8 of Ms Mair's  grounds,  including
    such matters as the sponsor remitting funds every month for his upkeep,
    calling him two or three times a day,  always  speaking  to  him  after
    school, making all of  the  decisions  regarding  his  upbringing,  the
    relatives in Pakistan tell her what the issues  are,  she  relates  her
    decisions to them, these relate to everything to do with his  education
    and physical wellbeing, medical care and discipline, they tell her what
    he has been up to and she speaks to him about his behaviour.  And  then
    the grounds also go on to set out the correct legal test for the  issue
    of sole responsibility, particularly as set out by the AIT  in  TD  and
    the detailed guidance set out there.  This was not addressed at all  at
    paragraph 22.  That is a clear error of law.

5.   Also, there was no addressing at all  of  the  subparagraph  (f)  point
    where, as was accepted here, one parent is present and settled  in  the
    United Kingdom, whether there were serious  and  compelling  family  or
    other considerations making the exclusion of the child undesirable  and
    suitable arrangements had  been  made  for  his  care.   That  was  not
    addressed at all and is a matter that clearly requires to be addressed.

6.   Ms Mair has also challenged the findings in respect  of  Article  8  on
    the basis that the judge did not give proper consideration to the  best
    interests of the appellant and  effectively  applied  the  wrong  test.
    Rather than saying he has no family life  in  the  United  Kingdom  she
    says, and I agree, that the question was whether he enjoyed family life
    with his mother and brother.  That was not  addressed  and  Mr  McVeety
    takes some issue with the challenge in this regard but I think  in  the
    end it is a matter that is going to have to be assessed as part of  the
    consideration of this appeal overall.

7.   It is not a case where it would be appropriate for it  to  go  back  to
    the same judge clearly but it is a matter which falls within the Senior
    President's direction as to the appropriateness of venue of the  case's
    progress when there has been a need for a rehearing and I am  satisfied
    in this case that a sufficient degree of findings need to be made  that
    it must be sent back for rehearing by a First-tier Judge in Bradford.






Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
