
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07842/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |                  Decision & Reasons  |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 4 November 2015                    |                  On 24 November 2015 |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - KINGSTON
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                         mASTER ZADE TARKAINE BAILEY
                       (anonymity direction NOt made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J. Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. B. E. Jones of Counsel, instructed by
Immigration UK Limited


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Entry Clearance Officer against  the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge T. Jones promulgated on 8  April  2015  in
    which he allowed Master Bailey's appeal  against  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's decision to refuse leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  the
    child of a parent settled in the United Kingdom, under paragraph 297 of
    the immigration rules.
 2. For the purposes of this decision I shall refer to the Entry  Clearance
    Officer as the Respondent  and  to  Master  Bailey  as  the  Appellant,
    reflecting their positions before the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the ground  that  it  was  arguable
    that the judge's very brief findings were inadequately reasoned and  he
    had failed to take gaps in the evidence into account.


 4. The Sponsor attended  the  hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions

 5. Ms Isherwood submitted that there were inadequate reasons given for the
    finding of  sole  responsibility.   The  Appellant's  father  had  been
    mentioned in the letter submitted with the  application.   The  witness
    statements  referred  to  the  Appellant's  father.   She  referred  to
    paragraphs [10] and  [12]  of  the  Sponsor's  witness  statement,  and
    paragraph [3] of the Appellant's witness statement.  She submitted that
    the evidence regarding the Appellant's father needed to be resolved.


 6. She submitted that the letter from Knox College made  no  reference  to
    the point of contact for the Appellant.  The issue of  the  application
    having been made by the Appellant's  paternal  family  referred  to  in
    paragraph  [11]  of  the  Sponsor's  witness  statement  had  not  been
    addressed at all.  She submitted that paragraph  [5]  of  the  decision
    raised points which had not been covered by the judge.  The findings in
    paragraphs [14] and [15] were not borne out by the evidence.


 7. With reference to the Rule 24 response, paragraph [12],  she  submitted
    that the responsibility of the judge was to deal with the issues.


 8. Ms Jones relied on the Rule 24 response.  This refers to the  cases  of
    Buydov [2012] EWCA Civ 1739 and R (Iran) [2005] INLR 633.  She  further
    submitted that the Appellant's past history had been fully canvassed in
    evidence  before  the  judge.   The  judge  clearly  had  the  evidence
    regarding the Appellant's father in mind as  illustrated  by  paragraph
    [9] of the decision.  She submitted that  the  Appellant's  father  had
    prevented the Sponsor from having sole responsibility until  2004,  but
    in 2004 she had taken control and had  had  sole  responsibility  since
    then.


 9. She submitted that the only question that the judge had to address  was
    whether or not the Sponsor had sole responsibility.   His  finding  was
    that she does, and reasons for this finding were  given  at  paragraphs
    [14] and [15].  The judge found the Sponsor  credible  [14].   The  key
    point of the decision was the direction of the Appellant's  upbringing.
    It was not an unreasoned decision.  The grounds were  no  more  than  a
    disagreement with the findings of the judge.


Error of law


10. I  have  carefully  considered  the  grounds  and  the  decision.   The
    Respondent was not satisfied that the Sponsor had  sole  responsibility
    for the Appellant's upbringing.  This was the sole issue on  which  the
    application  had  been  refused  following   the   concession   as   to
    accommodation.


11. The findings of the judge are contained in paragraphs [14] and [15]  of
    the decision.  In paragraph [14] the judge found the Sponsor  credible.
    He states:


    "In overview and being mindful of the appropriate standard, as  to  the
    constituents of her evidence, I do find her credible, in respect of his
    (sic) claimed sole responsibility at date of decision."


12. The judge then gave reasons for finding the Sponsor to be credible.  He
    stated that when the Sponsor did not know what she was being asked, she
    asked for clarity.  He states:


    "She is in my judgement, though nervous and at times a little confused,
    timid perhaps, she did give credible and reliable evidence  as  to  her
    care for and the direction she has as to her son's upbringing,  welfare
    and education, in a credible way."


13. Paragraph [15] states:


    "I did not doubt in overview from all the Sponsor said and  that  which
    is claimed within the other statements (her sons and his  aunts),  that
    it is clear she is very much involved in  his  school  choices,  friend
    choices and upbringing.  She may have some difficulty  documenting  all
    contacts these days, but she was informed and informative,  as  to  her
    son's life, likes and dislikes.  I also noted, and took account of  the
    prior refusal, but equally the Sponsor  was  not  represented  and  her
    surprise at the conclusions reached.  She  commented  on  this  in  her
    statement, as to her been (sic) deemed confused  at  the  prior  appeal
    hearing.  I assessed her  as  I  heard  her  evidence  before  me,  and
    considered her to be truthful, concerned and involved in her son's life
    as claimed.   It  is  all  such  that  I  find  the  direction  of  the
    Appellant's life, education health and welfare  were  at  the  date  of
    decision the sole preserve of the Sponsor.  I find  with  reference  to
    the decision in TD that the submissions made on behalf of the Appellant
    in this respect are well made out."


14. In both paragraphs [14] and [15] the judge gives  reasons  for  finding
    the Sponsor to be credible.  He has acknowledged that she was  nervous,
    and at times confused, but "in overview" he found her to  be  credible,
    [14].  In paragraph [15]  he  states  that  he  considered  her  to  be
    "truthful".  He gives  reasons  for  his  finding  that  the  Sponsor's
    account of sole responsibility is credible.   He  noted  that  she  was
    informed and informative as to her son's life.   He found that she  was
    "concerned and involved in her son's life as claimed".


15. I find that although the judge's findings are not lengthy, it is  clear
    that the reason he has found that the Appellant meets  the  requirement
    of the rules regarding sole responsibility  is  because  he  found  the
    Sponsor to be an honest and credible witness, whose evidence  could  be
    relied on.  He accepted her account  of  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant, which was the one issue before him.   As  found  in  Buydov,
    with reference  to  TD,  the  question  is  one  of  fact,  and  it  is
    acknowledged in the Presenting Officer's note following the hearing  in
    the First-tier Tribunal that "essentially this  will  come  down  to  a
    finding of fact for the IJ".


16. In relation  to  the  Appellant's  father,  the  judge  refers  to  the
    Sponsor's evidence in paragraphs [9] and [10], evidence  which  he  has
    accepted, and states that the Appellant was "abandoned  by  his  father
    who farmed him out with relatives pre 2004.  She then took control  and
    had always  intended  his  stay  with  her  sister  as  the  then  best
    alternative."  It is clear that he had the Appellant's father in  mind,
    and having found the Sponsor to be credible, he accepted  the  evidence
    that the Appellant's father has abandoned him.  It  was  not  necessary
    for the judge to make  detailed  findings  as  to  the  status  of  the
    Appellant's father, given that the sole issue before him  was  that  of
    sole responsibility of the Sponsor.


17. The Presenting Officer's hearing minute was  provided  to  support  the
    submission made in the grounds that the Sponsor's claim  that  she  had
    directed the Appellant's education and welfare was not borne out by the
    cross-examination.  In paragraph [10] of the decision the judge  refers
    to the cross-examination.  He refers  to  the  fact  that  the  Sponsor
    accepted that she received school reports via her sister.  In paragraph
    [14] he accepts that she did not name the school  principals  and  said
    that she received school results via her sister.  However, the judge is
    clear that "in overview" he found the Sponsor to be credible.   He  has
    acknowledged these issues, but they do not alter his findings, that  in
    overview,  the  Sponsor  was  credible,   and   that   she   has   sole
    responsibility.


18. Given the judge's finding as to the credibility  of  the  Sponsor,  for
    which he gave  reasons,  and  his  reliance  on  her  evidence,  it  is
    difficult to see how giving more reasons for his  decision  would  have
    changed the outcome of the appeal.  It is clear from a reading  of  the
    decision that the reason he finds in the Appellant's favour is  because
    he found the Sponsor to be credible.  He relied on her evidence to find
    that she has sole responsibility for the Appellant.


Notice of Decision

The decision does not involve the making of an error on a point of  law  and
I do not set it aside.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Signed                                  Date 21 November 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

