
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07590/2014
                                                               OA/07592/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination Promulgated            |
|On 14th April 2016                   |On 15th September 2016               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                 SANDRA [A]
                                 VICTOR [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARACE OFFICER - LAGOS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. N Aghayere; Babs & Co Legal Practitioners
For the Respondent:    Mr. C Avery; Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the appellants against a  decision  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bowler promulgated  on  1st  October  2015.   The  Judge
    dismissed the appellants appeals against the respondent's decisions  of
    15th May 2014 to refuse their applications for leave to enter the UK as
    the children of a person present and settled in the  UK  in  accordance
    with paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.


 2. The appellants are siblings and are  both  Nigerian  nationals.   Their
    father is Mr [DA].  On 12th February 2014, the appellants submitted  an
    application for indefinite leave to enter the  UK  in  accordance  with
    paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.  Both applications were refused
    by the respondent for the same reasons.  In each case,  the  respondent
    was  not  satisfied  that  the  appellants  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraphs 297(i)(e) and (f) of the Immigration Rules.  That is,  their
    father has had sole responsibility for their upbringing and  there  are
    serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  make
    exclusion of the appellants undesirable, and suitable arrangements have
    been made for the appellant's care.


 3. The appellant's appealed and the decision  was  reviewed  by  an  Entry
    Clearance Manager.  The decisions to refuse the applications for  leave
    to enter the UK as the children of a person present and settled in  the
    UK in accordance with paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  was
    maintained for the reasons set out in  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's
    decision of 26th September 2014.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bowler


 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out the background to the appeals  at
    paragraphs [1] to [4], of her decision.  She records the evidence  that
    the Tribunal received from the  sponsor  (the  appellants'  father)  at
    paragraphs [8] to [22] of her decision.  The  parties  submissions  are
    set out at paragraphs [23] and [24] of the decision.   The  Judge  sets
    out her findings and  reasons  in  respect  of  the  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules at paragraphs [27] to  [50]  of  her  decision.   The
    Judge sets out her findings and reasons in respect  of  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds at paragraphs [51] to [68] of her decision.


 5. The Judge found at paragraph [27] of her  decision  that  each  of  the
    appellants is under 18.  That satisfies the requirement to be met under
    paragraph 297(ii) of the Immigration Rules.


 6. Having heard the evidence of the appellants sponsor, the Judge made  an
    adverse credibility finding.  She found his evidence to be inconsistent
    and evasive in a number of material  respects.   The  Judge  turned  to
    address the requirements of  paragraphs  297(i)(e)  and  (f)  in  turn.
    Paragraph 297(i)(e) of the Immigration Rules requires the appellants to
    establish that one of their parents  is  present  and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom, and has had sole responsibility for  their  upbringing.
    The Judge made the following findings;


      a. The appellants' mother has moved to Ghana and has  remarried.   She
         does not take any role in the upbringing of the appellants; [30]


      b. Mr. [A] made telephone  calls  of  very  limited  duration  to  the
         appellants and or his mother which were insufficient for more  than
         the most basic of contact; [31]


      c. The emails between Mr. [A]  and  his  daughter  show  very  limited
         contact between 6th June 2013 and 29th December 2013 and the emails
         were produced in order to bolster the applications made in February
         2014; [32]


      d. Mr. [A] has provided funds  for  the  appellant's  maintenance,  in
         particular in the form of school fees, but  there  is  insufficient
         evidence to find that other payments made to Mr. [A]'s mother, were
         funds for the benefit of the appellants; [33]


      e. Mr. [A] exercised parental responsibility in respect of  a  medical
         procedure that his son underwent in  July  2013,  when  he  was  in
         Nigeria for a PTA meeting;  [37]


      f. Mr. [A] is named as an emergency contact for the appellants school,
         but there is insufficient evidence to find  that  he  is  the  only
         emergency contact;  [38]


      g. Mr. [A] attended annual meetings at the appellants school  in  2012
         and 2013 but there is little evidence of any  further  involvement;
         [38]


      h. Mr. [A] signed the application forms for the  appellants'  baptisms
         on 15th July 2012.  He was exercising  parental  responsibility  at
         that point;  [40]


      i. The appellants grandmother looks after herself and the  appellants,
         and can make decisions herself in relation to her own life and that
         of the appellants';  [42]


 7. Having made those findings the Judge states at paragraph  [43]  of  her
    decision;


         "therefore, taking into account the evidence overall, I  find  that
         on occasion when in Nigeria Mr [A] has exercised responsibility for
         the appellants and he has provided funds for their maintenance,  in
         particular in the form of school fees, but  there  is  insufficient
         evidence  of  Mr  [A]'s  involvement  in  decisions  affecting  the
         appellants  and  or  the  alleged  inability  of   the   appellants
         grandmother  to  make  decisions,  to  show  that   he   has   sole
         responsibility for them."


 8.  Alternatively, paragraph 297(i)(f) of the Immigration  Rules  requires
    the appellants to establish  that  there  are  serious  and  compelling
    family or other considerations which make exclusion of the  appellants'
    undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made  for  their  care.
    To that end, the Judge made the following findings:


      a. The appellants are looked after day to day  by  their  grandmother.
         There is no evidence that their  living  conditions  have  affected
         their health or development.  There is no evidence  of  neglect  or
         abuse of the appellants;  [45]


      b. The hospital admissions of the  appellants'  grandmother  were  not
         caused by the burden of looking after the appellants but by her own
         failure to  follow  medication  and  diet  advice.    There  is  no
         evidence that the  appellants'  welfare  was  at  risk  when  their
         grandmother was admitted to  hospital.    The  demands  of  looking
         after  children  of  the  appellants'  ages  by  a  lady  who   has
         cardiovascular  conditions  which  are  generally  well-controlled,
         osteoarthritis in her knees and diabetes  are  insufficient  to  be
         considered serious and compelling  considerations  which  make  the
         exclusion of the appellants' undesirable.  [46]


 9. Having made those finding the Judge concluded at paragraph [47] of  her
    decision that there are no  serious  and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations which make exclusion  of  the  appellants'  undesirable.
    The appellants could not therefore meet the requirements  of  paragraph
    297 of the Immigration Rules.


10. The Judge then turned to the Article 8 claim.  Approaching  the  matter
    in accordance with the five stage test  set  out  in  Razgar  -v-  SSHD
    [2004] UKHL 27, the Judge found at paragraph [56] of her decision  that
    family life exists between the appellants and their father.  She  found
    that exclusion of the appellants from the UK is an  interference  by  a
    public authority with the exercise of the appellants' right to  respect
    for their family life.  At paragraph [57], the  Judge  found  that  the
    interference has consequences of such gravity as potentially to  engage
    the operation of Article 8.  At paragraphs  [58]  and  [59]  the  Judge
    found that such interference is in  accordance  with  the  law  and  is
    necessary in furtherance of a permitted  aim  under  Article  8.    The
    Judge went on to  consider  whether  exclusion  of  the  appellants  is
    proportionate having regard to the public interest  considerations  set
    out in section 117B of the 2002 Act and  taking  account  of  the  best
    interests of the children.  The Judge concluded at paragraph [68]:


         "68. Having weighed up the competing  interests  I  find  that  the
         maintenance of effective immigration controls having regard as well
         to the economic implications for the UK is not  outweighed  by  the
         elements in support of the appellants. Accordingly I find that  the
         respondent's decision was necessary and proportionate.


 The grounds of appeal


11. The appellants contend that  in  considering  whether  the  appellants'
    father has had sole responsibility  for  their  upbringing,  the  Judge
    failed to properly assess whether the requirements of the Rules are met
    in accordance with  the  principles  laid  down  in  authorities.   The
    appellants refer in particular to the Upper  Tribunal  decision  in  TD
    (paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049.
    The appellants contend that the Judge neither referred to the authority
    nor addressed the issues in  line  with  the  guidance  set  out.   The
    appellants' also contend that the Judge failed to consider the decision
    of the Court of Appeal in Buydov -v- ECO (Moscow) [2012] EWCA Civ  1739
    which confirms that the concept of  sole  responsibility  in  paragraph
    297(i)(e) requires a broad analysis  on  a  case  by  case  basis.  The
    appellants contend that one can infer from the decision, that the Judge
    based her decision on  there  being  "shared  responsibility"  for  the
    appellants' upbringing.  The appellants refer to the decision in Sloley
    -v- ECO (Kingston) [1973] Imm AR 54 in which the  Tribunal  found  that
    correspondence between the child's mother in the  UK,  and  grandmother
    still caring for the child in Jamaica, amounts to decision-making  when
    considering whether the mother had sole responsibility.  The appellants
    also refer to the decision in Ramos -v- IAT [1989] Imm AR 148  where  a
    mother claimed sole responsibility for her daughter who was living with
    her grandmother in the Philippines. The Tribunal found that  the  carer
    assisting the child with  daily  tasks  like  bathing  and  getting  to
    school, do not extinguish the sole responsibility  of  the  UK  mother.
    Finally, the appellant contends that the finding by the Judge that  the
    appellants grandmother at the age of 75 would be  able  to  look  after
    herself  and  the  appellants,  despite  medical  evidence   confirming
    incapability's due to her health, is irrational.


12. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen
    on 3rd  March 2016.  The matter comes before me to consider whether  or
    not the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bowler  involved  the
    making of a material error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


13. At the hearing before me, Mr Aghayere adopts the grounds of appeal  and
    submits that the Judge failed to assess whether the appellants'  father
    has had sole responsibility for their upbringing,  in  accordance  with
    the guidance set out in TD (paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility")
    Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049.   He submits that  the  test  is  essentially
    whether the appellants father has continuing control and  direction  as
    to their lives and upbringing. Although not  a  ground  of  appeal,  he
    submits that in reaching  her  decision,  the  Judge  appears  to  have
    adopted a higher  standard  than  the  balance  of  probabilities  when
    addressing that question. He submits that  the  findings  made  by  the
    Judge establish that the direction and control lies with the appellants
    father in the UK, and  that  where  the  Judge  refers  to  a  lack  of
    evidence, the approach adopted by the Judge is  perverse.   By  way  of
    example, he submits that at paragraph [38] of her decision,  the  Judge
    found that the appellants father is named as an emergency  contact.  He
    submits it is irrational and perverse for the Judge  to  seek  evidence
    that he is the only emergency contact.  Mr. Aghayere accepts that  this
    is a fact sensitive decision but he reminds me that the  Judge  appears
    to have accepted most  of  the  evidence  advanced  on  behalf  of  the
    appellants as to the role their father plays in their lives. He submits
    that the Judge was required to take a holistic approach to the evidence
    but failed to do so.


14. In reply, Mr Avery relied upon the Rule 24 response  dated  14th  March
    2016, filed by the respondent.  The respondent opposes the  appeal  and
    submits that the Judge directed herself appropriately and made findings
    that cannot be impugned. Mr Avery submits that the grounds relied  upon
    by the appellants  are  nothing  more  than  a  disagreement  with  the
    findings made by the Judge that were open to her. He submits  that  the
    Judge properly considered all of the evidence before her, and a careful
    reading of the decision shows that the  Judge  carried  out  a  careful
    analysis of the  facts  and  evidence,  before  coming  to  a  reasoned
    conclusion.


 Discussion


15. Paragraph 297(i)(e) of the Immigration Rules requires the appellants to
    establish that one of their parents  is  present  and  settled  in  the
    United Kingdom, and has had sole responsibility for  their  upbringing.
    The First-tier Tribunal Judge found at paragraph [30] of  her  decision
    that the appellants' mother has moved to Ghana and has remarried.   The
    Judge found that she does not take any role in the  upbringing  of  the
    appellants.  The appellants contend that their father, who now lives in
    the  UK   has   had   sole   responsibility   for   their   upbringing,
    notwithstanding that they are cared for day to day in Nigeria, by their
    grandmother.


16. In TD (paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT
    00049, the Upper Tribunal held that the issue of "sole  responsibility"
    for a child within the meaning of  paragraph  297  of  the  Immigration
    Rules is a question of fact to  be  determined  in  each  case,  having
    regard to who exercised actual responsibility for the  child,  and  was
    not a theoretical or legal obligation.  The appellant in that case  was
    a citizen of Yemen aged 17.  He appealed against the rejection  of  his
    application for entry clearance to the UK to settle  with  his  father,
    who had lived in the UK since 1976.  In his application, the appellant,
    who had lived with his mother in Yemen since birth,  claimed  that  his
    father had "sole responsibility" for him and his two brothers. Although
    the appellant had lived separately from his father all  his  life,  his
    father had provided all financial support for the family  and  had  had
    weekly telephone contact.  His father had made personal visits to Yemen
    only once every three or four years. The  Immigration  Judge  concluded
    that responsibility for the appellant was shared between his father and
    mother and the requirement in para.297(i)(e) was not met.   On  appeal,
    the Upper Tribunal held "Sole responsibility" is a matter of fact to be
    decided on all the evidence in each case. "Responsibility" for a  child
    is a practical obligation, having  regard  to  who  actually  exercised
    responsibility. That could be someone other than a child's parents  and
    it could be shared between individuals, particularly  where  the  child
    remained in his home country while the  only  parent  involved  in  his
    life, resided in the UK. If both parents were involved in  the  child's
    upbringing, it was only in exceptional circumstances that one  of  them
    would have sole responsibility.  The Tribunal held that even  if  there
    was only one parent involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may
    not have sole responsibility.  Although a parent may  share  day-to-day
    responsibility  for  a  child's  welfare   with   others   because   of
    geographical separation, that does not prevent the parent  from  having
    sole responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.  The test of "sole
    responsibility" is whether  that  parent  has  continuing  control  and
    direction  of  the  child's  upbringing  and  made  all  the  important
    decisions in his life;  Ramos -v- IAT [1989] Imm  AR  148  In  TD,  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had taken account of all the relevant issues,
    including the extent of physical contact between the appellant and  his
    father, the frequency of  telephone  contact,  the  father's  financial
    contribution to the family and the fact that the father  made  all  the
    significant decisions.  There was no suggestion  that  the  appellant's
    mother had ceased to act as carer. On that  factual  basis,  the  Upper
    Tribunal held that the Judge could not properly have come to any  other
    conclusion, than that responsibility was shared.


17. I accept that the test here  is  whether  the  appellants'  father  has
    continuing control  and  direction  over  the  appellants'  upbringing,
    including all of the important decisions in their lives.  It  is  plain
    that that can be so, even when as here, there is geographical  distance
    between the appellants and their father.  Mr. Aghayere accepts, rightly
    in my judgement, that whether the test is met is a factual matter to be
    decided on all the evidence.


18. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bowler expressly referred  to
    TD at paragraph [34], and in my judgment, she applied the reasoning  of
    that case in reaching her decision at paragraphs [35] to [43].


19. I have already set out at paragraph [6] of this decision, the  findings
    made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The  Judge  noted  the  limited
    evidence of contact between the appellants' and their father, but  took
    into account the role played by the sponsor when he visited Nigeria  in
    2012 and 2013.  The evidence before the Judge was that the sponsor  has
    lived in the UK since 2003, when the appellants  were  about  3  and  4
    years old.  The Judge was entitled to take into account the  fact  that
    the sponsor's separation from the appellant  is  not  simply  of  short
    duration.  The appellant's have been cared for by their grandmother for
    a significant part of their  lives.  The  Judge  was  entitled,  in  my
    judgment to take into account the paucity  of  evidence  regarding  the
    money transfers made to the appellant's grandmother and  whether  those
    funds were  paid  for  the  benefit  of  the  appellants,  whether  the
    appellant is the only person named  as  an  emergency  contact  in  the
    school records and the lack of evidence as to the  involvement  of  the
    sponsor with the school beyond attending annual meetings  in  2012  and
    2013.


20. In my judgement, the Judge has directed herself appropriately to TD.  I
    accept that it is true that a child being looked after by  others  does
    not necessarily mean sole responsibility no longer subsists.   However,
    the Judge having  directed  herself  appropriately  to  the  case  law,
    concluded after a careful consideration of all the  evidence  that  the
    sponsor does not have sole responsibility for the appellants'.


21. I accept the submission made by Mr. Avery on behalf of the  Respondent.
    The matters advanced on behalf of the  appellants'  amount  to  nothing
    more than a disagreement with the findings of the Judge.  The Court  of
    Appeal in R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 held that a finding
    might only be set aside for error of law on the grounds  of  perversity
    if it was irrational or unreasonable in the Wednesbury  sense,  or  one
    that was wholly unsupported  by  the  evidence.   In  my  judgment  the
    findings of the Judge that I have referred to in  the  course  of  this
    decision were properly open to her, on the evidence.


22. It follows that the appeal is dismissed.


 Notice of Decision


   23. The appeal is dismissed.


   24. No anonymity direction is applied for and none is made.





Signed   Date 15th September 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal there can be no fee award.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia    Date 15th September 2016









