
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/07882/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                            |Oral Determination         |
|On 16 July 2014                                 |Promulgated                |
|                                                |On 08 August 2014          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN

                                   Between

                          solomon hagos gebremedhin
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr N Stevens, Legal Representative, instructed
                  by Duncan Lewis,
         Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Holmes, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


 1. The  appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Eritrea  who  appeals  against  the
    determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Napthine  promulgated  on  6
    March 2014 dismissing his appeal against  the  decision  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer to refuse the appellant entry clearance to  join  her
    spouse who holds leave to remain in the United Kingdom until  1  August
    2016.  The application was made for entry clearance as a spouse for the
    purposes of family reunion.  It was  refused  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer on 4 February 2013 on two bases.  First, paragraph  320(7A)  of
    the Immigration Rules and then second under paragraph 352A.   Paragraph
    320(7A) is a mandatory basis:

         "Where false representations have been made or false  documents  or
         information have been submitted (whether or  not  material  to  the
         application and whether or not to  the  applicant's  knowledge)  or
         material  facts  have  not  been  disclosed  in  relation  to   the
         application."

 2. The basis of that stance adopted by the Entry Clearance Officer related
    to the submission of a marriage certificate which the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer found to a high degree of probability  was  false.   The  judge
    considered the marriage certificate and looked at what  the  respondent
    submitted.  A copy of it had been endorsed "the marriage certificate is
    forget" with an indecipherable signature.  Assuming that it is meant to
    convey that the marriage certificate is forged, there was  no  document
    verification report which had  been  submitted  for  consideration  and
    accordingly there was little in the way of cogent material to establish
    why the marriage certificate was false.

 3. The sponsor had given an explanation as to how the marriage certificate
    had come into her hands.   She  had  obtained  the  document  from  her
    husband's paternal uncle so she could not  speak  directly  as  to  its
    provenance.  The judge did not make any express finding in relation  to
    paragraph 320(7A) but it  might  be  assumed  from  the  absence  of  a
    document verification report that he was  not  satisfied  that  it  was
    forged.

 4.  Having  directed  himself  as  to  the  contents  of   Tanveer   Ahmed
    (HX23022/01), he then said

         "The marriage certificate is unreliable at  the  very  least.   The
         sponsor accepts that it is not original and doubt has been cast  on
         its authenticity even if it has not been proved to a high degree of
         probability that that copy marriage certificate is a forgery".

    I am bound to say I do not understand what  the  judge  was  saying  in
    relation to the  authenticity  of  the  document.   He  appears  to  be
    suggesting that although there was not  adequate  evidence  to  suggest
    that the marriage certificate was a forgery, nevertheless the  evidence
    was sufficiently probative to show that it could not  be  relied  upon.
    In my judgment that cannot be the right approach.  Either the  marriage
    certificate had been  properly  shown  to  be  a  forgery  by  credible
    evidence or the evidence in  relation  to  its  unreliability  was  not
    itself reliable.  There was no reason why, if  a  marriage  certificate
    had  been  provided  by  the  appellant's  paternal  uncle  that   this
    inevitably meant that the  marriage  certificate  was  inauthentic,  at
    least not as explained by the judge.   All  that  meant  was  that  the
    appellant was not able to vouch for its authenticity.

 5. He then went on to deal with a  number  of  matters  dealing  with  the
    absence of a wedding reception and waiting three months to register the
    wedding.  There was no evidence of a wedding such  as  photographs  and
    accordingly he dismissed the appeal on the basis that the appellant was
    not married to the sponsor as claimed.  There was however material that
    the judge simply did not consider in relation to the existence  of  the
    marriage.  The judge did not recite the material that was  provided  by
    the various witnesses in relation to the marriage.  There was  evidence
    that the sponsor had  visited  the  appellant  in  Uganda.   There  was
    evidence that she had been financially supported by him ever  since  he
    had fled Eritrea and made his  way  to  Uganda  as  a  refugee.   Money
    receipts were produced.  None of this  material  was  assessed  by  the
    judge in the way that is now normal in cases of this nature.  It may be
    that the marriage certificate was not determinative of the marriage but
    there were other sources of information which the judge was required to
    consider such as whether the  sponsor  had  visited  Uganda,  what  the
    purpose of that visit was, who she had met on her visit to  Uganda  and
    the time that she had  spent  there.   There  was  also  likely  to  be
    evidence of contact and if there was no contact then there is likely to
    have been some evidence as to why there was not  any  contact  in  this
    period.  Similarly, there was material in  relation  to  the  financial
    support that had been provided.  None  of  this  was  assessed  by  the
    judge.

 6. Accordingly the  focus  by  the  judge  on  the  marriage  certificate,
    although he had not found that it was a forgery, amounted to  an  error
    of law which deprived the appellant of a proper  determination  of  his
    appeal.  In those circumstances I consider that it is  appropriate  for
    the matter to be looked at afresh in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    direct that the appeal is to be re-heard there rather than in the Upper
    Tribunal.




                                                                       [pic]
                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE

