
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07961/2015
     OA/07962/2015
     OA/07963/2015
     oa/07964/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 March 2018                               |On 27 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                     AK
                                     UK
                                     tK
                                     aK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Ms N Ostadsaffar, Counsel instructed by AA
Immigration Lawyers
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellants are citizens of Afghanistan born on  19  March  1997,  9
    June 2002, 28 February 1999 and 13 November  2007  respectively.   They
    appealed the decisions of the respondent dated 13 April 2015 to  refuse
    the appellants' leave to enter the United Kingdom as  the  children  of
    parents settled here on the  basis  that  they  failed  to  fulfil  the
    requirements of paragraph 297(v) of the Immigration Rules as it was not
    considered  that  there  was  evidence  that  the  children  could   be
    maintained  without  recourse  to  public  funds.     In   a   decision
    promulgated  on  21  April  2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier   tribunal
    Nightingale dismissed the appellants' appeals.

 2. The appellants appealed to the Upper Tribunal with  permission  on  the
    grounds that:

    Ground 1:     The First-tier Tribunal erred in the  assessment  of  the
    maintenance requirement taking into consideration the case law in KA  &
    Others (adequacy of maintenance) Pakistan [2006] UKAIT 00065 and  Ahmed
    (benefits; proof of receipt; evidence) [2013] UKUT 00084 (IAC).

    Ground 2:     The  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  the  assessment  of
    Article 8 in particular the best interests of the children.

Error of Law - Discussion

    Ground 1

 3. Ms Ostadsaffar relied on the case of Ahmed.  It was submitted that  the
    Tribunal had erred in considering the monthly income figure as  opposed
    to the weekly income figure which is the relevant  accepted  assessment
    including as set  out  in  Ahmed  and  confirmed  in  the  respondent's
    guidance.  Ms Ostadsaffar relied on paragraph  12  of  her  grounds  of
    appeal which set out from Ahmed as follows:

         "As adequacy of accommodation was out of the picture following  the
         earlier decision, the present hearing was concerned solely with the
         maintenance requirement.  Expressed mathematically, the formula  to
         be fulfilled is -

             A - B ? C where:

             A is the projected income

             B what needs to be spent on accommodation and

             C the income support (or equivalent) figure (which we term  in
             this decision 'the benefit threshold')."

 4. It was Ms Ostadsaffar's submission that as the sponsors are settled  in
    the UK they are entitled to the benefits  and  this  should  have  been
    taken into consideration by the First-tier Tribunal.

 5. Ms Fijiwala submitted  that  Ahmed  was  not  authority  for  what  the
    appellant relied on and as set out in the respondent's  guidance  which
    Ms Fijiwala provided, Ahmed is authority for the way in which  decision
    makers should approach the maintenance formula.  It was  Ms  Fijiwala's
    submission that, as noted by the First-tier Tribunal, it was  a  matter
    for the Department of Work and Pensions as to what  benefits  would  be
    received and there was no way of knowing what  the  sponsors  would  be
    entitled to.  She submitted  that  Ahmed  was  not  authority  for  the
    proposition that future benefits  were  in  all  cases  permitted.   Ms
    Fijiwala further relied on the respondent's guidance at paragraph 3(a),
    third bullet point, which provided as follows:

         "An entry clearance applicant may say that they will be entitled to
         claim public funds in  their  own  right  in  the  UK,  e.g.  under
         reciprocal arrangements between the UK and their  own  country  and
         ask for this to be included in  their  net  income.   However,  any
         potential  future  entitlement  to  benefits  after  the  applicant
         arrives in the UK does not count towards net income when  assessing
         adequate maintenance."

    Paragraph 10 of Ahmed provided as follows:

         "The authorities concerning adequacy  of  resources  were  recently
         reviewed by the Upper  Tribunal  in  Yarce  (adequate  maintenance:
         benefits) [2012] UKUT 00425 (IAC).  The correct  approach  is  that
         set out in KA and Others (Adequacy of Maintenance) Pakistan  [2006]
         UKAIT 00065,  referring  to  the  earlier   decision   in   Uvovo
         (00 TH 01450), namely:

             'The  appropriate  method  of  calculation   for   comparative
             purposes is, as explained in Uvovo,  to  separate  maintenance
             from accommodation, and to  look  first  to  see  whether  the
             accommodation would be adequate, and then to see  whether  the
             income  available  to  the  Appellants  for   maintenance   is
             equivalent to the amount that would be available to a  similar
             family on income support once they have dealt with the  costs
             of their accommodation.'

         What the Tribunal in Uvovo - and the Tribunal in KA - seeks here to
         require focus on (and what paras 6A-C  require  focus  on)  is  the
         actual financial position on arrival, i.e. income that is  or  will
         be available to the applicant and his sponsor upon his  arrival  in
         the  UK  (in  the  language  of  para  6,  'as  a  result  of  [the
         applicant's] presence in  the  UK').  Because  the  calculation  is
         therefore a projection forward to what the income of the  applicant
         and his sponsor is or will be  on  arrival,  we  shall  employ  the
         expression 'projected income'."

 6. Ms Fijiwala relied on the judge's findings that there  was  a  lack  of
    evidence including in relation to housing benefit and the income  which
    the family judge noted that the P60s did not appear  to  bear  out  the
    claimed amount.  Ms Fijiwala noted that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    already adjourned the hearing in order to obtain further  evidence  but
    that it still was not adequate.

 7. The Upper Tribunal Judge permission, noted that  as  this  was  a  case
    where the decisions were made after 6 April 2015 and in line  with  the
    respondent's guidance on what constitutes a human rights claim and  the
    Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No.4,  transitional  and  saving
    provisions and Amendment) Order 2015, No.371  (C18),  the  applications
    under paragraph 297 constituted human rights claims and therefore under
    the new appeal regime there was no time  restriction  to  the  date  of
    decision; it was Ms Fijiwala's submission however  that  there  was  no
    further financial evidence submitted that postdated  the  decision  and
    therefore any error by the judge in this respect was not material.   Ms
    Ostadsaffar raised no point and did not rely on this  issue.    I  also
    note that the Tribunal  did  properly  consider  the  position  of  the
    children to include the position after the date of decision.    I  find
    no material error in this regard.

 8. In addition Ms Fijiwala conceded that the judge was wrong  to  look  at
    the maintenance figures from a  monthly  point  of  view  whereas  they
    should have been weekly but submitted for all the  reasons  given  that
    this error was not material.

 9. Paragraph 297(v) provides as follows:

         "The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave to
         enter the United Kingdom as a child  of  a  parent,  parents  or  a
         relative present and settled or being admitted  for  settlement  in
         the United Kingdom are that he:

         (v)  can,  and  will,  be  maintained  adequately  by  the  parent,
             parents, or relative the child is  seeking  to  join,  without
             recourse to public funds."

10. The Upper Tribunal  in  Ahmed  addressed  the  issue  of  public  funds
    including as follows:

         "4.  Here reference should be  made  to  paras 6A  to  6C  of  the
             Immigration Rules as they were in force with effect  from  31
             March 2009 which provide:

             '6A  For the purpose of these Rules, a person (P) is not to be
                  regarded as having (or  potentially  having)  recourse  to
                  public funds because P is (or will be) reliant in whole or
                  in part on public funds provided to P's sponsor unless, as
                  a result of  P's  presence  in  the  United Kingdom,  the
                  sponsor  is  (or  would  be)  entitled  to  increased   or
                  additional public funds (save where  such  entitlement  to
                  increased or additional public funds is by virtue of P and
                  the sponsor's joint  entitlement  to  benefits  under  the
                  regulations referred to in paragraph 6B).

             6B   Subject to paragraph 6C,  a  person  (P)  shall  not  be
                  regarded as having  recourse  to  public  funds  if  P  is
                  entitled to benefits specified under section 115  of  the
                  Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 by virtue of  regulations
                  made under sub-sections (3) and (4) of  that  section  or
                  section 42 of the Tax Credits Act 2002.

             6C   A person (P)  making  an  application  from  outside  the
                  United Kingdom will be regarded  as  having  recourse  to
                  public funds where P relies upon the future entitlement to
                  any public funds that would be payable  to  P  or  to  P's
                  sponsor as a result of P's presence in the United Kingdom,
                  (including those benefits to which P or the sponsor  would
                  be  entitled  as  a  result  of  P's   presence   in   the
                  United Kingdom  under  the  regulations  referred  to  in
                  paragraph 6B).'

         5.   A sponsor is thus entitled to rely on his or her own  recourse
             to public funds to the extent that paragraphs 6A to 6C of the
             Rules provide."

11. The Upper Tribunal in Ahmed went on to discuss paras 6A-C as follows:

         "13. The first question is what does the proviso  'save  where'  in
             para 6A apply to? As we read para 6A, it is  saying  that  all
             that counts as recourse to public funds is  increased  benefit
             as a result of P's presence and even that does not count if it
             arises as the result of the matters referred  to  in  para  6B
             (which includes joint applications for tax credit of the  type
             with which we are concerned, the  relevant  regulations  being
             made under section 42 of the Tax Credits  Act  2002  ('TCA')).
             The alternative approach is to say that the joint  entitlement
             cases are carved out from the general rule that only increases
             in benefit are caught. We can think of no sensible reason  for
             such an  interpretation,  which  appears  to  go  against  the
             structure of s115 of Immigration and Asylum Act  1999  ('IAA')
             and that of TCA s42.

         14.  Para 6B then exempts claims by P (as opposed to  P's  sponsor)
             to the specified benefits where  there  is  joint  entitlement
             (thus confirming the impression that IAA1999 s115 and  TCA2002
             s42 have, if anything, a liberalising role and that the  first
             rather than the second of the interpretations of para 6A above
             is likely to be the correct one.) In principle, where para  6B
             applies, it appears to allow not only the joint claim  at  the
             same amount but, as regards P, a joint claim  resulting  in  a
             higher amount than would previously  have  been  paid  to  the
             sponsor  alone  (even  though,  as  regards  the  sponsor,  an
             increase in her entitlement under the (now) joint claim  would
             not be permitted by para 6A if the second interpretation above
             were to prevail.) It would be nonsense (acting  in  vain)  for
             para 6B to grant something which  as  regards  a  joint  claim
             would - on the second interpretation - be ruled  out  by  para
             6A.

         15.  What then is the effect of  para  6C?  This  applies  only  to
             persons making an application from outside the UK (as  is  the
             present case). The question is whether para  6C  is  concerned
             only with additional funds or whether it also bites where  the
             level of funds remains the same,  but  because  of  the  joint
             claim provisions - such as the tax credit one - the  applicant
             for entry  clearance  will,  when  he/she  comes  to  the  UK,
             inevitably be involved in the claim and to that extent it will
             be 'paid as a result of P's presence in the  United  Kingdom'?
             Para 6C appears to provide a partial  disapplication  of  para
             6B, so that whereas para 6B allows increases in benefit  under
             the provisions (even though they  would  otherwise  have  been
             caught by para 6A) this does not hold  good  in  the  case  of
             applications from outside the UK. An example  of  a  situation
             which would be caught by para 6C would be a spouse  and  child
             coming from abroad which would (unlike the  present  situation
             where the children are already here) lead to  an  increase  in
             the amount claimed and so be precluded by para 6C. Indeed,  it
             may be that para 6C is confined to cases where  there  are  at
             present no entitlements to benefits, which may be the case  so
             far as a hypothetical applicant is  concerned  in  an  out  of
             country case (though not necessarily of course where there  is
             a United Kingdom sponsor.) The explanatory notes  to  HC  314,
             which inserted paras 6A to 6C into the Rules in 2009, speak at
             para 7.19 of 6C concerning 'anticipated entitlement to  public
             funds'."

12. Although therefore the Tribunal at [35] indicated that any  entitlement
    to benefits would "clearly be a breach of the principle that there must
    be no additional recourse to  public  funds  by  the  admission  of  an
    applicant"  as  set  out  in  the  relevant  legislation  including  as
    summarised above, and as held in Ahmed, this is a question of  fact  in
    each case.

13. I am of the view however that, on the facts before it, the Tribunal was
    correct  in  its  ultimate  conclusion,  given  Paragraph  6C  of   the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999 that any future entitlement  to  public
    funds as a result of P's presence in the UK would amount to recourse to
    public funds and therefore is not permissible.

14. Even if that were not the case and the appellant had  established  that
    the future benefit entitlement was allowed to be taken into account  in
    the  assessment  of  future  income  (which  I  am  not  satisfied  was
    established) as held in Ahmed the calculation of benefit figures is  an
    academic exercise and the most compelling evidence of receipt of income
    by way of social security is "likely to be proof of  receipt  of  funds
    into a person's bank account.  Notices of award are intrinsically  less
    reliable.  The position of tax credits is particularly complex".

15. This is echoed to  some  extent  in  the  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the awarding of tax credits  or  child  benefits  in  the
    assessment of entitlement to funds of this nature is a matter  for  the
    Department for Works  and  Pensions  (DWP).   Therefore,  although  the
    appellant sought to rely on claimed figures of anticipated income  from
    these benefits, even if they could rely on such benefits, the  Tribunal
    made no error in ultimately not taking  them  into  account,  including
    because of the lack of adequate evidence as to  the  proposed  benefits
    amount.

16. Even though therefore the Tribunal may  have  erred  in  looking  at  a
    monthly assessment as opposed to  a  weekly  assessment  of  income  as
    required by Ahmed and set out in the respondent's guidance, such  error
    if not material given that the Tribunal's ultimate conclusion that such
    funds would amount to additional recourse to public funds is ultimately
    correct in this case.

17. No material error of law is disclosed from ground 1.

    Ground 2

18. It was submitted by Ms Ostadsaffar that the Tribunal made no assessment
    of the children's best  interests  and  Ms  Ostadsaffar  relied  on  ZH
    (Tanzania) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2011] UKSC  4.
    It is not disputed that in assessing Article 8 rights,  best  interests
    of the children should be a primary consideration.  Ms Ostadsaffar also
    relied on the Home Office IDIs in relation to the Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009, Section 55.  Ms Ostadsaffar referred  to  the
    lack of any reference to relevant case law.  She referred to  the  fact
    that the first appellant had undergone cancer treatment  and  that  the
    Tribunal ought to have approached this differently as she was 16  years
    old at the time.  It was submitted that the judge erred in stating that
    the children had been separated from her  parents  for  some  years  as
    there was only a short  separation  between  the  application  and  the
    decision and that it was the appeal process that counted in large  part
    for the length of separation.

19. Ms Fijiwala submitted that although the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did
    not specifically mention the term 'best interests', that was in  effect
    what had been considered including at [37] of the decision and reasons.
     It was submitted that the judge was entitled  to  reach  the  findings
    that she did and  consideration  was  given  to  all  of  the  children
    including the child who had been previously satisfactorily treated  for
    suspected ovarian  cancer  and  that  she  was  being  monitored.   The
    Tribunal took into consideration there was  no  evidence  the  children
    were not being cared for, that they were in education and in  a  stable
    environment and that they were residing with the sponsor's parents  and
    that family life continued to be maintained in the same manner  as  had
    been done for the years since the sponsor had left for the UK.

20. It was her further submission that the Tribunal was  entitled  to  take
    into consideration that at the date of the hearing the  time  that  the
    children had been away from their parents.

21. Although the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  may  not  have  made  specific
    reference  to  the  term  'best  interests',  it  was  precisely   this
    assessment which took place at paragraphs [37] and [38] of the decision
    and reasons where the Tribunal considered "the circumstances  of  these
    four children" and went on to find that there was nothing compelling to
    indicate  that  leave  to  enter  should  be  granted  outside  of  the
    Immigration Rules.   The  Tribunal  undertook  the  required  balancing
    exercise under Article 8 and was satisfied given the  failure  to  meet
    the maintenance requirements, that the refusal was proportionate to the
    legitimate  aim  pursued,  the  maintenance  of  fair   and   effective
    immigration control to safeguard the economic wellbeing of  the  United
    Kingdom.  That decision was open to the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  for
    the reasons she gave.  It was not suggested that those reasons  reached
    the high test of irrationality and the Tribunal gave  adequate  reasons
    which are sustainable.  I am satisfied that the grounds  constitute  no
    more than a disagreement with the judge's reasoned findings.

Notice of Decision


22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.  The appeal is dismissed

I continue the anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  23 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  23 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
