
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/07914/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24 February 2016                      |On 14 March 2016                  |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC



                                   Between

                                MD MUSA KHAN
                       (anonymity directioN not made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRERTARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M K Mustafa
For the Respondent:    Mr Mr S Staunton, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  from  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Housego, promulgated on  1  July  2015.   The  appellant  was  born  in
    Bangladesh on 24 August 1998.  He is one of four siblings,  the  others
    being Aysha Begum (born 10 April 1986), Tarif Khan (1  September  1991)
    and Taslim Khan (21 October 1993).  The appellant's  father  Juad  Khan
    became registered as a citizen of the United Kingdom and Colonies on  9
    October 1962. The appellant's mother  is  Afia  Begum.  It  was  common
    ground that Juad Khan was living in  Bangladesh  at  the  date  of  the
    appellant's birth, but the judge made no finding as  to  his  place  of
    domicile at that time.

2.   The appellant made an application for a Certificate of  Entitlement  to
    the Right of Abode on the basis that he was a child of Juad Khan.  That
    application was considered by the Entry Clearance Officer in Bangladesh
    and reviewed by a manager on 22 December  2014.   The  application  was
    refused on a number of bases. The first was that the photocopy  of  the
    British nationality certificate  of  Juad  Khan  was  not  accepted  as
    legitimate. The second was the production  of  a  non-genuine  marriage
    certificate relating to Juad Khan and Afia Begum.  The  third  was  the
    lack of evidence to support the claimed relationship.  And  the  fourth
    was in relation to certain DNA testing.

3.   The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  The  judge  heard
    evidence from  the  appellant's  brother,  Tarif  Khan.  There  was  no
    Presenting Officer to represent the Secretary  of  State.   Mr  Mustafa
    acted for the appellant and he has done so again before me today.

4.   The judge made findings  of  fact  as  follows.   First  he  found,  at
    paragraph 25, that there was no valid marriage between  Juad  Khan  and
    Afia Begum.  He further found, at paragraph 26, that Afia  Begum  could
    not reasonably have believed herself to be married to Juad Khan.

5.   The judge continued:

         "27. If there  had  been  a  marriage  I  would  find  against  the
             appellant on this point, as plainly the  marriage  (had  there
             been one) would have been bigamous for Mr Khan, and polygamous
             for Afia Begum.  Afia  Begum  lives  in  Bangladesh  with  the
             appellant. There is no witness statement from her.  The burden
             of proof is on the appellant.  It would not be  reasonable  to
             assume that she thought the marriage was valid when she could,
             but had not, said so.


         28.  The appellant's birth certificate.  The appellant  produced  a
             photocopy of a birth certificate, purportedly registering on 5
             October 1998 the birth of the appellant  on  24  August  1998.
             The certificate states that it was registered at the office of
             the chairman, local registrar of birth and death, No 1 Umorpur
             Union Parishad Sylhet.  I do not find  incredible  [sic?]  the
             explanation that the original certificate  was  lost,  leaving
             only this photocopy, so that the birth had  to  be  registered
             afresh.  This is akin to a parish register,  and  even  though
             compulsory registration of births was not required until 2003,
             the appellant's case is that his birth  was  registered  on  5
             October 1998 in a local register. No evidence is produced, nor
             any explanation given, as to why that register does not exist,
             or  has  been  destroyed,  or   why   a   duplicate   of   the
             register/certificate  could  not  have  been   obtained.   The
             registration of the birth some fifteen years after  the  event
             is a factor  to  be  borne  in  mind  in  the  decision-making
             process."

6.   The judge's conclusions are at paragraph 34.

         "34. There is no evidence to link the appellant to Juad Khan  other
             than the fact that the three who are his siblings were granted
             British citizenship on the basis that he was their father, and
             that as he is their full sibling, Juad Khan must have been his
             father too. It  is  possible,  likely  even,  that  the  three
             earlier applications were based on invalid documents  such  as
             the false marriage certificate, since the  marriage  that  did
             not occur was a prerequisite for those applications also."

7.   The judge found at paragraph 36: "However, as I  find  that  Juad  Khan
    was not married to Afia Begum, polygamously or at all, the appellant is
    not legitimate. This is a fundamental problem with  this  application".
    Accordingly the appeal under the Immigration Act therefore failed.

8.   At the outset of hearing  before  me,  I  discussed  with  Counsel  the
    issues which had required determination before the First-tier Tribunal.
    After some discussion, I formulated the following questions which  both
    agreed were the contested matters which had to be resolved.
    i.   As a matter of fact, had there been a  marriage  at  between  Afia
         Begum and Juad Khan?
    ii.  If so, was it void for bigamy/polygamy?
    iii. If so, does the statutory presumption of reasonable belief in  the
         validity of the marriage apply,  pursuant  to  the  Legitimacy  Act
         1976?
    iv.  And again if so (in order to determine the  applicability  of  the
         statutory presumption) was Juad Khan domiciled in England and Wales
         at the time of the appellant's birth?

9.   I received lengthy oral submissions on a range  of  legal  and  factual
    issues, all of which, to a greater or lesser  degree,  engaged  one  or
    more of these four questions. However, it was  to  the  first  question
    that argument was principally directed, since if the  judge's  disposal
    of this point was unassailable, it was implicitly accepted  by  counsel
    that  none  of  the  three   following   questions   would   fall   for
    consideration.

10.  In reality, notwithstanding the extensive legal  arguments  which  were
    advanced on the appellant's behalf, both in oral submissions and in his
    skeleton argument, the substantive appeal is in fact  no  more  than  a
    challenge to the judge's finding of fact that appellant had  failed  to
    satisfy him that there had been a marriage between Afia Begum and  Juad
    Khan.

11.  Mr Mustafa accepted that the burden of proof lay on the  appellant  and
    the assessment of credibility and the weight to be given  to  different
    parts of the evidence were matters for the judge. Mr Mustafa submitted:
    i.   that that the judge appeared to place undue  weight  on  the  fact
         that the marriage was not registered;
    ii.  that the judge failed to give any, or any adequate, weight to  the
         fact that the appellant's siblings  had  apparently  been  given  a
         Certificate of Entitlement on separate applications at  an  earlier
         point in time.

10.  Mr Mustafa drew my attention to the requirements of the  Muslim  Family
    Laws Ordinance of  1961,  which  applies  to  all  Muslim  citizens  of
    Bangladesh and Pakistan. In the Secretary of State's guidance  entitled
    'Marriage', the Ordinance is described in the following terms:

         "It provides  for  all  Muslim  (or  Mohammedan  marriages)  to  be
         registered by a Nikah Registrar appointed  by  the  Union  Council.
         The Pakistan courts have in the past refused to recognise marriages
         which have not been registered in accordance  with  the  ordinance.
         Polygamy (up to four wives) is allowed on condition  that  the  man
         obtains permission for each marriage from the Arbitration  Council.
         The ordinance is regarded as directive rather than mandatory  since
         it makes no reference to the validity of  marriages  which  do  not
         conform to its requirements."

11.  Mr Mustafa relies on  this,  on  appellant's  behalf,  to  support  his
    proposition that registration of marriages is not required.  Therefore,
    the lack of an authenticated register  is  not  fatal.  The  difficulty
    here, however, is not simply the lack of registration  but  absence  of
    any evidence to support the proposition that any marriage took place.

12.  Notwithstanding the submissions made by Mr Mustafa, in my  judgment  no
    error of law can be demonstrated in this regard  and,  therefore,  this
    appeal fails in limine.

13.  In carrying out a full review of the  evidence  which  was  before  the
    judge, and the manner in which he dealt with it, I note in particular:
     i.  that the burden of proof was on the appellant (para 27);
    ii.  that no witness statement was adduced from Afia Begum  (para  27).
         In the course  of  argument,  Mr  Mustafa  handed  up  a  statement
         apparently from her but stated it was only  to  be  deployed  if  I
         found an error of law and decided to remake the decision;
    ii.  the issue of non-registration was  not  of  the  generalised  type
         addressed  in  the  Guidance  quoted  above,  but  one  of  greater
         specificity. As the judge found (para  25),  the  alleged  marriage
         occurred in circumstances where marriages were routinely registered
         (notwithstanding that this practice may not  have  been  mandatory)
         and that a check  against  the  register  demonstrated  an  obvious
         mismatch between the content of the register and the details on the
         purported marriage certificate. The judge made a  positive  finding
         on the evidence that there had been no marriages registered on  the
         alleged date of 25 June 1983. It was not the appellant's case  that
         the practice was not to register marriages;  on  the  contrary  the
         case was put on the basis of de facto registration which the  judge
         rejected after carefully considering  and  assessing  the  evidence
         which was before him.

14.  It is not open to the Upper Tribunal to  review  the  factual  findings
    made by the judge. His findings are clear, supported by cogent reasons,
    and based upon his assessment  of  the  evidence,  the  credibility  of
    witness and the weight to be afforded to documents, some  of  which  he
    concluded were of dubious provenance. He found that there was no  valid
    marriage. He further found  that  Afia  Begum  cannot  reasonably  have
    believed herself to have been married. Both these findings were open to
    him on the evidence. It therefore follows that no error of law  can  be
    demonstrated in relation to these factual findings of the judge.

15.  There are some  further  matters  which  I  need  to  deal  with  since
    reliance placed upon them by Mr Mustafa. First, he  advanced  something
    akin to an estoppel argument, suggesting that the  Secretary  of  State
    was in some way  obliged  to  grant  the  appellant  a  Certificate  of
    Entitlement since such a Certificate had been granted to  each  of  his
    siblings. I do not consider there to merit in  this  submission.  As  a
    general principle, like cases should be treated alike, but a case which
    fails under the Immigration  Rules cannot be saved  by reference  to  a
    related matter in which, through oversight,  inadvertence  or  (indeed)
    deceit, a contrary conclusion was  reached.  Each  case  turns  on  its
    merits.

16.  Secondly, Mr Mustafa suggests that in some way the Secretary of  Estate
    was under an obligation to inform the appellant  in  advance  that  the
    marriage certificate was not accepted as valid and  that  she  did  not
    consider herself bound by the manner in which the appellant's  siblings
    were treated. I can see no merit in this submission either. The  burden
    of proof is on the appellant throughout, and  it  is  for  him  or  his
    advisers to marshal and deploy such evidence as they deem relevant  and
    sufficient to discharge that  burden.  It  was  clear  from  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's refusal that the certificate of  marriage  was  not
    accepted as genuine so the appellant was on notice that  the  existence
    of the marriage was in issue. If the appellant or  his  advisers  chose
    not to place relevant evidence before  the  judge  (including  but  not
    limited to  a  statement  from  a  surviving  partner  to  the  alleged
    marriage), that does not invalidate the judge's conclusions.

17.   Finally,  Mr  Mustafa  drew  my  attention  to  regulation  4  of  the
    Immigration (Certificate of Entitlement to Right of Abode)  Regulations
    2006 and suggested that this was an appropriate case for waiver of  the
    requirement for the provision of  a  particular  document,  whether  an
    original or a photocopy. This submission, too, is  flawed  because  the
    judge's finding that there had been no valid judge was based  upon  his
    assessment of the totality of the evidence placed before  him  and  not
    upon the absence of any particular document whose production could have
    been waived.

18.  As I have already indicated, my rejection of the  principal  ground  is
    dispositive of the entire appeal. If, as I find, there was no error  of
    law on the part of the judge in finding as a fact  that  there  was  no
    valid marriage (nor any reasonable belief in such a  marriage  on  Afia
    Begum's part) then the subsequent questions do not fall to be addressed
    and the alternative grounds of appeal become purely academic.

19.  In all the circumstances, for the reasons  which  I  have  given,  this
    appeal is dismissed.




Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed   Mark Hill                               Date     3 March 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC


