

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/07756/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 5 March 2014                               |On 4 April 2014              |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                          ZAKIA KAMAL MOHAMED ABAS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                      THE ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, CAIRO

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Stevenson, instructed by McGill & Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J Parkinson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Sudan, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    against the decision of the respondent on 20  February  2013,  refusing
    her entry clearance as the spouse of Abdelrazig Mohamed  Abdalla.   The
    application was made under the Immigration Rules and it is now  not  in
    dispute that it cannot succeed under the  Immigration  Rules.   In  the
    covering letter attached to the application, consideration  was  sought
    outside the Rules, by reference to Article 8 to the European Convention
    on Human  Rights  and  the  best  interests  of  the  children  of  the
    appellant: the appellant's  husband  has  two  other  children  from  a
    previous marriage.

 2. In the First-tier Tribunal, the appeal was heard by  Judge  Burns,  who
    found that the appellant could not meet the requirements of the  Rules.
    He found that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  had  entirely  failed  to
    consider the matter  outside  the  Rules,  and,  instead  of  making  a
    decision himself, purported to remit the matter to  the  respondent  in
    order to consider whether entry clearance should be granted outside the
    Rules on the basis that it would be disproportionate to refuse it.   It
    is that element of the judge's decision that  is  the  subject  of  the
    appeal to this Tribunal.  Leave was sought and  granted  on  the  basis
    that the judge was required to determine the  issue  under  Article  8,
    which had been raised as a ground both on application and on appeal.

 3. We agree.  The judge was required to make such a determination.

 4. The difficulty for the appellant and for Mr Stevenson representing  him
    is, however, to show that the  judge's  determination  ought,  or  even
    could have been, in the appellant's favour.  Although the  letter  sent
    with the original application deals at length with Article 8 and  s.55,
    it does so  in  almost  entirely  general  terms.   The  only  specific
    references to individual facts consist in a statement of the  names  of
    the children and their ages.  As Mr Stevenson readily acknowledged, the
    mere existence of children cannot require a decision in an  applicant's
    favour.

 5. The appellant's difficulties go further than that however.  At the date
    of the decision her husband was (if we may so  put  it)  emerging  from
    bankruptcy.  That, in fact, is the principal reason why he  was  unable
    to supply the documents which  might  have  enabled  the  appellant  to
    succeed under the Rules.  At the date of the decision he had just begun
    a new business.  It looks as though on that date the business had  been
    running for about a week.  The application was supported  by  a  letter
    from a professional (not, we think,  an  accountant);  the  appeal  was
    supported by another  letter  from  the  same  person.   They  are  not
    entirely consistent in relation to  the  financial  prospects  for  the
    sponsor and his firm.  In any event, they are of course, almost  wholly
    speculative.  The position is that the  appellant  is  unable  to  show
    that, if she had been admitted to the United Kingdom as a result  of  a
    visa granted on the date of the decision under appeal, there would have
    been sufficient money to enable all the members of the family  to  live
    in reasonable dignity.  In particular, although the best  interests  of
    the children are asserted in general terms, it is very far from easy to
    see how those interests would be served by spreading the modest  family
    income even more thinly in order to support the appellant  as  well  as
    them.  We should add that this is not a case where the evidence is that
    the family members have not been able to see each other regularly;  nor
    is it a case where it is said that  the  circumstances  of  the  family
    abroad point of themselves to admission to  the  Untied  Kingdom.   The
    position is, unfortunate as it may be, that the evidence  available  in
    relation to the position at the date of the decision shows neither that
    the appellant could meet the requirements of  the  Rules  nor  that  it
    would be disproportionate in her case to maintain the status  quo,  nor
    that the children's best interests would be served by her admission for
    settlement.

 6. As we remarked at the hearing, this appears to us to be  a  case  which
    would probably benefit from a new application, in which (whether or not
    made in the hope of succeeding under the Rules) there can be  a  proper
    statement on what the circumstances would be if the appellant  were  to
    be admitted to the United Kingdom, so that an assessment can be made of
    whether there is a viable claim outside the  Rules.   So  far  any  new
    application is concerned, we  emphasise  that  the  dismissal  of  this
    appeal implies no judgement that any of the evidence we have  seen  was
    not worthy of credit: the position  simply  is  that  the  evidence  is
    wholly insufficient to make the case the appellant seeks to make.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred by failing to decide the Article  8
    issue.  He ought to have decided it,  but,  for  the  reasons  we  have
    given, we regard it as inconceivable that  he  could  have  decided  it
    other than by dismissing the appeal on  those  grounds.   We  therefore
    substitute a determination, dismissing the appeal on all grounds.











                                                              C M G OCKELTON

VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                         Date: 31 March 2014











