
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: oa/07263/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Determination issued                 |
|on 28 April 2015                     |On 1 May 2015                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                M R S HASSANE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, EGYPT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K Dingwall, of Ethnic Minorities Law Centre,
Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt, born on 6 April 1980.  On 7  April
    2013 he applied for entry clearance for settlement in  the  UK  as  the
    fianc� of Brenda Ann Gatherer, his sponsor.

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer refused his application by notice  dated  6
    May 2014, referring to  Appendix  FM  and  paragraph  EC-P.1.1  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  The Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied  that
    the  appellant's  relationship  with  the  sponsor  was   genuine   and
    subsisting, that he intended that they should live together permanently
    in the UK, or that he was  seeking  entry  to  the  UK  to  enable  his
    marriage to take place.

 3. By determination promulgated on 17 December 2014 a panel of the  First-
    tier Tribunal comprising  judges  J  C  Grant-Hutchison  and  M  Porter
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against that decision.   At  paragraph
    22 the panel was "not persuaded that the appellant had an intention  to
    form a genuine subsisting relationship with the sponsor, albeit we  had
    no reason to doubt the sponsor's intentions."

 4. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds:

         ...

          3. The FtT has erred in its assessment of whether the appellant's
             relationship with the sponsor is  genuine  and  subsisting  by
             misunderstanding the facts of the case,  by  failing  to  give
             material evidence the proper consideration and by imposing  an
             unjustified expectation of specific  actions  and  behaviours,
             thereby failing to take the  available  evidence  into  proper
             consideration.

         Misunderstanding the Facts

          4. The FtT held that the appellant and sponsor's relationship was
             not genuine as there was no discussion between them as to  how
             the appellant would care  for  the  sponsor  in  the  UK:  see
             determination at 23:

                  "We  also  noted  the  contents  of  the  brief  statement
                  produced by the appellant which appeared to focus  on  the
                  meeting between the parties in 2012 and on the appellant's
                  health problems, but otherwise was not  informative  about
                  the nature  of  any  potential  future  relationship.   In
                  particular there was no reference as to how the  appellant
                  envisaged being able to care for the sponsor or what  care
                  might involve."

          5.  Although  the  appellant's  sponsor  suffers  from   Multiple
             Sclerosis there is no suggestion that she  currently  requires
             any additional care or that the  appellant  would  require  to
             provide such care.  The FtT therefore erred in concluding that
             such care would be necessary  and  as  such  that  a  lack  of
             discussion  on  the   matter   would   indicate   that   their
             relationship is not genuine or subsisting.

         Failure to properly consider material evidence

          6. The FtT also erred in concluding that a lack  of  evidence  in
             relation to the appellant and sponsor's future intentions,  as
             the appellant has shown that the  couple  have  made  definite
             plans for the future of their relationship (in accordance with
             section 3.1(VI) of the Immigration  Directorate  Instructions)
             by providing  proof  of  the  provisional  booking  for  their
             marriage ceremony  (see  determination  at  the  FtT  at  19.)
             Furthermore the sponsor discussed in her  statement  that  she
             and the appellant intend to live together permanently  in  the
             UK with the appellant's youngest daughter.  The FtT has  erred
             in concluding that there was no evidence of the reality of the
             appellant's intentions.

         Misapplication of the legal test

          7. The FtT has misapplied the provisions of the Immigration Rules
             in concluding at 23 that it is; "essential for  the  appellant
             to work in the UK" as the maintenance  requirement  under  the
             Immigration Rules was accepted by the  respondent  has  having
             been met.  As such  the  FtT  has  erred  by  relying  on  its
             incorrect conclusion that the appellant must  work  to  decide
             that the relationship is not genuine.

          8. The FtT has also failed to apply the  correct  legal  test  in
             assessing the genuineness of the relationship by imposing  its
             own view of how the parties should reasonably be  expected  to
             conduct their relationship with regards to the involvement  of
             the sponsor's eldest daughter.  In doing so the FtT failed  to
             correctly evaluate the evidence that was submitted.  Reference
             is made to Goudey (subsisting marriage-evidence) Sudan  [2012]
             UKUT 00041(IAC) at 10-12:

                  "In our judgement the judge has mis-directed himself as to
                  the weight to  be  attached  to  the  total  documentation
                  relation  to  the  telephone  calls  ...  The  judge   was
                  therefore imposing his own view of how the  parties  could
                  reasonably be expected to conduct  their  relationship  as
                  opposed  to  evaluating  the  consistent   and   supported
                  evidence that was before him as to how they actually did.

                  Everything else is neutral in  this  case.   There  is  no
                  evidence of lies, poor immigration history  or  deception.
                  There is some evidence of financial sponsorship though the
                  judge was entitled to be unimpressed by it for the  reason
                  he gave the absence of receipts is not a factor that  goes
                  to the discredit of the application.

                  Accordingly we find that there has been an error of law in
                  the assessment of this case and whether  the  requirements
                  of the Immigration Rules had been met.  It may be that the
                  Entry Clearance Officer and the judge considered that  the
                  requirement to show a "subsisting marriage"  imposes  some
                  significant burden to produce  evidence  other  than  that
                  showing  that  there  was  a  genuine  intention  to  live
                  together as man and wife in a married relationship.  If so
                  we conclude that that is an error of law.   The  authority
                  of GA ("Subsisting" marriage) Ghana * [2006] UKAIT  00046;
                  [2006] Imm AR 543 only  requires  that  there  is  a  real
                  relationship as opposed to the  merely  formal  one  of  a
                  marriage which has not been terminated.  Where there is  a
                  legally recognised marriage and the parties who are living
                  apart both want to be together as  husband  and  wife,  we
                  cannot see that more is required to demonstrate  that  the
                  marriage  is  subsisting  and  thus  qualifies  under  the
                  Immigration Rules."

          9. The FtT concluded that the sponsor's daughter should have been
             involved in the sponsorship of the appellant at 23:

                  "Finally we  noted  the  absence  of  involvement  in  the
                  apparent relationship on the part of the  sponsor's  elder
                  daughter,  whom  we  would  have  expected  to  have  been
                  concerned in her mother's well-being."

         10. The sponsor's daughter does not live with her and there is  no
             evidence to suggest that this lack of involvement  relates  to
             the genuineness  of  the  appellant's  relationship  with  his
             sponsor.  There is no evidential basis for concluding that the
             reasons for the absence of involvement in the sponsor's eldest
             daughter  relate  to  the  substance  of   the   sponsor   and
             appellant's relationship.

         11. The FtT also concluded that the appellant and  sponsor  should
             have met on further occasions as  well  as  in  2012,  despite
             recognising  the  limitations  of  the  sponsor's  ability  to
             travel.  This issue is discussed by the FtT at 22:

                  "We accepted  that  the  sponsor  was  restricted  in  her
                  ability to travel, due to her health problems, her  family
                  circumstances   and  her  financial  position  which   was
                  dependant on Social Security  Benefit,  although  she  had
                  been able to travel to Abu Dhabi  in  2012.   However,  we
                  considered that the appellant, who was  in  apparent  good
                  health, could have visited the United Kingdom at any stage
                  between 2012 and 2014 or made arrangements  to  meet  with
                  the sponsor elsewhere at a mutually  convenient  location,
                  nearer to the sponsor's home country."

         12. This conclusion goes beyond the relevant  respondent  guidance
             which was lodged in the appellant's bundle  and  discussed  in
             the appellant's submissions but  was  not  considered  in  the
             FtT's determination.  The guidance states  that  visiting  one
             another is a positive factor in  favour  of  the  relationship
             being genuine but that "the fact that an appellant  has  never
             visited the UK must not be regarded as a negative factor".

         13. This conclusion also fails to properly take into  account  the
             financial circumstances of the appellant.  The FtT found at 18
             that:

                  "The appellant worked in the Abu Dhabi Pipe Factory from 4
                  October 2004 until 2 June 2013 when he returned to  Egypt.
                  He has worked on his father's farm since that date without
                  receiving any pay."

         14. This suggests that the appellant is unlikely to have  had  the
             financial means to travel to any third  country  from  2  June
             2013.  It is an error of law  to  substitute  the  appellant's
             actual circumstances with the FtT's expectation  that  further
             physical contact should be present in order for a relationship
             to be genuine and subsisting.

         Conclusion

         15. Considering the extensive evidence  relating  to  the  contact
             between the parties  and  the  further  evidence  provided  in
             relation to their physical contact, it is submitted  that  the
             couple have demonstrated that on the balance of  probabilities
             their relationship is genuine and subsisting and the appellant
             intends to come to the UK in  order  to  get  married  to  his
             sponsor.

 5. Ms Dingwall made submissions expanding upon  the  grounds  as  follows,
    identifying 6 points:

      i) The panel misunderstood the evidence, which did not show  that  the
         sponsor requires additional care or that the appellant  would  need
         to provide such care.  The parties'  lack  of  discussion  of  that
         issue was not adverse.  The panel hypothesised and went beyond  any
         relevant legal test.

     ii) The appellant had shown the future intentions of the couple through
         provisional booking of their marriage ceremony and their  intention
         to live together in the UK with the appellant's  younger  daughter.
         Although the younger daughter did not give oral  evidence  and  had
         not met the appellant in person,  there  was  evidence  of  regular
         contact by skype.  The panel wrongly considered that there  was  no
         evidence of the reality of the appellant's intentions.

    iii) In saying at paragraph 23 that  it  would  be  "essential  for  the
         appellant to find work in the UK" the  panel  overlooked  that  the
         maintenance requirement under the Rules was met and he did not need
         to show that he would find work.

     iv) The panel went wrong by applying  its  own  expectation  of  how  a
         relationship should  be  conducted.   They  noted  the  absence  of
         involvement of the sponsor's older daughter, but she  is  an  adult
         who  lives  independently.   The  absence  of  such  evidence   was
         insignificant.   The panel's duty as explained  in  Goudey  was  to
         evaluate the evidence before them.  Marital  relationships  may  be
         genuine whether or not approved by wider family members.

      v) The panel went wrong by founding on the absence of further meetings
         between appellant and sponsor.  There was no requirement  for  them
         to have met again.  The panel at paragraph 22 accepted  that  there
         were  restrictions  on  the  sponsor's  travel.   The  respondent's
         guidance (which the appellant had put before the  panel)  indicated
         that lack of visits was not adverse.

     vi) The panel's observations on lack of visiting also  failed  to  take
         account of the circumstances of the appellant,  although  they  had
         been set out in paragraph 18.  As he was working  on  his  father's
         farm without pay it was unlikely he would have the means  to  visit
         the sponsor, so the panel should have noted also  the  restrictions
         upon him.

 6. Summing  up,  Ms  Dingwall  said  that  the  extent  of  error  in  the
    determination was such that  it  should  be  set  aside.   On  all  the
    evidence which had been presented it should be found that the appellant
    made out his case on the balance  of  probability.   The  determination
    should be reversed.

 7. Mr Matthews in response said that it was  always  difficult  to  assess
    whether a relationship is genuine, even when  oral  evidence  is  heard
    from both parties, and more so when one is absent in  another  country.
    However, it was a factual question on which a tribunal had to  make  up
    its mind one way or the other.  The conclusion reached was  within  the
    scope of the panel.  To set it aside, the appellant had  to  show  more
    than mere disagreement.  It was not suggested that this was a  decision
    which no Tribunal could have reached.  It might be that  another  judge
    or panel could have decided the other way, but there  was  no  material
    inadequacy in the panel's reasoning.  On the particular points  raised,
    Mr Matthew submitted as follows:

      i) There was evidence that the sponsor was in  receipt  of  Disability
         Living Allowance, including the higher rate  care  component.   She
         suffers  from  multiple  sclerosis,  which   is   unfortunately   a
         degenerative condition.  Her future health and care needs would  be
         an obvious point of interest  and  discussion.   This  was  not  an
         irrelevant factor.  At paragraph 23, the panel made no more  of  it
         than they were entitled to do.

     ii) The Rules at Appendix FM paragraph E-ECP.2.8 require that entry  is
         sought to enable the marriage to take place.  Paragraph 19  records
         that the parties had made provisional plans, which  later  required
         to be cancelled.  That is simple narrative.  The panel does not  go
         on to develop it into a negative point.

    iii) There is no legal requirement to show that the appellant could find
         work.   The  application  did  not   have   to   meet   maintenance
         requirements due to the sponsor's receipt of benefits.  However, if
         he did not intend to work then he planned to live on the  sponsor's
         benefits.  The evidence  which  he  did  provide  was  scanty.   It
         included no reference to working.  The panel was entitled  to  find
         it curious that he did not say anything about it.  He  proposed  to
         establish a household with his wife and one of her daughters, so it
         would be normal to expect some information about how he proposed to
         contribute to the household's support.

     iv) There is no requirement to show that wider family  members  approve
         of and support a relationship, but it would be usual to expect some
         indication of an attempt to integrate  with  the  spouse's  family.
         The matter could not go very far, but the panel's comment  was  not
         much more than a passing one.

      v) The appellant and sponsor met only once, in 2012, for only 10 days.
          The Tribunal did not find the sponsor unable to travel, only  that
         there are restrictions.  The evidence appeared to  have  been  that
         she found the heat in Abu Dhabi oppressive.  There was  nothing  to
         show that the appellant could not visit her in the UK or in another
         more convenient and congenial country.  The Tribunal  was  entitled
         to take the lack of further contact into account.

 8. Finally, Mr Matthews said that the burden of proof was on the appellant
    to show that there was a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.   The
    evidence he submitted was patchy  and  insubstantial  and  invited  the
    adverse conclusion reached.  The determination did not err, or at least
    did not err to such extent as to justify it being set  aside.   If  the
    decision were to be remade, Mr Matthews agreed that there was  no  need
    for further hearing or submissions.  Everything to be  said  on  either
    side had been put forward.

 9. In reply Ms Dingwall said that although the Presenting  Officer  argued
    that the lack of involvement of the older daughter was not  given  much
    weight, the determination only rehearsed the various factors taken into
    account against the appellant, without explaining the respective weight
    given to each one.  The panel should not have made anything at  all  of
    that aspect of the evidence,  but  should  have  given  weight  to  the
    evidence of contact ongoing with the younger daughter,  with  whom  the
    couple planned to reside, and of the intention to marry.  Although much
    was made of the lack of further visits, the meeting in Abu Dhabi was in
    2012 and the application leading to these proceedings was made in April
    2013, less than a year later.  To expect evidence of additional  visits
    within that relatively short period was unreasonable.

10. I reserved my determination.

11. The challenge is essentially to the adequacy of the panel's  reasoning.
    Paragraphs 22 and 23 of the determination set out the  adverse  factors
    which led to the decision:

      i) There was online contact for over  2  years,  but  only  one  brief
         physical meeting, in 2012.

     ii) The sponsor was restricted in her ability to travel,  but  she  was
         able to go to Abu Dhabi.  The appellant could have visited  the  UK
         at any time from 2012 to 2014 or they could  have  met  in  another
         mutually convenient location.

    iii) The appellant's statement focused on the meeting  in  2012  and  on
         [the sponsor's] health problems but not on the future nature of the
         relationship.  In particular, the future care of  the  sponsor  was
         not envisaged, which was adverse to  an  enduring  and  substantive
         relationship "and did not confirm the reality  of  the  appellant's
         intentions."

     iv) The appellant had work experience but there appeared to  have  been
         no discussion between the appellant and sponsor regarding  work  he
         might seek in  the  UK,  where  "it  would  be  essential  for  the
         appellant to find work ... given that his  sponsor  was  unable  to
         work due to severe health problems and reliant solely on benefits."



      v) Finally,  the  panel  noted  the  absence  of  involvement  of  the
         sponsor's elder daughter "whom we would have expected to have  been
         concerned in her mother's well being."

12. In my opinion, the panel was entitled to make its observations on  lack
    of discussion about the sponsor's potential future care  needs.   There
    is nothing in the Rules which calls for that specific type of evidence,
    but in the nature of the case this was a matter relevant  to  assessing
    the nature of the relationship, as the panel had to do.

13. There is nothing in the point about specific wedding plans.  The  panel
    did not find this adverse.  In any event, the arrangements were at  the
    instance of the sponsor, and the panel's  doubts  were  not  about  her
    intentions, only those of the appellant.

14. The nearest the panel may have come to error is in the remark  that  it
    would be essential for the appellant to find work.  However,  this  has
    to be read in context of the evidence as a whole and of  the  preceding
    sentence of the determination.  This is another  obvious  matter  which
    might be expected to be of some importance to both parties.  The  panel
    was entitled to find it odd that the parties appeared to have given  it
    no consideration.

15. There is no need to establish  that  wider  family  members  support  a
    relationship.  Again, however, this is  an  obvious  matter  which  one
    would expect to be contemplated in a genuine  relationship.   There  is
    nothing wrong with the panel saying that they would have  expected  the
    sponsor's older daughter to be concerned about her mother's well being.
     Any panel might have expected the parties to deal  with  this  in  her
    evidence, eg by leading evidence from her; by explaining that  she  was
    supportive; or that she took no interest; or that she disapproved,  but
    that was something to be lived with.  I do not  think  the  panel  gave
    this any more significance than it merited.

16. As to the extent of meetings, the grounds seek to explain  this  partly
    by the appellant's lack of means, but there was  no  evidence  on  that
    matter.  It did not necessarily follow from what  the  panel  was  told
    that he was impecunious.  Ms Dingwall countered  with  the  observation
    that the period without a meeting was less than a year up to  the  date
    of application, but the panel noted that there was no meeting up to the
    date of the hearing on 2 December 2014.  Again, the panel was  entitled
    to give this some weight.

17. The weighting of the various factors is very  much  a  matter  for  the
    panel.  Ms Dingwall complained that it was not made clear which  factor
    carried the most weight, but this is not an  exercise  of  arithmetical
    precision.  The panel gave a number of reasons.   It  is  fairly  clear
    that some carried more weight than others, but the question is  whether
    as a whole they justify the outcome.

18. The appellant's case has been pressed as strongly as it properly  could
    be on the evidence available, both in the First-tier  Tribunal  and  in
    the Upper Tribunal.  However, reading the determination fairly and as a
    whole, he has not shown that the determination is a less  than  legally
    adequate explanation to him of why the panel  found  that  evidence  to
    fall short of proving his case.  The case may have been  a  close  one,
    and other judges might have come down on the other side, but  there  is
    no error of law which would entitle the Upper Tribunal to interfere.

19. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



           [pic]


           28 April 2015
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman
