
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08002/2015
                                                               OA/08005/2015
                                                               OA/08006/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th December 2017                        |On 14th March 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MASTER FHY
                                 MASTER HHY
                                  MISS NHY
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms. L Santamera, Counsel instructed by Hersi & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant before me, is  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department. However, for ease of reference,  in  the  course  of  this
      decision I shall adopt the parties' status as it was before the First-
      tier  Tribunal.   I  shall  in  this  decision,  refer  to  FHY  (born
      27.04.08),  HHY  (born  0.0.11),  and  NHY  (born  10.11.03),  as  the
      appellants and the Secretary of State as the respondent.


 2. The appellants are all citizens of Somalia.  They are two brothers  and
    a sister. They each applied for entry clearance to join  their  father,
    FY, and settle in the UK.  Their  applications  were  refused  on  21st
    January  2015.  The  respondent  concluded  that  the  appellants   had
    submitted no evidence of their identity and submitted  no  evidence  of
    their relationship with their sponsor.   Each  of  the  appellants  had
    claimed to be a child of their sponsor.  The respondent noted that  the
    appellants had failed to provide evidence of the  relationship  between
    the appellants and their sponsor by way of documents indicative of  the
    claimed relationship.  The  respondent  also  noted  that  the  sponsor
    travelled to the UK in 2005 to be reunited  with  his  mother,  as  her
    dependent. At that time, there was no mention of the  appellants  being
    the sponsor's children.  The respondent also considered the  appellants
    account of their mother having been kidnapped in 2014, and their having
    lived with a cousin since that time.  The  respondent  noted  that  the
    appellants had provided no evidence to substantiate the kidnapping  and
    that there had been a delay between the kidnapping and  the  making  of
    the application. The respondent  concluded  that  the  appellants  were
    being cared for in their country of origin by their cousin.


 3. The appellants appealed to  the  FtT.  Shortly  after  lodging  at  the
    appeal, under cover of a letter dated  19  June  2015,  the  appellants
    representatives provided the Entry Clearance Manager with a DNA  report
    as confirmation of the relationship  between  the  appellants  and  the
    sponsor. The matter was reviewed by the Entry  Clearance  Manager,  who
    stated in a decision to maintain the refusals as follows:


             "In the grounds of appeal it was asserted that the sponsor and
             appellants were related as claimed. In support  of  this  they
             provided DNA tests from DNA Legal which is  part  of  the  DNA
             Worldwide group, confirming the appellants were  the  children
             of the sponsor. However I note that DNA Legal is  not  on  the
             GOV.UK website as an approved paternity testing provider.


             ...


             I  have  noted  that  the  grounds  drew  attention   to   the
             solicitor's letter from Hersi & Co  Solicitor's  which  stated
             that  the  appellants'  mothers  had  been   kidnapped.   They
             reiterated this and also that the subsequent  search  for  her
             had resulted in the delay  in  the  applications  being  made.
             However these claims are  not  corroborated  by  the  evidence
             provided.


             I have noted that the grounds advance the point that  the  ECO
             has been unfair and unreasonable by refusing  the  appellants.
             However  given  the  serious  concerns  as  to   whether   the
             appellants were related to the sponsor as claimed as  well  as
             that the claim about their mother is unsubstantiated,  then  I
             am satisfied that the ECO was  entitled  too  and  correct  in
             arriving at the decision  they  did.  Furthermore,  I  am  not
             satisfied on the balance of probabilities that the grounds  of
             appeal and evidence provided have dispelled these concerns.


             Given the above, I maintain  the  decisions  to  refuse  entry
             clearance.


 4. The appeals were heard by FtT Judge J Macdonald  on  28th  March  2017.
    The appeals were  allowed  for  the  reasons  set  out  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 7th April 2017.


The decision of the FtT Judge


 5. A summary of the background to the appeal is set out at paragraphs  [1]
    to [20] of the decision of the FtT Judge.   The  Judge  heard  evidence
    from the appellants father that is set out at paragraphs [26]  to  [35]
    of  the  decision.   The  Judge  sets  out,  at  paragraph  [40],   the
    requirements of paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.


 6. The FtT Judge noted that  contrary  to  what  was  said  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager, the DNA report relied upon by the appellants is from
    an approved Company and the Judge, at [41], accepted the DNA report  as
    evidence of the relationship between the appellants and their father.


 7. The Judge turned to consider the appellants account of  the  kidnapping
    of their mother. The Judge found at [44], that the appellants inability
    to obtain corroborating evidence is  understandable.   Having  had  the
    benefit of hearing  evidence  from  the  sponsor,  he  found  that  the
    evidence of the sponsor that his wife has been  abducted  is  credible,
    and was accepted.


 8. At paragraph [45], the Judge notes that the decisions under appeal were
    made on 21st January 2015 before the changes to appeal rights  set  out
    in the Immigration Act 2014 came fully into force. The Judge  notes  "I
    can therefore decide this appeal on  the  basis  that  the  immigration
    rules have been wrongly applied.".


 9. The Judge found that the sponsor is present and settled in  the  United
    Kingdom and has had sole responsibility for the appellants  upbringing,
    so that the requirement at paragraph 297(e) of the rules  is  met.   In
    reaching that decision, the Judge states at [46];


             The documentary evidence produced shows that the sponsor makes
             regular payments in support of his  children  and  rings  them
             almost every day to provide them with advice and support.  The
             children are now aged almost 8 years and 11 months, nine years
             and 11 months, and 13  years  and  five  months  respectively.
             Based  upon  the  evidence  contained  within  the   documents
             produced to me and  the  oral  and  written  evidence  of  the
             sponsor, I  find  that  the  sponsor  as  the  parent  of  the
             appellants  has  sole  responsibility  for  their   upbringing
             following the abduction of their mother in April 2014."


The appeal before me


10. The respondent advances one ground of appeal. That is, the judge failed
    to give adequate reasons for his finding on a material  matter.  It  is
    said that in reaching the decision that the appellants mother had  been
    kidnapped and the sponsor had sole responsibility  for  the  appellant,
    the Judge has (a) given inadequate reasons for  his  finding  that  the
    appellants mother had been kidnapped; (b) did not consider  the  eighth
    month delay between the abduction of  the  appellants  mother  and  the
    making of the application for settlement and  (c)  failed  to  consider
    whether the major decisions concerning the appellants, were at the time
    of the respondents decision, being made by their cousin, with whom they
    were living.


11. Permission to appeal was granted  by  FtT  Judge  Hollingworth  on  8th
    November 2017. The matter comes  before  me  to  consider  whether  the
    decision of the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and
    if so, to remake the decision.


12. Mrs Aboni adopts the respondent's grounds of appeal  and  submits  that
    the key issue in this appeal is whether it was open  to  the  Judge  to
    find that at the date of  the  respondent's  decision,  the  appellants
    father  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  appellants  upbringing  as
    required by paragraph 297(e) of the immigration rules. She submits that
    the Judge has failed to consider how the appellants were  being  looked
    after  at  the  date  of  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse   the
    application for settlement. She submits that in  an  appeal  against  a
    refusal of entry clearance, the key date is the date of the decision of
    the entry clearance officer, and the appeal should have been determined
    by the Judge by reference to the situation as it was, at that time.


13. In reply, Ms Santamera submits that the Judge was entitled to  consider
    the circumstances as they were at  the  date  of  the  hearing  of  the
    appeal. She submits that the appellant's cousin, with  whom  they  were
    living, was only taking a care-taking role for the children and it  was
    their  father  that  had  sole  responsibility   for   his   children's
    upbringing. She submits that the Judge  must  have  accepted  that  the
    appellants cousin had moved to Norway, and that the respondent's appeal
    amounts to a mere disagreement with the  findings  that  were  properly
    open to the Judge.


Discussion


  14. The decisions of the respondent that were under appeal before the  FtT
      were the decisions to refuse entry clearance for settlement dated 21st
      January  2015.    The  Immigration   Act   2014 ("the   2014   Act")
      fundamentally changed the system granting rights of  appeal.   Section
      15 of the 2014 Act repealed and replaced the key  relevant  sections,
      82, 83, 83A and 84 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002
      ("the 2002 Act").  The relevant savings provision, operate  such  that
      from 6th April 2015, the new regime applies for all persons who  apply
      for entry clearance, on or after that date.     The  FtT  Judge  here,
      correctly noted that the decisions under  appeal  were  made  on  21st
      January 2015 before the changes  to  appeal  rights  set  out  in  the
      Immigration Act 2014 came fully into force.  The  prospective  grounds
      of challenge must fall within one of the listed grounds of  appeal  in
      s84 of the 2002 Act. These include: the decision is not in  accordance
      with the Immigration Rules. It was therefore  open  to  the  Judge  to
      decide the appeal on the basis that the immigration  rules  have  been
      wrongly applied.


  15. On appeal, the relevant date in entry clearance cases is the  date  of
      refusal; s85(5) of the 2002 Act.  It is now well established that  any
      material change in circumstance or evidence not reasonably foreseeable
      after the date of refusal, should not be taken into account.  The  FtT
      Judge was entitled to look at circumstances/evidence after the date of
      decision, only if it related to circumstances before or at the time of
      decision.


  16. The Judge accepted the DNA evidence.  The Judge found, at  [41],  that
      the appellants are the two sons and one daughter of the  sponsor.   It
      was plainly open to the Judge to accept that the relationship  between
      the appellants and their father has been  established.   Although  the
      DNA report came after the respondent's decision of 21st January  2015,
      it had been considered by the Entry  Clearance  Manager,  and  in  any
      event, the evidence relates to the facts as at the time of decision.


  17. The Judge also found, at [44]:


         "..Having had the benefit of hearing evidence from the sponsor  and
         taking into account the background information about Somalia I find
         the appellant's claim that his wife has been abducted  be  credible
         and believable and I accept it. It is further supported by the fact
         that the sponsor visits the appellants when he can in Addis  Ababa,
         he telephones them almost on a daily basis  and  remits  funds  for
         their support."


  18. The Judge found that  the  requirement  at  paragraph  297(e)  of  the
      Immigration Rules is met. In  deciding  whether  the  appellants  have
      established that their father has had sole  responsibility  for  their
      upbringing since the abduction of their mother, it is far  from  clear
      whether the Judge had in mind the position as it was at  the  date  of
      the respondent's decision.  The Judge  states  at  [46],  that  "..The
      documentary evidence produced shows that  the  sponsor  makes  regular
      payments in support of his children and rings them almost every day to
      provide them with advice and support..".  It  is  not  entirely  clear
      whether the Judge was referring to the position as it was at the  date
      of refusal, or the date of the hearing before him.  I  have  carefully
      considered the evidence that was to be found at pages [70] to [107] of
      the appellant's bundle.  The majority of that evidence post-dates  the
      decision.  The only evidence that pre-dates the respondent's  decision
      of 21st January 2015 is  evidence  of  money  transfers  made  by  the
      appellants father to MAA on 3rd December  2014  ($400),  9th  December
      2014 ($150), 19th December 2014 ($2,000), 20th December  2014  ($250),
      and 3rd January 2015 ($400).


  19. In January 2015, it appears the appellants were being looked after  by
      a cousin.  The Judge notes, at [34], that the cousin moved  to  Norway
      in July 2016.  That plainly post-dates the respondent's  decision  and
      was a material change in circumstance, not reasonably  foreseeable  at
      the date of the refusal.  The Judge does not make any findings  as  to
      the care being provided to the appellants by their cousin, in  January
      2015.


  20. I remind myself of the observations made by Mr. Justice Haddon-Cave in
      Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC);


           It  is  generally  unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for   First-tier
           Tribunal judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a
           case. This leads to judgments becoming overly long and  confused
           and is not a proportionate approach to deciding  cases.  It  is,
           however, necessary  for  judges  to  identify  and  resolve  key
           conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear and  brief  terms
           their reasons, so that the parties can understand why they  have
           won or lost.


  21. I have also had regard to the decision of the Upper Tribunal in Shizad
      (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 IAC where it was
      stated in the head note that:


             "Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of
             the conclusions on the central issue on which  the  appeal  is
             determined,  those  reasons  need  not  be  extensive  if  the
             decision makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted
             by the judge."


  22. Although a Judge is not required to rehearse  every  detail  or  issue
      raised in a case, in my judgement, the issue as to how the  appellants
      were being cared for in January 2015, and the role that  their  cousin
      and father played in their lives at that time, required  much  clearer
      analysis and consideration.  Although  not  expressly  set  out  as  a
      finding, one cannot help but get the impression  that  the  Judge  was
      persuaded  that  the  appellants  cousin,  who  the   appellants   had
      previously lived with, left for Norway in 2016 and that  their  father
      has since assumed sole responsibility for their upbringing.


  23. Having carefully considered the decision of the FtT Judge,  I  am  not
      satisfied that a Tribunal properly directing itself to the  facts  and
      circumstances as they were at the date of the  respondent's  decision,
      would reach the same conclusion, and the error  of  law  is  therefore
      material to the  outcome  of  the  appeal.   It  follows  that  in  my
      judgment, the decision of the FtT discloses a material  error  of  law
      and should be set aside.


  24. As to disposal, I have decided that it is appropriate  to  remit  this
      appeal back to the FtT for hearing afresh, having taken  into  account
      paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement  of  25th
      September 2012.  In light of the nature  of  the  error  of  law,  the
      extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be extensive.


  25. The Judge of the FtT was satisfied that the relationship  between  the
      appellants and their father, that is supported by DNA evidence, is  as
      they claim.  The finding that the appellants are the children of Mr FY
      is preserved.


  26. The parties will be advised of the date  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


  27.  The  appeal  is  allowed.   The  decision  of  FtT  Judge   MacDonald
      promulgated on 7th April 2017 is set aside, and I remit the matter for
      a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal with the finding that the
      appellants are the children of Mr FY, preserved.


      Signed                                 Date         28th February 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


28. The FtT Judge made no fee award.


       Signed                                Date     28th February 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





