
[pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/08714/2013
                                                               OA/08708/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 1 October 2014                             |On 11 November 2014          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                 THE RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                  Mrs Vida Moles D'souza (first appellant)
                    Mr Isidore D'souza (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MUMBAI
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mrs J Rothwell, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Grimmett promulgated on 3 March 2014.  The appellants are  citizens  of
    India and are husband and wife.  They appealed against  a  decision  of
    the Entry Clearance Officer at Mumbai dated 4 March 2013 to refuse them
    entry clearance to the UK as dependants of the sponsor, their daughter,
    and her husband, their son-in-law.

2.   At the date of the decision the first-named appellant was  78  and  the
    second nearly 85.  It is not disputed that both appellants suffer  from
    a variety of age-related illnesses including dementia.  For a time  the
    first appellant was looking after  and  caring  for  her  husband,  the
    second appellant.  However, in about 2012 her  health  deteriorated  to
    the point where she was no longer able to provide such care.  Both  now
    require long-term care.

3.   The couple have three daughters one of whom is the  sponsor.   None  of
    them live in India.  The sponsor's sisters live in  Canada  and  Dubai.
    They have for some time returned to India  on  a  six  week  rotational
    basis to look after their parents.  This arrangement puts a  strain  on
    the appellants' daughters, who have families of their own.  The sponsor
    herself has two children who in January 2013 were aged 6 and 9.  It has
    not been suggested that this arrangement involving rotational  care  by
    the daughters offers a long-term solution to the  appellants'  required
    care needs.

4.   The sponsor is a geriatric nurse working in the NHS and her husband  is
    a general practitioner.  They wish the appellants to come and stay with
    them in the UK where they can be provided for in their home.  They  are
    arranging for their house to be converted to provide an annex  suitable
    for their needs.

5.   The relevant Rules which the  respondent  applied  are  EC-DR.1.1,  EC-
    DR.2.4 and EC-DR.2.5.  EC-DR.2.4 provides that the applicant must as  a
    result of age, illness or disability require long-term personal care to
    provide everyday tasks.  EC-DR.2.5 provides:

         "The applicant or, if the  applicant  and  their  partner  are  the
         sponsor's parents or grandparents, the applicant's partner, must be
         unable, even with the practical and financial help of the  sponsor,
         to obtain the required level of care in the country where they  are
         living, because -

         (a)  it is not available and there is no person in that country who
             can reasonably provide it; or

         (b)  it is not affordable."

6.   It is not disputed that as a result  of  age,  illness  and  disability
    both appellants require long-term care.  The issue before the  ECO  and
    on appeal Judge Grimmett was  whether  the  applicant,  even  with  the
    practical or financial support of the sponsor, would be able to  obtain
    the required level of care because it was not available and  there  was
    no person in that country who could reasonably provide it.  The sponsor
    and her husband are relatively well-off, at least by Indian  standards,
    and it is not suggested that any care that is available in India is not
    affordable.

7.   Judge Grimmett in her  findings  accepted  that  at  the  date  of  the
    decision by the ECO both appellants were in need of some care and  that
    it was foreseeable  that  the  care  needs  of  both  appellants  would
    increase over time.  She accepted that there were  currently  few  care
    homes for those with dementia and few people formally  trained  in  the
    care of those with dementia or indeed the elderly.  She found that most
    elderly family members were cared  for  in  India  by  extended  family
    members.

8.   Judge Grimmett, however, was not  satisfied  that  the  appellants  had
    shown that they were unable to obtain the required  level  of  care  in
    India.  Carers could be trained by the sponsor.   Although  there  were
    insufficient doctors and nurses for the Indian population  as  a  whole
    there were well-qualified  doctors  in  India.   The  sponsor  and  the
    appellants were able to afford the required level of care.

9.    Extensive  grounds  of  appeal  were  lodged  by  the  appellants  and
    supplemented by written submissions.  Before us Mrs Rothwell  submitted
    that the issue was whether the required level of care was available  in
    India and whether there was anyone capable of providing it.

10.  Mrs Rothwell submitted that First-tier Judge Grimmett had erred in  law
    by finding that the sponsor and her husband could go to India and train
    sufficient staff to undertake the  care.   She  said  that  this  would
    involve not only training regular staff but additional  staff  to  care
    for holidays, illnesses etc.  In any  event  the  undisputed  evidence,
    recorded at paragraph 14, was that a family member needed to be present
    to coordinate the care.  At paragraph 16 First-tier Judge Grimmett  had
    said that the evidence produced by the appellants suggested  that  they
    would be best looked after by  their  family  members.   She  went  on,
    however, that it was clear that this was not necessarily  the  view  of
    the sponsor who said that she wished to return to  work  part-time  and
    have other care for her parents while she was not there.  This  it  was
    submitted was a misunderstanding of her evidence and  she  referred  to
    the sponsor Diana Ray's statement at paragraphs 50 and 51.  This was to
    the effect that she may go back to work  part-time  if  the  appellants
    were well enough.

11.  Mr Melvin, the Home Office Presenting Officer, relied on  the  Rule  24
    response and his written submissions.  He submitted that there  was  no
    error of law.  He ventured to suggest that  it  would  be  unusual  for
    somebody in this country with these care needs to obtain the specialist
    care that was being suggested was  required  for  the  appellants.   He
    submitted  that  a  decision  to  allow  the  appeals  would  open  the
    floodgates.  The family, presumably the daughters, had all  left  India
    by choice.  There was a difference in any event between rural India and
    what was available in urban centres such as  Mumbai  where  there  were
    well-qualified doctors as evidenced by the expert reports in this case.
     There were also care homes as the respondent had  found.   The  family
    have provided care on a rotational basis.  The requirements of the Rule
    had not been fulfilled.

Decision on Error of Law

12.  EC-DR.2.5 requires the applicant to show that even with  the  practical
    or financial help of  the  sponsor  they  were  unable  to  obtain  the
    required level of care in India because it is not available.  Financial
    support from the sponsor is available.  Given that the Rule also refers
    to practical support we do not think that it was an  error  of  law  or
    unreasonable to consider whether or not the sponsor and/or her  husband
    might  provide  some  training  for  carers  in  India.   However,  the
    undisputed evidence was that a family member required to be present  to
    coordinate care.  It is  also  clear  that  First-tier  Judge  Grimmett
    misunderstood the evidence about the sponsor's intentions  about  going
    back to work.  Her witness statement says that if she  is  able  to  go
    back to work this would help cover the  cost  of  a  reputable  nursing
    agency to provide care for her parents.  Crucially, however,  she  goes
    on "as their nursing needs inevitably increase this is something that I
    do not wish to delegate to anyone but  myself."   The  important  point
    from her evidence is that whether or not she worked two to three days a
    week she would nevertheless be on hand to supervise and coordinate  any
    care.  As her parents' needs increased she herself  would  be  involved
    intimately in providing that care.

13.  The requirement for a heavy family  involvement  in  the  care  of  the
    appellants is emphasised by the rotational nature  of  the  care  being
    provided by the appellants' daughters.  First-tier Judge  Grimmett  did
    not suggest that this was a long-term solution.

14.  Accordingly we have come to the view that  in  assessing  the  evidence
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to recognise  the  requirement  in
    the evidence of an ongoing involvement by a relative in  the  provision
    of care for the appellants.  This in our view  amounts  to  a  material
    error of law.  We shall accordingly allow the appeal and set aside  the
    judgment of First-tier Judge Grimmett.

Fresh Determination

15.  Having set aside the determination it  falls  to  be  remade.   No  new
    evidence was presented to us but we heard submissions on  the  evidence
    which was before the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

16.   A  number  of  medical  reports  were  supplied  in  respect  of  both
    appellants.

17.  The appellants'  general  practitioner  Dr  Priya  Gokhale  provided  a
    report dated 24 November 2012  in  respect  of  both  appellants.   The
    second appellant, the husband, has suffered from type 2  diabetes  from
    1985.  This  has  been  insulin-controlled  since  2004.   He  has  had
    hypertension since 2008, ischemic heart disease  -  angina  from  2008,
    benign prostatic hypertrophy from 2006.  He suffers from osteoarthritis
    of  multiple  sites  including  the  lumbar  and  cervical  spine   and
    shoulders.  From 1998 he has  suffered  from  senile  dementia  (likely
    vascular dementia) and it is now moderately severe.  At that  time  his
    diabetes, angina, hypertension and benign  prostatic  hypertrophy  were
    controlled  within   satisfactory   levels.    With   regard   to   his
    osteoarthritis he is generally in severe pain, mainly  from  his  lower
    back.  He tends to be most comfortable when he is lying down.   He  can
    only stay upright for short periods and  cannot  walk  beyond  a  short
    distance without needing to stop and rest.  He  is  restricted  in  his
    ability to do household tasks.  With regards to his senile dementia his
    memory is poor  and  this  means  that  he  cannot  be  allowed  to  be
    unsupervised with regard to his medication, especially his insulin.  He
    needs to be constantly reminded to inject his insulin which  should  be
    taken prior to  his  meals  and  reminded  to  take  other  medication.
    Failure to take medication  would  have  serious  consequences  to  his
    health, especially his diabetes.

18.  Turning to the first appellant, the wife, Dr Gokhale notes  that  until
    recently she acted as a main  carer  for  her  husband.   However,  her
    present medical problems encompass type 2 diabetes since 1994 which  is
    tablet-controlled and essential hypertension since 2002.  She also  has
    cataracts.  In  about  June  2012  she  suffered  an  acute  myocardial
    infarction.  It appears that this was not  properly  diagnosed  at  the
    time.  It is noted that she becomes tired and breathless easily because
    of her poor cardiac function.  She cannot walk very far and  cannot  do
    any household task without getting breathless and tired.  Her memory is
    poor and she cannot be left unsupervised to take her  medication.   She
    has lost the insight to take care of herself in terms of  her  personal
    safety, personal care, hygiene and bathing.  She needs  help  for  this
    and supervision on a daily basis.  It is noted that this  is  presently
    being provided by her family.

19.  In her recommendations for future care Dr Gokhale notes that  both  her
    patients require supervision  with  their  medications  and  the  first
    appellant requires continuing help with her personal care, hygiene  and
    bathing tasks which are best provided  by  a  family  member.   In  her
    experience the same standard of care cannot be provided by a  carer  or
    even a qualified nurse since the personal nature of the  help  required
    would be distressing and embarrassing if received from a stranger.   It
    is noted that she is capable of accepting the necessary care  if  given
    by her daughters.  She is supportive of the proposal that  they  should
    move to the United Kingdom to be cared  for  by  the  sponsor  and  her
    husband.

20.  A report from Dr Vinay S Chauhan, a consultant  neurologist,  dated  20
    March 2013  examines  the  second  appellant,  the  husband's  clinical
    history.  In his recommendations he notes that the second appellant has
    minimal cognitive impairment with physical disability  of  osteoporosis
    and  lumbar  canal  stenosis.   He  requires  considerable   help   for
    activities of daily living.   He  notes  that  his  wife  suffers  from
    dementia and is unable to look after him.  He then recommends  that  he
    lives with his children and close family members for  both  mental  and
    physical assistance.  An orthopaedic surgeon, Dr  Jawahar  S  Panjwani,
    made a similar recommendation in respect of the second appellant in his
    report dated 16 March 2013.

21.  So far as the first appellant is concerned there is  a  report  from  a
    clinical psychologist, Siddika Panjwani,  dated  16  March  2013  which
    notes  that  current  cognitive  testing  reveals   borderline   global
    cognitive functioning with difficulties in the areas  of  calculations,
    verbal fluency and language ability.  It noted that she would need help
    to perform her self-care effectively and also to do  household  chores.
    Her daughter reported that she was averse to the idea of having a full-
    time person to take care  of  her  and  hence  her  daughters  have  to
    regularly keep travelling from abroad to take care of her.

22.  Dr Vinay S Chauhan has also provided a report in respect of  the  first
    appellant.  He notes  that  she  is  emotionally,  psychologically  and
    physically dependent on her close relatives and family members to  look
    after her daily living.  She refused any  external  help  and  external
    assistance agitates and  confuses  her.   This  adversely  affects  her
    mental health and may worsen her  dementia.   He  recommends  that  she
    should be cared for and looked after by her family members and children
    with whom  she  is  most  comfortable.   Familiarity  with  people  and
    surroundings is extremely important to avoid  further  decline  of  her
    mental health.  Within the papers there is a  further  report  from  Dr
    Nitin  S  Gokhale  dated  24  March  2013  which  confirms  the   first
    appellant's ischemic heart disease.

23.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge also had sight of a report from  Dr  Amit
    Dias.  He is an epidemiologist and geriatrician and has an expertise in
    dementia care in India.  He has published a number  of  papers  on  the
    care of patients suffering  from  dementia.   He  had  not  met  either
    appellant personally but had had access to the medical reports  and  to
    the  reasons  for  the  respondent's   refusal   of   the   appellants'
    applications.

24.  Reviewing the medical opinions Dr Dias concluded that  both  appellants
    were currently unable to do a number of  household  tasks  without  the
    help  of  carers  including  cooking,  washing  clothes,  shopping  for
    provisions  or  management  of  finances.   They   both   had   nursing
    requirements including the administration  of  regular  medication  and
    encouragement for them to do so,  monitoring  of  blood  sugar  levels,
    supervision with bathing and help with personal hygiene and  monitoring
    of urinary incontinence, specifically for the  first  appellant.   Both
    required medical input including regular reviews by a doctor  of  their
    medical conditions, in  particular  the  heart  disease,  diabetes  and
    dementia for the first appellant  and  diabetes,  pain  management  and
    dementia for the second appellant.

25.  He concluded that any caregiver for the appellants required to  have  a
    degree of special training.  He noted a number of therapies  which  may
    be of assistance.  He concluded that in his opinion family members were
    an integral part of the care for both appellants which they required on
    a daily basis.  The family members  needed  to  be  present  to  ensure
    better outcomes.  He noted that the documentation suggested that if the
    appellants' sponsor  is  a  nurse  with  experience  in  geriatric  and
    dementia care and their son-in-law is a general practitioner  he  would
    have thought it best for them to be looked after  for  their  long-term
    care by them.  That  would  be  the  best  outcome.   He  reviewed  the
    expectations of  future  long-term  care  needs.   He  then  asked  the
    question as to whether or not the level of  care  that  the  appellants
    require is available in India.  Under reference to  chapter  4  of  the
    Dementia India report he noted that the support services necessary  for
    the estimated 3,700,000 people with dementia in India are miniscule and
    grossly inadequate.  In 2010  there  were  around  ten  long-term  care
    facilities which provided care for people with dementia.   These  homes
    were spread across the country and language would be a barrier for this
    couple from Mumbai.  (The appellants are both native English speakers).
     He considered whether or not a nursing home could be  considered.   He
    concluded that there were insufficient  trained  nurses  available  and
    that there is often a big falloff in a person's health  when  they  are
    placed into a nursing home.  This would be a particular problem for the
    first-named appellant.

26.  Dr Dias notes that in  principle  dementia  care  in  India  is  almost
    entirely home-based.  Patients with  dementia  continue  to  live  with
    their families and their care is usually a joint effort  by  the  adult
    members of the family who stay in the same  household.   Dr  Dias  then
    went on to consider various options.   The  first  one  was  that  they
    continued to live on their own with the help  of  a  live-in  maid  and
    nurses now with the  supervision  of  medical  doctors  specialised  in
    geriatric care and dementia.  Having examined the option at some length
    he concluded:

         "The missing link is the presence of a  family  member.   A  family
         member who could be Mr  and  Mrs  D'Souza's  coordinator  of  these
         different threads of their care at home.  Without a  family  member
         being present this is impossible."

27.  He then considered the option of  the  appellants  being  placed  in  a
    nursing home.  He considered firstly that they  must  be  placed  in  a
    location together.  This could be a genuine  problem  as  many  nursing
    homes are unisex and will not accept couples or insist on nursing  them
    in separate rooms.  There are around six nursing homes in  the  country
    which could reach the standard of care required.  Four are  in  Kerala,
    one is in Karnataka and one is in Maharashtra.   Language  would  be  a
    particular difficulty especially for those in South India where English
    is the second or third language for many people.  All these  facilities
    have long waiting lists which can be measured in years.   He  concluded
    that nursing home facilities suitable for the  appellants  taking  into
    account their nursing care and medical care needs,  their  culture  and
    language are not available in Mumbai or India as a whole.

28.  Dr Dias also commented on the reasons for the respondent's  refusal  of
    entry clearance.  With regard to the number of nursing homes which  are
    said to be available he concluded that these  are  not  suitable  since
    they specifically refuse admission to people with dementia.

29.  The evidence from Dr Dias is generally backed up by  research  evidence
    conducted by the sponsor and his wife and detailed  in  a  letter  with
    appendix dated 1 April 2013.

30.  Mr Melvin relied on the Entry Clearance  Officer's  reasoned  decision.
    He was based in Mumbai and had local knowledge.   His  internet  search
    had shown that there were 200 care homes in Maharashtra and it was  not
    immediately apparent why these could not cater for the appellants.

31.  The appellants also had a claim under Article 8.  Mrs Rothwell took  us
    to the cases of MF (Article 8 - new  rules)  Nigeria  [2013]  EWCA  Civ
    1192, Gulshan [2013] UKUT 00640 (IAC), Nagre [2013]  EWHC  720  (Admin)
    and in particular to paragraph 26 and to MM (Lebanon) [2014]  EWCA  Civ
    985 and in particular paragraphs 132 and 135.  She submitted  that  the
    import of these decisions was that since  there  was  no  comprehensive
    code  which  purported  to  deal  with   those   in   the   appellants'
    circumstances that the Article 8 consideration should be at large.  She
    submitted that because of the medical evidence and the evidence of  the
    sponsors the family life went beyond the normal  emotional  ties  which
    would bind parents and adult children.   The  appellants  were  totally
    dependent on their daughters and on the sponsor in the United  Kingdom.
    The Razgar test applied.  To refuse entry would interfere  with  family
    life.  She submitted that it was not necessary to show  exceptionality.
    The sponsor was a nurse within the United Kingdom and she had  her  own
    part to play in her community in the UK (paragraphs 48 and  49  of  her
    statement).  Her husband had 15,000 patients in his practice.  He  paid
    his tax in the UK.  They and their children were British  citizens  and
    it was unreasonable for them to relocate to Mumbai  in  order  to  look
    after the sponsor's parents.  The appellants although  Indian  citizens
    had been many times to the United Kingdom and knew  the  country  well.
    The legitimate aim that could be prayed in  aid  of  not  allowing  the
    appeals could only be  that  of  immigration  control.   There  was  no
    economic impact.  The provision of care would be provided  for  by  the
    sponsor and her husband out of their resources.  She accepted that  the
    provisions of Section 117A and 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 would  apply.   She  submitted  that  they  both  spoke
    English and they would not be a burden on the taxpayer.  They  met  the
    public interest test.  There was a balancing  exercise.   There  was  a
    significant effect on the two children of the  sponsor  when  she  went
    away to look after her parents.  These were detailed at paragraph 38 of
    her statement.  In particular the younger  child  Alana  suffered  from
    separation anxiety.  Section 55 applied and should have regard for  the
    welfare of the children.

32.  Mr Melvin submitted that after the application of  the  new  Rules  the
    Tribunal was bound by Nagre.  He said that this was a complete code for
    criminal cases and in other cases encompassing discretion.   There  was
    therefore no need for  the  Razgar  test.   He  referred  to  Nagre  at
    paragraph 35 and to MM (Lebanon) at paragraph 135.  The comments in  MM
    (Lebanon) were an obiter comment and they did  not  outweigh  what  the
    Court of Appeal  had  said  in  other  matters.   We  should  disregard
    paragraph 135.

33.  If it was necessary to show  exceptionality  the  grant  of  indefinite
    leave would entitle ageing parents to access the NHS and to  have  free
    drugs.  There was therefore an economic impact on the  United  Kingdom.
    The new Act required the Tribunal to give great weight  to  the  public
    interest and this was not one which showed  a  great  public  interest.
    These were citizens of India who were cared for their sisters and  that
    could continue.  The decision of the ECO was proportionate and the case
    law and Section 55 did not apply on entry clearance.

Decision

34.  EC-DR.2.5 requires the appellants to show that even with the  practical
    and financial help of  the  sponsor  they  are  unable  to  obtain  the
    required level of care in the country where they are living because  it
    is not available and there  is  no  person  in  that  country  who  can
    reasonably provide it.  35.     From the medical reports cited above it
    is apparent that both appellants have complex medical conditions. These
    require a high level personal, nursing and medical care.  There  is  no
    doubt that specialist medical care is available for  both  of  them  in
    India; that is evidenced by the expertise of  these  doctors  who  have
    provided reports for the appellants.  The issue is  with  the  personal
    and nursing care.

35.  The Immigration Directorate Instructions guidance  on  the  application
    of the Rules for adult dependent relatives sets out  the  matters  that
    must be addressed  by  applicants  and  sponsors.  The  appellants  and
    sponsor meet the relationship requirements. Evidence has been provided,
    including  the  appropriate  undertaking  by  the  sponsor,  that   the
    appellants can be adequately maintained, accommodated and cared for  in
    the UK without recourse  to  public  funds.  The  appellants  meet  the
    suitability requirements. Paragraph 2.2.1 requires that as a result  of
    age,  illness  or  disability,  the  applicant  must  be  incapable  of
    performing everyday tasks for themselves  e.g.  washing,  dressing  and
    cooking. That condition is met.

36   Paragraph 2.2.2 of the guidance provides that the  ECO  establish  that
    the applicant has no access to  the  required  level  of  care  in  the
    country where they are living even with  the  practical  and  financial
    help of the sponsor in  the  UK.  While  there  are  nursing  homes  in
    Maharashtra the evidence is that  they  do  not  accept  patients  with
    dementia  and  they  would  probably  be  split  up.   That  would   be
    detrimental to their health.  There are only six care  homes  in  India
    specialising in the care of dementia patients.  Those in the  south  of
    the country would pose  language  difficulties  and  would  clearly  be
    inappropriate. In any event the long waiting list  for  such  homes  is
    measured in years. Given the appellants' ages and the present need  for
    personal and nursing care we accept that there are no suitable  nursing
    homes. We also accept, for the reasons given by Dr Dias, that it  would
    not be possible for the appellants to continue living on their own even
    with the assistance of maids and nursing staff, without the presence of
    a family member.

37.  Paragraph 2.2.3 requires the ECO to consider whether  there  is  anyone
    in the country where the applicant is living who can reasonably provide
    the required level of care.  The guidance gives the  example  of  close
    family members including a son or daughter who may provide that care or
    another person, such as a home help or a housekeeper, a nurse, carer or
    care or nursing home.  We accept  that  the  appellants  appear  to  be
    sufficiently well off that they could afford home help and even a level
    of nursing care at home. We have  given  careful  consideration  as  to
    whether or not the evidence before us satisfies  this  requirement.  On
    balance we have  come  to  the  view  that  there  is  nobody  who  can
    reasonably provide the  level  of  care  that  the  appellants  clearly
    require. The appellants' medical conditions are complex and a range  of
    care and assistance is  required.  Dr  Dias's  evidence  was  that  the
    missing link was a family member who could be the  coordinator  of  the
    various threads of care;  the  provision  of  care  at  home  would  be
    impossible without the presence of a family member. We note,  too,  the
    first appellant's resistance to assistance from anybody other than  her
    daughters. The daughters themselves have felt it necessary  to  provide
    care by returning to India on  rotation.  There  are  no  other  family
    members in India who could provide such care.  We  are  satisfied  that
    this provision is met.

38.  A number of example scenarios are given in the  guidance  at  paragraph
    2.2.5. None of these are directly in point but  the  example  given  at
    paragraph (g) appears to us to be not too  dissimilar  to  the  present
    situation. We were also shown a copy of a  letter  written  by  a  Home
    Office Minister, Lord Taylor of Holbeach to  Lord  Avebury  dated  24th
    July 2014. In the letter he answered a query from  Lord  Avebury  about
    the operation of Appendix FM. Lord Taylor  advised  Lord  Avebury  that
    based on the applications that had been received two further  scenarios
    had been identified. He sets these out in his  letter.  The  second  of
    those appears to us to be almost directly comparable to the appellants'
    circumstances.

39.  Accordingly we are satisfied  that  the  appellants  have  demonstrated
    that they are unable, even with the sponsor's financial  and  practical
    help, to obtain the required level of care in India.

40.  Given our decision under the Rules it is not necessary for us to  reach
    a view on the Article 8 claim.

41.  The appeals are allowed.




                                                      LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                                    Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
                                                      Date: 11 November 2014


