
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/08079/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated:     |
|on 6 December 2016                    |On 8 December 2016                   |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN &
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    [S K]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, Islamabad

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr J Bryce, Advocate, instructed by RH & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the FtT.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born on 2  February  2014  (not
    1914, as stated in the decision leading  to  these  proceedings).   She
    applied for entry clearance for family reunion in the UK.

 3. The sponsor is the appellant's father, a citizen of  Pakistan,  granted
    refugee status in August 2012.  The other members of the family are the
    sponsor's wife, who is the appellant's mother, and their  other  child,
    who have been  granted  entry  clearance  as  the  "pre-flight"  family
    members of the sponsor.  The appellant does not fit into that  category
    of the immigration rules.  It  has  not  been  disputed  that  she  was
    conceived while the sponsor and his wife were together  in  Afghanistan
    in May 2013.

 4. The ECO refused the application on 1 April  2015,  under  reference  to
    paragraph 325D(iv) of the rules, because the appellant was not part  of
    the family unit at the relevant time.  The grant of entry clearance  to
    her mother and sibling was held not to outweigh the  need  to  maintain
    immigration control, particularly as there was a route available within
    the rules for which a fee  would  be  chargeable  (unlike  the  refugee
    family reunion rule).

 5. FtT Judge Debra Clapham allowed the appeal by determination promulgated
    on  21  January  2016,  under  article  8  of  the  ECHR,  outwith  the
    immigration rules.

 6. The SSHD's grounds of appeal to the UT are along these lines.   It  was
    irrational to use age, or separation of family members, as  reasons  to
    look outside the rules, because  they  are  designed  to  resolve  such
    issues.  Potential separation of family members is not a good reason to
    allow in the whole family.  Assertions of  the  sponsor's  anxiety  and
    inability to work full time to meet the financial requirements  of  the
    rules were not corroborated or  based  on  medical  evidence,  so  such
    findings were not open to the judge.  Policy in favour of  admitting  a
    child conceived pre-flight, but not born until afterwards, and  so  not
    falling within the rules, did not benefit the appellant because she was
    conceived post-flight.  The judge failed to quantify and  take  account
    of the public interest.

 7. A rule 24 response for the  appellant  counters  thus.   There  was  no
    requirement for a medical report to  support  the  sponsor's  evidence.
    The existence of a post-flight child is exactly the sort of exceptional
    situation where flexibility is required, a principle recognised by  the
    respondent in relation to compliance of the rules with article 8.   The
    public interest was not spelt out but did not need to be.

 8. (The response deals also with further observations made  by  the  judge
    granting permission, but these points were not taken up  by  the  SSHD,
    and need not be resolved here.  Suffice it to say that we broadly agree
    with the refutation in the rule 24 response.)

 9. On 26 October 2016 the SSHD made an application to the UT  to  add  the
    following ground of appeal: In paragraph 35, the FtT  acknowledges  the
    ECO's position that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of
    the rules, and a fresh application should be made  under  the  relevant
    rule, 319R.  Making such an application would not be disproportionate.

10. The  application  is  part  of  a  written  submission.   The  argument
    developed is along these lines.  The application to  the  ECO  was  not
    made under  the  appropriate  rule,  a  matter  relevant  in  assessing
    proportionality.  The FtT does not  explain  why  it  said  there  were
    circumstances not catered for by the rules, or why the appellant should
    not be expected to apply again under the applicable rule.  If  the  FtT
    meant to say the rules provided no route, that was  wrong  -  there  is
    rule 319R.  If the FtT meant that rule 319R could not be met in respect
    of maintenance and accommodation, that was a different matter.  The FtT
    approach was muddled.  The stringent financial requirements of Appendix
    FM did not apply, but the FtT left out of  account  the  need  to  show
    adequate maintenance, a threshold in which there  was  a  clear  public
    interest, and which had been upheld a number of times in the Courts.

11. In our opinion, none of the grounds on  which  permission  was  granted
    discloses error of law.  Each was squarely answered by the arguments in
    the rule 24 response by Mr Bryce.

12.  The  additional  ground  and  argument  came  late  in  the  day  (the
    responsibility for that does not rest  with  Mr  Matthews  personally).
    This came to attention of Mr Bryce shortly before a hearing  fixed  for
    28 October 2016.  He did not oppose the amendment of  the  grounds  but
    reasonably sought and was granted time to respond.

13. In a further note and orally on 6 December Mr Bryce made the  following
    submissions.  Attention had not previously been  drawn  to  rule  319R.
    Another route of application was not taken as a way of avoiding a  fee.
    A fee waiver would probably have been granted.  The appellant  did  not
    qualify under rule 352D, being a post-  flight  child,  or  under  rule
    319R, due to financial requirements.   She  should  have  been  granted
    leave  to  enter  on  the  basis  of   exceptional   circumstances   or
    compassionate factors per the respondent's policy instruction,  "Family
    reunion for refugees and those  with  humanitarian  protection".    Her
    case was analogous to or stronger than  that  of  a  de  facto  adopted
    child, catered for in the  policy  instruction.   She  met  the  bullet
    points set out by way of example, except that she is not over 18.   Her
    case was a fortiori of such an instance.  It would be absurd to  extend
    reunion to a person aged 18 or over but not to an infant.  There  is  a
    public interest in migrants having means of subsistence  but  exclusion
    from public benefits would not necessarily be applied by an  ECO  in  a
    case like this, the impact on family finances would not be of  material
    weight even if she was excluded, and this was not an issue  capable  of
    outweighing the best interests of the child.  There had been errors  in
    the  FtT  but  there  was  no  need  to   set   aside   its   decision.
    Alternatively, the decision should be remade in the appellant's favour.

14. Mr Matthews submitted that the FtT made  such  clear  errors  that  its
    decision should not stand.   The  correct  rule  might  not  have  been
    pointed out by either party, but the statement in the decision that  at
    paragraph 36 that the circumstances were "simply not catered for in the
    rules" went far wrong.  The existence of a rule had to be reflected  in
    the proportionality assessment.  It was an equally plain error to  have
    no regard to section 117B(3) of the 2002 Act, the  public  interest  in
    the financial independence of migrants.  It  was  not  unreasonable  to
    expect the appellant through the sponsor to meet financial requirements
    which were not as stringent as those in appendix FM.   No  good  reason
    had been shown why the sponsor might not earn enough to meet the rules,
    and it was not disproportionate to expect that.   The  alternative,  or
    the situation pending  such  an  outcome,  was  that  the  child  would
    continue to live with her mother and sister.  It  had  not  been  shown
    that they were living in dire  circumstances.   The  guidance  was  for
    other situations, not for a post-flight child.  The  factors  mentioned
    might be relevant, but did not  point  to  a  straightforward  outcome.



15. We reserved our decision.

16. This is an unusual situation where a wife and young child  qualify  for
    entry to the UK under the family reunion provisions in the  rules,  but
    an even younger child, born after the sponsor's flight, does not.   The
    effect of the adverse decision is that the family remains split  unless
    and until the sponsor earns enough to meet financial expectations which
    do not apply in respect of the appellant's mother and sister.

17. The principle underlying the rules on refugee reunion is to reunite pre-
    flight  families.   Strict  financial  requirements,  and  even   broad
    accommodation and maintenance requirements, do not apply.  The rules do
    not cover children conceived prior to flight but born afterwards.   The
    respondent's policy (as acknowledged in her grounds) recognises that as
    a gap in the rules, and provides for the deficiency.

18. Further children conceived after refugee recognition  and  born  abroad
    are not covered either by the rule or by specific extension in  policy.
    There is a route under the rules, but subject to financial requirements
    which cannot presently be met.

19. The policy on which the appellant now relies is available to  her,  but
    we take the Presenting Officer's point that the bullet  points  in  the
    policy are not all necessarily met and  that  its  application  is  not
    automatic.   The  analogy  with  a  de  facto  adopted  child  is   not
    particularly close either, because that is framed for pre-flight family
    members.

20. There is clearly an underlying policy intention that members  added  to
    families after refugee recognition are not  entitled  to  entry  unless
    they meet the same financial considerations as general family migrants.
     This draws the humanitarian line in a rational place.

21.  We  have  looked  back  at  the  chronological  information.   Refugee
    recognition was granted to the sponsor on 20 August 2012.  He was  with
    his family in Afghanistan in May 2013.  We do not have the date of  the
    visa application by the appellant's  mother.   She  was  granted  entry
    clearance on 6 February 2014.   The  appellant's  sister,  born  on  18
    October 2009, was granted entry clearance only  on  13  December  2014.
    The appellant was born on  2  February  2014,  nine  months  after  her
    father's visit.  In her application, she is stated  to  be  two  months
    old.

22. We think that it could never have been sensibly expected that  the  two
    or three incoming members of the family might arrive separately,  given
    the ages of the children.  There was a period  when  mother  and  older
    daughter might have travelled together, but that was  only  during  the
    few weeks just before the appellant was born, while her mother  was  in
    an advanced stage of pregnancy.  That is well known to be a  time  when
    extensive travelling should generally be avoided.

23. We do not think the underlying rationale for the distinction  in  rules
    and  policy  between  pre-  and  post-flight   children   carries   any
    significant  force  in  this  situation.   We  find  that  there   were
    exceptional circumstances, or compassionate or compelling  factors,  in
    the language of the policy, such that it should have  been  applied  in
    her favour.

24. Put another way, we do not think it proportionate that the  appellant's
    mother and sister qualify without regard to any economic  requirements,
    but she, born so soon  afterwards,  does  not.   Separation  of  family
    members is inherent in many of the rules and does not usually  lead  to
    the rules being overridden by article  8,  but  the  present  situation
    leads to a distinction among family members which in  our  judgment  is
    not justified by the public interest.

25. Although we come in the end to the same conclusion as the FtT, that  is
    for rather different reasons.  We  think  the  errors  made  should  be
    expunged by setting aside and remaking the decision.

26. The making of the decision of the FtT involved the making of errors  on
    points of law, as identified above, and as conceded by  the  appellant.
    That decision is set aside.  We remake the  decision  by  allowing  the
    appeal, as originally brought to the FtT, under article 8 of the ECHR.

27. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            7 December 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




