
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/08762/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Columbus House, Newport   |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated      |
|On: 22 January 2018                  |On: 22 February 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                              ARMINA NIKOUBAKHT
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms S Alban, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Fowell in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a citizen  of
    Iran, against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance as the child of the Sponsor Cyrus Persia  who  holds  refugee
    status in the United Kingdom. The appeal before the First-tier Tribunal
    engaged both the Immigration Rules (paragraph 352D) and Article 8  ECHR
    grounds.

 2. The Appellant applied for entry clearance  on  24  February  2015.  Her
    application was refused by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  on  29  April
    2015. The Appellant exercised her right of appeal against the  decision
    and the appeal was heard before Judge Fowell on 21  February  2017  and
    dismissed by virtue of both the Immigration Rules and Article  8  ECHR.
    The Appellant applied for permission to appeal and her application  was
    refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis on 12 September 2017  but  on
    renewal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch
    on 23 October 2017 in the following terms

         "It is arguable that the Appellant did continue to enjoy  a  family
         life with her father and that this should have been  given  greater
         weight when considering the evidence of a family unit.

         It is also arguable that her best interests were not fully explored
         as a primary consideration.

         As a consequence, it is arguable  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Foxell's (sic) decision  contained  arguable  errors  of  law  and,
         therefore, it is appropriate to grant the Appellant  permission  to
         appeal."



Submissions

 3. At the hearing before me Ms Alban appeared on behalf of  the  Appellant
    and Mr Richards appeared for the Entry Clearance Officer. The Appellant
    filed an appeal bundle including a  skeleton  argument.  No  additional
    documents were filed by the Respondent.

 4. For the Appellant Ms Alban referred to the skeleton argument. The Judge
    failed to make a finding of fact as to the current  living  conditions.
    In paragraph 32 the Judge finds it in the Appellant's favour  that  her
    grandmother is no longer able to care for her, but this  does  not  sit
    well with paragraph 33 where  the  Judge  finds  that  the  absence  of
    medical evidence about the grandmother's condition gives  no  basis  to
    find in her favour. There is no  mention  of  the  statement  from  the
    Appellant's mother stating that the grandmother can no longer care  for
    her daughter. There is a factual error  in  paragraph  34  in  that  it
    implies that the Sponsor has  waited  8  years  before  sponsoring  his
    daughter's application. It was not posislbe  for  him  to  sponsor  her
    application before. The  Judge  has  failed  in  his  consideration  of
    Article  8  and  proportionality,  he  has  failed  to   consider   the
    Appellant's welfare, failed to consider that the Sponsor (as a refugee)
    cannot visit and failed to consider that the Appellant will not  get  a
    visa to visit the Sponsor. The Judge has looked at  other  factors  and
    not  at  the  strength  of  the  relationship.  He  has  erred  in  his
    consideration of section 55  in  paragraph  37  of  the  decision.  The
    starting point should have been that the Sponsor is the only person who
    can look  after  the  Appellant.  The  Judge  failed  to  consider  her
    emotional needs and stability and failed to give enough weight  to  the
    enjoyment of family life.  So far as paragraph 352D of the  Immigration
    Rules is  concerned  the  Judge  failed  to  give  due  wright  to  the
    continuing  relationship  of  the  Appellant  and   her   father   when
    considering whether she was part of the family unit when he left Iran.

 5. For the Respondent Mr Richards said there was nothing in the grounds to
    challenge the finding that the Appellant was not  part  of  the  family
    unit. The First-tier Tribunal made it clear that  there  was  a  family
    unit (paragraph 24) with the mother. In relation to Article 8 the  best
    interests of  the  child  are  dealt  with  adequately  by  the  Judge.
    Paragraph 32 is not a finding, it puts the  Appellant's  case  and  the
    second sentence has a significant "however". It is correct  that  there
    was no medical evidence as  to  the  grandmother's  condition.  A  best
    interests finding is made  at  paragraph  39.  The  Judge  was  clearly
    mindful  of  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  is  not  a  young  child.
    Proportionality is adequately reasoned. There is no arguable  error  of
    law.

 6. Ms Alban responded to say that the Judge has failed  to  consider  that
    the Appellant could be part of both her mother's  and  father's  family
    units. Although no medical evidence was produced the  Judge  failed  to
    consider the  evidence  from  the  Appellant's  mother  concerning  the
    grandmother's medical condition.

 7. I reserved my decision.



Decision

 8. At the time of her application the Appellant was  a  16-year-old  child
    living with her grandmother in  Iran.  Her  father,  the  Sponsor,  was
    divorced from her mother when the Appellant was  three  years  old  and
    after the divorce he was allowed, according  to  her  statement,  "very
    limited access". This situation pertained  for  the  next  seven  years
    until 2008 when the Sponsor left Iran and came to the  United  Kingdom.
    Sometime after the Sponsor came to the  United  Kingdom  the  Appellant
    left her mother's home and began living with her  maternal  grandmother
    and at the time of the application this  is  where  she  remained.  The
    Appellant last met the Sponsor in Turkey in about 2016. Full details of
    the contact between the Appellant and  the  Sponsor  are  contained  in
    their witness statements and in addition the Sponsor gave oral evidence
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. The statement of reasons shows that the Judge carefully considered  the
    evidence. In doing so it is clear that he considered the existence of a
    family unit and correctly self-directed to BM and AL (352D(iv); meaning
    of "family  unit"  Colombia  [2007]  UKAIT  00055.  He  considered  the
    possibility of the Appellant  being  part  of  both  her  mother's  and
    father's family unit and in doing so clearly  examined  the  facts  (at
    paragraph 24). Having done so the Judge reached the conclusion that the
    Appellant was part of her mother's family unit. It is a clear and well-
    reasoned conclusion and, in my judgment, reveals no error of law.  This
    conclusion meant that the Appellant did not meet  the  requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules. It is a conclusion that must  also  be  factored
    into the proportionality assessment under Article 8.

10. In dealing with Article 8 the Judge again  properly  self-directed.  At
    paragraph 32 he puts forward the Appellant's case,  he  does  not  make
    findings.  So,  contrary  to  Ms  Alban's  submission   there   is   no
    inconsistency between paragraphs 32 and 33 of the statement of reasons.
    The Judge finds that although  it  is  asserted  that  the  Appellant's
    grandmother is no longer able to look after her  there  is  no  medical
    evidence to support this assertion. The Judge,  again  contrary  to  Ms
    Alban's submission, does refer to the statement  from  the  Appellant's
    mother noting that  "there  is  little  evidence  beyond  (this)".  The
    conclusion that "in the absence of any such medical evidence  there  is
    really no basis on which to find in her favour"  is  reasoned  and  was
    manifestly open to the Judge to make.

11. The Judge goes on to consider section 55 and the best interests of  the
    child. Again, he properly self directs and, at paragraph 37, reaches  a
    clearly reasoned conclusion. He takes into account the Appellant's age,
    the long separation from her father and her current living  conditions.
    It cannot be said that this is anything other than a careful and  well-
    reasoned consideration. In my judgment there is no error of law.



Conclusion

12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not involve the making  of
    a material error of law.

13. The appeal is dismissed, and the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.






Signed:     Date: 16 February 2018

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
