
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08475/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Held at UT (IAC) Hearing in Glasgow             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 17th July 2013                               |On 2nd August 2013         |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A L McGEACHY
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                             MASTER JUNJIE CHEN
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Price, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant was born on 15th February 2002 and is a citizen of China.
     He sought entry clearance to join his parents in the  United  Kingdom.
    The application was refused by the Entry Clearance  Officer  (ECO)  and
    his  subsequent  appeal  to  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Balloch   was
    dismissed in a determination promulgated on 21st May 2013.   The  judge
    found that the Appellant did not  qualify  for  entry  clearance  under
    paragraph 297(i)(f) or paragraph 301(i)(c).  While there were competing
    factors in the Article 8 balancing exercise she did not find  that  any
    interference in the family or private life would be disproportionate.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged.  Although the judge had set out the
    correct standard of proof it was said that she  had  applied  a  higher
    test of proof in her consideration of the case.  Some of the Grounds of
    Appeal relate to the concept of sole responsibility which  we  need  to
    mention no further as Mr Price for the Appellant placed no reliance  on
    such grounds.  It was, however, said to be unclear  whether  the  judge
    had accepted the medical evidence and if so why  she  had  refused  the
    case under the paragraphs mentioned above.  In terms of Article  8  the
    judge had correctly identified that the  starting  point  was  that  it
    would be in the best interests of the Appellant to  live  with  and  be
    brought up by his parents but had failed to  give  proper  reasons  why
    this should not be the position in the Appellant's  case,  particularly
    given the evidence produced in respect  of  the  grandparents'  health.
    Before us Mr Price did not rely on Ground 6 in relation  to  Article  8
    ECHR where it was said that the Appellant's sister would have to revoke
    her citizenship if returned to China.  He did however rely on Ground  7
    namely that the judge had erred in law in her approach to the leave  to
    remain of the Appellant's  father  who  was  clearly  on  the  path  to
    indefinite leave to remain.  Finally it was said  that  the  very  fact
    that the Appellant made the application was sufficient to confirm  that
    the Appellant was wishing to come to the UK.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted and thus the matter came before us  on
    the above date.

 4. Mr Price indicated that there were  no  maintenance,  accommodation  or
    exclusion issues. Firstly, the judge should  have  concluded  that  the
    Appellant's father qualified under paragraph  301(i)(a).   This  stated
    that one parent was present and settled here and "the other  parent  is
    being or has been given limited leave to enter or remain in the  United
    Kingdom with a view to settlement".   That  was  the  position  of  the
    Appellant's  father  and  therefore  the  Appellant  came  within  that
    paragraph and the decision should therefore be set aside and the appeal
    allowed.

 5. Secondly, the Appellant  did  qualify  under  paragraph  297(i)(f)  and
    301(i)(c) in that there were "serious and compelling  family  or  other
    considerations which make exclusion of  the  child  undesirable".   The
    judge had recited the oral evidence given (see paragraphs  13  and  17)
    but had ignored that evidence when concluding in paragraph 30  that  on
    the basis of the documentary evidence it had not been demonstrated that
    the criteria of the Rules had been met.  The judge had said that it was
    "not evident" what had changed to make them unable to care anymore  for
    the Appellant.  That ignored the oral evidence given.  We were referred
    to paragraph 48 of  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole  responsibility")
    Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049  where  it  was  said  that  the  purpose  of
    paragraph 297 was designed to maintain or  effect  family  unity.   The
    judge had failed to take that into account.

 6. As set out in the grounds there was a breach of the Appellant's  rights
    under Article 8 ECHR.

 7. We were entitled to find an error in the decision, set  it  aside,  and
    allow the appeal under the sections of the Rules  mentioned  above  and
    Article 8 ECHR.

 8. For the Home Office Mr Matthews said that the  Appellant's  father  had
    been given discretionary leave for a period of five years -  given  the
    normal period was three years it was unclear and unknown why  a  longer
    period had been granted.  In  order  to  achieve  indefinite  leave  to
    remain a further application for discretionary leave would have  to  be
    made.  The outcome of that application would depend on  the  facts  and
    circumstances.  The judge had been correct to say (paragraph  33)  that
    it could only be speculative as to what might happen some years  hence.
    As at the time of the application the Appellant's father did only  have
    discretionary leave to remain.

 9. The judge had set out the correct burden and standard of proof and  all
    that she was  saying  was  that  the  burden  of  proof  had  not  been
    discharged.

10. In terms of the judge looking  only  at  the  documentary  evidence  in
    relation to the health of the grandparents it would  be  surprising  if
    the judge had forgotten about the oral  evidence  given  that  she  had
    recited what that oral evidence had been.

11. In terms of Article 8 the judge had set out the five stage test in R  v
    SSHD  ex  parte  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27,   had   applied   well-known
    jurisprudence and carried out a proper balancing exercise.  While there
    might be an error in the judge saying that there was a doubt about  the
    wish of the Appellant to come to the UK that was not a material matter.
     We were invited to hold that there was no error in law in the  judge's
    determination.

12. We reserved our decision.

Conclusions

13. Condensing the Grounds of Application there  are  three  limbs  to  the
    Appellant's case.  Firstly it is argued that the language of  paragraph
    301(i)(a) is that the Appellant's father does  have  limited  leave  to
    remain in the UK all with a view to settlement.  As noted by the  judge
    both parents have lived in the UK since  2006  and  2007  respectively.
    Both made claims for asylum which were refused.  The Appellant's father
    has limited leave to remain until March 2015 and they have  a  daughter
    born here on 17th November 2008 who has a British  passport.   Does  he
    then qualify as someone who has limited leave to remain "with a view to
    settlement"?  How far along that route does he have  to  be  before  he
    might qualify?  As Mr Matthews pointed out to us being settled  in  the
    United Kingdom means that someone is free from any restriction  on  the
    period for which he may remain (subject to exceptions).   While on  one
    view the Appellant's father  had  started  on  the  route  to  becoming
    settled in the United Kingdom he did have some distance to go  in  that
    he only had discretionary leave to remain  and  a  further  application
    would require to be made.  In those circumstances we do not  think  the
    judge can faulted for concluding that it would only be speculative what
    might happen some years ahead.  We do not think that such a  conclusion
    is unfair to the Appellant's father and as such there can be  no  error
    in law in the judge noting the position that at the  present  time  the
    father only had discretionary leave to remain which did not permit  the
    Appellant to qualify under the rules.

14. Secondly, it has to be said that the judge  appears  to  have  confined
    herself to looking at the documentary evidence presented  in  terms  of
    the health of the grandparents.  While she recited  the  oral  evidence
    given there is nothing in the reasoning contained at paragraphs  26  to
    30 to indicate that the judge took that evidence into  account.  Indeed
    the opposite is true as she writes that on the basis of the documentary
    evidence "alone" the Appellant does not satisfy the rules.   That  oral
    evidence was particularly important given that  Qiqingmei  Chen  stated
    (paragraph 13) that her parents' health was now poor and they  "cannot"
    look after her son anymore.  At paragraph 17 Bingyun Ni said  that  the
    Appellant "cannot" continue to live with his grandparents because  they
    could not even take care of themselves.

15. There is nothing to indicate that the judge assessed the importance  of
    this evidence and whether she accepted  or  rejected  it.   Rather  she
    concluded (paragraph 30) that it was not "evident  what  has  changed".
    Accordingly it seems to us that the judge did not  assess  the  medical
    condition of the  Appellant's  grandparents  on  the  totality  of  the
    evidence presented to her.  Not to do so was an error in law.  It might
    also be said that at page 339 and 341 of the bundle are  statements  of
    the grandparents who say in effect that they are no longer able to look
    after the Appellant.  There is nothing in the determination to say that
    the judge considered this evidence which does go in the clear direction
    that there was a change in the circumstances which required the judge's
    consideration. Not to consider this evidence was an error in law.

16. We therefore consider it necessary to set the decision aside and remake
    it. Neither party indicated to us that that there was a  need  to  hear
    further evidence and it was not suggested that we should not accept the
    evidence of the Appellant's   parents  as  being  anything  other  than
    honestly given.

17. The judge said in paragraph 30 in relation to the medical documentation
    "I do not find on the basis of this evidence alone  that  it  has  been
    demonstrated that the criteria  of  paragraph  297(i)(f)  or  paragraph
    301(i)(c) have been met".  As we have said it  appears  the  judge  did
    ignore material evidence in coming to  that  conclusion.   We  consider
    this error was compounded by the fact that as noted  in  TD  above  the
    purpose of paragraph 297  is  clear  namely  that  it  is  designed  to
    maintain or effect family unity.  The judge should have looked  at  the
    broad picture namely that the Appellant's sister is a  British  citizen
    and in the United Kingdom and his parents are in  the  United  Kingdom,
    one who has indefinite leave to remain and the other  who  was  granted
    discretionary leave to remain for a period of five years.  We can  take
    it from the lodgement of the application itself that the Appellant does
    desire to come to the United Kingdom.  It is clear from the  statements
    provided by the grandparents that they consider they are too  frail  to
    continue to look after the Appellant.  It is a truism that it is highly
    desirable that  families  live  together  hence  the  intention  behind
    paragraph 297 as expressed above.

18. Taking into  account  all  the  family  circumstances  surrounding  the
    Appellant and in particular the growing inability of  the  grandparents
    to look after the  Appellant  we  consider  that,  to  the  appropriate
    standard,  the  Appellant  has  shown  that  there  are  "serious   and
    compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion  of  the
    child undesirable" both in terms of paragraph 297(i)(f) and  301(i)(c).
    We would therefore allow the appeal on this basis.

19. For the same reason we would allow the appeal  under  Article  8  ECHR.
    The Appellant qualifies under the Immigration Rules.  In the  light  of
    those findings it would be disproportionate in terms of Article  8  for
    his application to be refused.

20. For these reasons this appeal must be allowed.

Decision

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

22. We set aside the decision.

23. We remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by  allowing  it  under  the
    Immigration rules and on human rights grounds.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


