
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08677/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke         |      Decisions and Reasons          |
|                                      |Promulgated                          |
|On 16 July 2015                       |      On 14 August 2015              |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GARRATT

                                   Between

                              Mr abdul ghafoor
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Khan, Solicitor of Khirri Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


Background

 1. On 11  June  2015  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Cruthers  gave
    permission to the appellant to appeal against the decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  Narayan  in  which  he  dismissed  the  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent taken on 8 July 2014  to  refuse
    entry clearance as a partner applying the provisions of Appendix FM  of
    the Immigration Rules.  Judge Cruthers granted permission on the  basis
    that it may have been the Judge erred in some of the  ways  alleged  in
    the grounds of application by, in particular, failing to  consider  the
    appellant's Article 8 rights even if the Judge had  concluded  that  he
    could follow the findings of an earlier Judge that there was  no  valid
    and subsisting marriage.

The application and submissions

 2. The grounds of application take issue with the  conclusion  that  there
    was no valid or subsisting marriage between the parties.  In particular
    it is submitted that the Judge placed too much weight on a typing error
    in a translated version of the parties' marriage  certificate.   It  is
    also argued that the Judge  did  not  properly  consider  "overwhelming
    evidence" used by the appellant to show that his  alleged  marriage  to
    Sanghra Sultana did not exist when  the  appellant  had  accepted  full
    responsibility for the earlier misrepresentation.  It was  also  argued
    that  the  Judge  had  placed  too  much  reliance  upon  the   earlier
    determination sent out on 30 June 2010 without considering the relevant
    evidence of the appellant and sponsor.

 3. At the hearing before me Mr Khan indicated that, although his firm  had
    been instructed to represent the appellant at the end of June 2015,  he
    had not seen the appellant's three bundles submitted for the First-tier
    hearing or the previous determination.  He had also sent a letter dated
    13 July 2015 to Field House requesting copies  of  the  respondent  and
    appellant  bundles  although  the  letter  contains   no   reason   for
    representatives not having those documents.   In  the  circumstances  I
    provided Mr Khan  copies  of  the  relevant  bundles  and  the  earlier
    determination. I then adjourned the hearing for half an hour  in  order
    for Mr Khan to give consideration to those documents.  On resuming  the
    hearing Mr Khan indicated that he was content to make submissions based
    upon the information he had read.

 4. Mr Khan thought that a distinction could be drawn between the  findings
    in the first decision and those of Judge Narayan.   In  particular  the
    first decision at paragraph 46 referred to the validity and genuineness
    of the appellant's marriage as  the  main  issues  whereas  the  latest
    decision made reference to the existence  of  the  marriage.   He  also
    thought the Judge had been wrong to rely upon  the  appellant's  "self-
    declaration" pointing to the appellant misleading the Tribunal when his
    affidavit of 10th March 2015 acknowledged the misrepresentations  made.
    The Judge should have taken  that  into  consideration.   He  suggested
    that, in any event, any earlier marriage by  the  appellant  would  not
    have invalidated the marriage to the sponsor as a  polygamous  marriage
    could take place in Pakistan.  He conceded that the points he made were
    not incorporated into the original grounds of application.

 5. Mr McVeety objected to any amendment to  the  grounds.   He  emphasised
    that the 2010 decision had not been appealed.  Further, the sponsor was
    a British national so any polygamous marriage by  the  appellant  could
    not be valid.  In any event, as the appellant claimed that he  had  not
    been previous married, the issue was not relevant.  He thought that the
    conclusions reached by the Judge about the credibility of the appellant
    supported by the evidence were not limited to the mis-spelling  in  the
    certified copy of the birth certificate but included  proper  reference
    to the earlier misrepresentation.  It was not, therefore, relevant  for
    the Judge to reach any conclusion on Article 8 issues  because  he  was
    entitled to find that the marriage was neither valid nor subsisting.

 6. In  conclusion,  Mr  Khan  conceded  that  the  Judge  had  taken  into
    consideration  the  appellant's  affidavit  in  paragraph  36  of   the
    decision.

Conclusions

 7. After considering the matter for a few moments I announced that  I  had
    concluded that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show  a
    material error on a point of law and shall stand.  My reasons for  that
    conclusion follow.

 8. It is clear that the Judge  was  entitled  to  rely  upon  the  earlier
    decision of the Tribunal sent out on 30 June 2010 and to reach  similar
    conclusions on the same essential issues put before him.  These  issues
    included evidence that the appellant had made reference to another wife
    in an earlier application to visit the  United  Kingdom  and  thus  the
    validity and subsistence of the appellant's  claimed  marriage  to  the
    present sponsor was in issue.  The first Judge made the proper finding,
    open to him, that the appellant had not shown that his marriage to  the
    sponsor was valid and subsisting.  That decision was not  appealed  and
    Judge Narayan was entitled to make the decision a  start  point  before
    reaching his own conclusions on the same and similar issues.

 9. Judge Narayan was careful to point out (paragraph 30) that he  had  not
    only taken into consideration the findings of the  previous  Judge  but
    considered all the evidence put before him which, the  decision  shows,
    was carefully examined and cogent reasons given for the conclusion that
    the appellant was not a witness of truth in relation to either any past
    marriage or his present marriage.  In reaching  these  conclusions  the
    Judge was entitled to taken into consideration the inconsistency in the
    translated copy marriage certificate although  it  is  clear  that  the
    inconsistency was only one  reason  for  the  Judge  reaching  negative
    conclusions.   The  Judge  was  entitled  to  reject  the   appellant's
    assertion that his first marriage had never taken  place  when  earlier
    assertions suggested that it had.  The  Judge  was  therefore  able  to
    conclude, in line with the earlier decision, that the appellant had not
    shown his marriage to the sponsor was genuine and valid.

10. Bearing in mind the finding that the marriage was not  genuine  it  was
    not incumbent upon the Judge to consider Article 8 issues based upon  a
    spousal relationship which had been found not to exist.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not show a material error on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Anonymity was not requested  nor  do  I  consider  it  appropriate  in  this
appeal.

Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Garratt
