
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08071/2015
                                                               OA/08073/2015
                                                               OA/08074/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 9th January 2017                       |On 25th January 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON

                                   Between

                      kousar mubashar (first appellant)
                      farrukh ahmad (second appellant)
                      imama mubashar (third appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONs not made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - islamabad
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms Ali of Morden Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1.  The  Appellants  are  a  family  of  Pakistani  citizens.   The  first
    Appellant, born on 21st November 1972, is the mother of the second  and
    third Appellants who were born respectively on 15th June 1996 and  30th
    November 2000.  They all applied for entry clearance to the UK  as  the
    dependent spouse and children of the Sponsor, Mubashar  Mumtaz.   Those
    applications were refused for the reasons given in Notices of  Decision
    dated 10th April 2015.  The Appellants appealed, and their appeals were
    heard by Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Stoke-on-Trent on 20th May 2016.  He decided to dismiss  the
    appeals for the reasons given in his Decision dated 6th June 2016.  The
    Appellants sought leave to appeal that decision, and  on  17th  October
    2016 such permission was granted.

 2. There was a fourth Appellant, another child of the first Appellant  and
    the Sponsor named Muqarab Ahmad Bilal.  However his appeal was  allowed
    by the Judge on human rights grounds and therefore he is not a party to
    this appeal.

Error of Law

 3. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 4. The appeals of all the Appellants were dismissed under  the  provisions
    of paragraph 320(7B) of HC 395 in that deception had been  used  in  an
    earlier application for entry clearance.  The Judge also dismissed  the
    appeals on Article 8 ECHR grounds on  the  basis  that  there  were  no
    compelling circumstances allowing him to consider the Appellants' human
    rights outside the Immigration Rules.

 5. At the hearing, Mr Mills addressed me first and helpfully conceded that
    there was a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  Judge  in
    respect of the second and third Appellants.  That error  was  that  the
    Judge had not taken into account the fact that under paragraph  320(7B)
    children cannot suffer the consequences of an earlier act of  deception
    by an adult, in this case their  mother.   He  invited  me  to  find  a
    material error of law in respect of the second and third Appellants and
    to set aside the Judge's decision relating to  them.   Indeed,  as  the
    paragraph 320(7B) issue had been the only reason why  the  applications
    for entry clearance made  by  the  second  and  third  Appellants  were
    refused, and subsequently their appeals dismissed, I should  go  on  to
    remake their appeals by allowing them.

 6. Mr Mills went on to further  concede  that  in  considering  the  first
    Appellant's Article 8 ECHR rights, the Judge had erred in  law  by  not
    considering the situation, which should have been the  case,  that  the
    first Appellant would be the only member of this family not to  achieve
    entry clearance under the Immigration Rules.  That was a material error
    of law and the decision of the Judge in respect of the first  Appellant
    should therefore also be set aside.

 7. Ms Ali confirmed that she agreed  with  what  Mr  Mills  had  said.   I
    therefore find a material error of law in the decisions  of  the  Judge
    relating to all three Appellants and I set aside  those  decisions.   I
    need not give detailed reasons for my decision in accordance  with  the
    provisions of Rule 40(3)(a) of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.



Remade Decisions

 8. I proceeded to remake  the  decisions  in  the  appeals  of  all  three
    Appellants.   Following  the  invitation  of  Mr  Mills  and  with  the
    agreement of Ms Ali, I allowed the appeals  of  the  second  and  third
    Appellants for the reasons explained to me by Mr Mills.

 9. As  regards  the  first  Appellant,  I  heard  submissions.   Mr  Mills
    addressed me first.  He accepted that there was family life between the
    Sponsor and all three Appellants which would be interfered with by  the
    decision of the Respondent to such a degree of  gravity  as  to  engage
    their Article 8 rights.  He also acknowledged that now it was the  case
    that the first Appellant's three children would be able to  join  their
    father in the UK to the exclusion of the first Appellant, there  was  a
    compelling circumstance whereby the Appellant's Article 8 rights should
    be considered outside the Immigration Rules.  The issue  therefore  was
    whether the decision of the  Respondent  was  proportionate.   In  that
    respect, Mr Mills argued that the decision  was  not  disproportionate.
    The deception previously referred to had occurred in an application for
    entry clearance made in June 2007.  Under paragraph 320(7B) of HC  395,
    the first Appellant was therefore excluded from seeking entry clearance
    for a period of ten years.  She could therefore apply again  for  entry
    clearance in June 2017.  Following the decision in Mumu (paragraph 320;
    Article 8; scope)  [2012]  UKUT  00143  (IAC),  each  case  had  to  be
    considered on its own facts.  In  Mr  Mills'  submission,  it  was  not
    disproportionate to expect the first Appellant and her  three  children
    to wait in Pakistan for approximately six months in order to seek entry
    clearance again, which application would inevitably be successful.  The
    Sponsor had now achieved refugee status in the UK as  an  Ahmadi.   The
    first Appellant and her children were also Ahmadis, but it would not be
    disproportionate to  expect  them  to  wait  in  Pakistan  because  the
    objective  evidence  was  that  not  all  Ahmadis  were  persecuted  in
    Pakistan, and that had been the finding of a Country Guidance decision.
     The first Appellant and her children did not come within  any  of  the
    categories of risk as Ahmadis identified in that case, and there was no
    evidence that they themselves had ever been persecuted  as  Ahmadis  in
    Pakistan.

10. In response, Ms  Ali  argued  that  it  would  be  disproportionate  to
    separate the first Appellant from her children and  their  father  even
    for a short period of time.  The best interests of those  children  had
    to be taken into account as  a  primary  consideration,  and  as  their
    father had been persecuted as an Ahmadi, there was an element  of  risk
    in them remaining in Pakistan.

11. I find that the decision of the Respondent is not  disproportionate  in
    respect of the first Appellant.  I accept that that  decision  will  in
    one way or another involve the separation of this family, but  only  in
    the short term.  They had been separated since the Sponsor came to  the
    UK in December 2011, but that separation will inevitably come to an end
    later this year.  The first Appellant and her children are Ahmadis, but
    notwithstanding the experiences of the Sponsor, there is no reason  for
    me to believe that they will be at risk of persecution whilst remaining
    in Pakistan for this short period.  The objective evidence is that  not
    all Ahmadis are persecuted in Pakistan, and  there  is  no  information
    before me that the first Appellant and her  children  have  experienced
    persecution as Ahmadis in Pakistan.  I must consider the best interests
    of the children as a primary issue, but there is no evidence before  me
    that they  will  suffer  any  greater  adverse  consequences  by  their
    separation from their father continuing for a further short period.

12. For these reasons I find the decision of the Respondent in  respect  of
    the first Appellant proportionate and I dismiss her appeal.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law in respect of all Appellants.

I set aside that decision.

I remake the decision in the appeal by dismissing the appeal  of  the  first
Appellant, but by allowing the appeals of the second and  third  Appellants.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make orders for anonymity.  I was not  asked
to do so, and indeed I find no reason to do so.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

In the light of my  decision  to  remake  the  decision  in  the  appeal  by
allowing the appeals of the second and third Appellants, I  have  considered
whether to make a fee award.  I have had regard to  the  Joint  Presidential
Guidance Note: Fee Awards.

I make  a  whole  fee  award  in  respect  of  both  the  second  and  third
Appellants.   This  is  because  their  original  applications   for   entry
clearance were refused in error.

As I have dismissed the appeal of the first Appellant I cannot  make  a  fee
award in her favour.


Signed                              Date 25/01/2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
