
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: oa/08514/2014
     oa/09061/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |               Decision & Reasons     |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 17th November 2015                 |               On 12th January 2016   |
|                                      |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                MR THULANI DIGNITY MAPHOSA (FIRST APPELLANT)
              MR Effort Ndabezinhle Maphosa (second appellant)
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No attendance
For the Respondent:    Miss C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are citizens of Zimbabwe they were born respectively  on
    8th July 2000 and 13th April 1996.  They originally applied  for  entry
    clearance as the dependent children of  their  Sponsor  Mr  D  Maphosa.
    Those applications were refused by the Secretary of State on 12th  June
    2014 and the decisions were upheld by  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's
    review on 10th November 2014.

 2. The  Appellant's  appealed  and  the  appeals  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ennals sitting at Manchester on 10th April 2015.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 13th April 2015 the  Appellants'  appeals  were
    allowed under the Immigration Rules.  On 17th April 2015 the  Secretary
    of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds
    contended that it was arguable  firstly  that  the  judge  should  have
    treated the previous determination in respect of the Appellants as  the
    starting point and secondly that the judge failed to adequately resolve
    the points made in the Notice of Refusal.  On 8th June 2015  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grimmett granted permission to appeal.   Judge  Grimmett
    noted that the original decision of the Secretary of  State  to  refuse
    the Appellant's leave to enter as the children of the  Sponsor  on  the
    grounds of sole responsibility and that the grounds asserted  that  the
    judge had failed to apply the principles  of  Devaseelan  [2002]  UKIAT
    00702 in the decision.   Judge  Grimmett  in  granting  permission  was
    satisfied that it was arguable that  there  was  no  reference  to  the
    various credibility issues raised when the  Appellants  had  previously
    sought leave to enter.

 3. It is on that basis the appeal comes before me to determine whether  or
    not there is a material error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision.  For the purpose of continuity throughout the appeal  process
    the Secretary of State is referred to herein as the Respondent  and  Mr
    Thulani Maphosa and Mr Effort Maphosa as the Appellants.  The Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Miss  Johnstone.
    It is relevant to note that the Appellants  are  represented  by  their
    Sponsor, and father Mr D Maphosa, and that he appeared before the First-
    tier Tribunal.  However he does not appear before me on this appeal and
    I am advised by the administration that he has telephoned the  Tribunal
    to indicate that it is not his intention to attend the appeal.  In such
    circumstances the appeal proceeds in the absence of  representation  by
    the Appellant's Sponsor albeit that I have given due  consideration  to
    the evidence that was considered by the First-tier Tribunal.

Submissions

 4. Miss Johnstone points out  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  make  any
    reference to the credibility  findings  made  by  Judge  White  in  his
    determination which  dates  back  to  October  2010  where  a  previous
    application was considered.  In particular she contends the  judge  has
    failed  to  consider  Judge  White's  conclusion  that  the   Sponsor's
    testimony was unreliable.  The judge  made  a  number  of  findings  on
    credibility and Judge Ennals in his recent determination has failed  to
    have any regard to those findings.  She  notes  that  at  paragraph  15
    there is reference by Judge Ennals to Judge  White's  determination  in
    particular with regard to the fact that Judge White had commented  that
    an application would be more appropriate  under  paragraph  297  rather
    than one that came before him for family reunion but she  submits  that
    the judge has failed to refer to any of  the  findings  made  by  Judge
    White.

 5. As far as the second ground is concerned Miss Johnstone points out that
    the refusal notice in respect of Thulani mentions  that  the  Appellant
    claimed to have been abandoned by his mother "early last year" and that
    he had lost contact with his mother but no more  details  on  this  had
    been made but it was  noted  that  Thulani  appeared  to  have  secured
    affidavits some two years earlier from his mother before she  allegedly
    abandoned him.  Miss Johnstone points out that a similar point is  made
    in respect of Effort in the refusal notice namely that  his  stepmother
    abandoned him "early last year" yet submitted an affidavit of 2012 that
    would  appear  to  predate  this  abandonment.   Whilst  she  notes  at
    paragraph 17 Judge Ennals acknowledged those affidavits in the  absence
    of any reasoning the Respondent was unable to understand why the  judge
    did not treat the points raised as of importance.   She  contends  that
    for all of the above reasons there are material errors of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal and that it is unsafe and she asked
    me to set it aside and to remit the matter to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing.

The Law

 6.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 7. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is brief in the  extreme.
    That of course in itself  does  not  mean  that  the  decision  is  not
    satisfactory but it is clear that there has been a previous application
    made albeit for family reunion other than  pursuant  to  paragraph  297
    made in 2010 and that within that determination the Immigration  Judge,
    has  made  findings  on  the  Sponsor's  credibility   and   that   the
    determination made negative credibility  findings  in  respect  of  and
    rejected some of, the documents relied upon.  This application involved
    the same Appellants and Sponsor and I accept the  submission  that  the
    judge fell into error in failing to treat the previous determination as
    the starting point in the assessment of credibility or  by  failing  to
    take it into account in any respect in the assessment of credibility.

 9. Further whilst the judge acknowledges that affidavits were filed by the
    Appellants' mother/stepmother (I acknowledge that  the  two  Appellants
    have different biological mothers) the judge at  paragraph  17  of  his
    determination simply acknowledges the affidavit and fails to address in
    any manner any reasoning or to explain why these documents  are  or  of
    not of any importance.

10. The reasons given by the judge in this matter are brief in the extreme.
     He has failed to address the principles of Devaseelan and the  various
    credibility issues raised when the Appellants had previously sought  to
    enter as well as to give due or proper consideration to documents filed
    within these proceedings.  In such circumstances the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal discloses material errors of law and is unsafe  and
    I set aside the decision and give directions  herein  in  the  decision
    paragraph remitting the matter back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing.

Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and is set aside.

 2) The following directions are given.

      a) None of the findings of fact are to stand.

      b) The matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at
         Manchester to be heard on the first available date  28  days  hence
         before any First-tier  Immigration  Judge  other  than  Immigration
         Judge Ennals with an estimated length of hearing of two hours.

      c) There be leave to either party to  serve  and  file  an  up-to-date
         bundle of documents  upon  which  they  intend  to  rely  at  least
         fourteen days prior to the rehearing of the appeal.

      d) In the event that the  Sponsor  requires  an  interpreter  he  must
         notify the Tribunal at least fourteen days prehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                              Date 7th January 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

