
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/08408/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 15 September 2016                 |on 16 September 2016                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                               O D T SCARLETT
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     no representative; sponsor present
For the Respondent:    Mr A Mullen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a determination  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge  Shanahan,  dismissing  his  appeal  against  refusal  of   entry
    clearance as a child seeking to join his mother.

 2. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

 3. The grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT  are  that  there  may  have  been
    inadvertent procedural unfairness, amounting constructively to error of
    law.  Documents submitted on behalf of the appellant to the FtT had not
    been linked to or had gone missing from the file and  were  not  before
    the judge when reaching his decision.

 4. Mr Mullen advised me that the respondent accepts that there has been  a
    constructive error of law - not through any fault of the appellant, the
    respondent, or the judge, but through a simple administrative mishap.

 5. That concession was fairly and correctly made.

 6. The sponsor is the appellant's mother, Angela Nugent.   She  said  that
    new representatives are to be instructed on behalf of the appellant.  I
    told her that should be undertaken  urgently,  without  waiting  to  be
    notified of the next hearing date.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  its
    findings are to stand. The nature of  the  case  is  such  that  it  is
    appropriate in terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of  the  2007  Act  and  of
    Practice Statement 7.2 to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal for
    an entirely fresh hearing.

 8. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Shanahan.

 9. The appellant is to file with the FtT and copy to  the  respondent  not
    less than 14 days prior to  the  next  hearing  in  the  FtT  a  single
    inventory containing all documents on which he is to rely, presented in
    clear order, indexed and paginated.




           [pic]


            15 September 2016
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman






