
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                 Appeal
Number:     OA/08768/2013
                                                               OA/08769/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                  |Determination Promulgated |
|On: 24th July 2014                     |On: 13th October 2014     |
|                                       |                          |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer, Beijing
                                  Appellant
                                     and

                              Master Zhijie Lin
                               Miss Zhimin Lin
                          (no anonymity order made)

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Hashmi, Counsel instructed by Anglo Chinese Law
                    Firm Ltd

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

The Respondents are both minors who are nationals of China. On the 19th
May 2014 the First-tier Tribunal (Judge MA Khan) allowed their  appeals
against the Entry Clearance Officer's decision to refuse to grant  them
entry clearance as the children of persons present and settled  in  the
United Kingdom.

The applications were made on the 30th January 2013  when  Ms  Lin  had
just turned 17 and Master Lin was 14.   Mr  Bramble  agreed  that  this
matter must be decided on the basis that Ms Lin was a minor at the date
of application, albeit that she has now  turned  18.  The  applications
were for the children to come to the UK to live with  their  mother,  a
British national, and their father,  who  has  discretionary  leave  to
remain.

The applications were refused on the 7th March 2013 with  reference  to
paragraph 297 of the Rules, the provision relating to a  child  seeking
leave to settle in the UK with a parent who is settled  here.  The  ECO
did not accept that the sponsors were in fact the biological parents of
the applicants; that matter has now been resolved by the production  of
DNA evidence. The refusal notice further made  reference  to  paragraph
297(i) of the Rules. That sub-section contains six  alternative  routes
(a)-(f) by which a child can assert that the rule applies:

         297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite
         leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent, parents
         or a relative present and settled or being admitted for settlement
         in the United Kingdom are that he:

         (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent,
         parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:

         (a) both parents are present and settled in the United Kingdom; or?

         (b) both parents are being admitted on the same occasion for
         settlement; or

         (c) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and the
         other is being admitted on the same occasion for settlement; or

         (d) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
         being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and the other
         parent is dead; or

         (e) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
         being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has had sole
         responsibility for the child's upbringing; or

         (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in the United
         Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and
         there are serious and compelling family or other considerations
         which make exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable
         arrangements have been made for the child's care;

None of these provisions applied to the applicants in  this  case.  The
children were not seeking to join one  parent  the  UK  nor  was  their
father  dead.  Nor  could  their  mother  claim  to   have   had   sole
responsibility.  They were seeking to join both parents who continue to
have parental responsibility over them. Those provisions  in  297  that
envisage the child's parents being in a subsisting relationship only do
so in the context of one parent being outside the UK and seeking  entry
for the purpose of settlement. Oddly, there is  no  provision  for  the
scenario presented in this case, where both parents are already in  the
UK but only one has settled status.

It was that apparent lacuna in the Rules that  greatly  troubled  Judge
Khan when the matter came before him in the First-tier Tribunal. He was
satisfied that all of the other requirements of paragraph 297 were  met
(indeed these were never put in issue) and  allowed  the  appeal  under
paragraph 297 of the Rules on the basis that the Appellants met  either
sub-paragraph (i)(a) - both parents settled in the UK,  or  (c)  -  one
parent here and the other being admitted for settlement:

         "I find that it is a mere technicality that the father has  limited
         leave, for all  intents  and  purposes  he  has  been  granted  his
         discretionary leave under Article 8 of the  ECHR  with  a  view  to
         settlement as a spouse"

He went on refer to the  provision  in  Appendix  FM  relating  to  the
admission of children to join a parent who has limited leave to  remain
in the UK. Since the ECO had "not raised the financial circumstances in
this  matter"  he  proceeded  on  the  assumption  that  the  financial
circumstances are met and allowed the  appeal  under  this  alternative
head.


Error of Law

The ECO now submits that there was no basis in  law  for  allowing  the
appeal outright with reference to paragraph 297.  I  would  agree.  The
situation of the Respondents' parents does not  fit  into  any  of  the
alternative scenarios clearly set out at sub-paragraph (i)(a)-(f).   It
cannot be said, as a matter of law, that their father is settled in the
UK  since  he  only  has  discretionary  leave.  Paragraph  6  of   the
Immigration Rules defines "settled" as meaning:

         a) is free from any restriction on the period for which he may
         remain save that a person entitled to an exemption under Section 8
         of the Immigration Act 1971 (otherwise than as a member of the home
         forces) is not to be regarded as settled in the United Kingdom
         except in so far as Section 8(5A) so provides; and

         (b) is either:

         (i)  ordinarily resident in the United Kingdom without having
         entered or remained in breach of the immigration laws; or

         (ii)  despite having entered or remained in breach of the
         immigration laws, has subsequently entered lawfully or has been
         granted leave to remain and is ordinarily resident.

Nor can it be said, as a matter of fact,  that he  is  "being  admitted
for settlement" on the same occasion as his children. That  is  because
he is  already  here  and  there  is  no  guarantee  that  a  grant  of
discretionary leave will automatically  lead  to  settlement  (although
Judge Khan is quite correct to suppose that in this case that is likely
to be the eventual  outcome).   The  appeal  could  not  therefore,  be
allowed with reference to paragraph 297.

Judge Khan goes on to allow the appeal with reference to E-ECC  1.6  of
Appendix FM. This relates to  applications  for  entry  clearance  from
children seeking to join one parent in the  UK  who  has  only  limited
leave to remain. This does not  contain  such  a  restrictive  list  as
paragraph 297(i):


         E-ECC.1.6. One of the applicant's parents must be in the UK with
         limited leave to enter or remain, or be applying, or have applied,
         for entry clearance, as a partner or a parent under this Appendix
         (referred to in this section as the "applicant's parent"), and

         (a) the applicant's parent's partner under Appendix FM is also a
         parent of the applicant; or

         (b) the applicant's parent has had and continues to have sole
         responsibility for the child's upbringing; or

         (c) there are serious and compelling family or other considerations
         which make exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable
         arrangements have been made for the child's care.

On the face of it the children could gain entry to the  UK  under  this
provision. Whilst the ECO does not contest that this paragraph might be
applicable to the Respondents it is submitted that as this  was  not  a
matter that had been entertained by the original decision-maker it  was
not for the Judge to simply allow the appeal outright. That was because
no analysis had been made of the documentary evidence  supplied  as  to
finances.   I find that the Respondent is right. An acceptance that the
sponsors could "adequately" maintain their children is not the same  as
a finding that they met the financial requirements under  Appendix  FM.
Had the Tribunal file contained all of the relevant evidence  it  could
have been open to Judge Khan, or indeed me, to conduct  that  analysis.
Unfortunately much of the original material supplied in support of  the
applications was not available; because maintenance was  not  in  issue
under paragraph 281 neither the Respondents nor the ECO had included it
in their bundles.

The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. There was no
basis in law for allowing it under 297. Whilst the decision of the  ECO
was flawed for failure to consider paragraph E-ECC - and indeed Article
8 - the Tribunal did not have sufficient evidence before it to allow it
outright under this paragraph of the Rules.   I set the decision  aside
and re-make it by allowing the appeals as "not in accordance  with  the
law".

I add this.  It is extremely  unfortunate  that  in  a  case  involving
children being separated from  their  parents  the  ECO  has  issued  a
decision that has manifestly failed to consider alternative  provisions
under which entry could be granted.   Consideration was  not  given  to
Appendix FM, nor to Article 8. For that reason the decision was not  in
accordance with the law  and  the  appeal  is  allowed.  When  the  ECO
reconsiders this matter he will no doubt wish to have regard to:

 a) The considerable delay  that  has  been  caused  thus  far,  always
    regrettable but particularly so in the case of children;


 b) The fact  that  the  applications  would  have  been  allowed  with
    reference to paragraph 297 but for the lacuna in 297(i) which would
    appear to have absolutely no basis in logic  or  policy.  It  would
    seem that these applicants have been disadvantaged by the fact that
    their father  is  alive  and  well  and  their  parents  are  still
    together;

 c) Exercising his discretion to request further evidence  if  for  any
    reason it is found that the evidence thus far  submitted  is  found
    deficient with reference to Appendix FM-SE etc.

It would be my strong recommendation that entry clearance is granted to
the Respondents, but it is a matter for the ECO.


Decisions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains error of laws  and  it
is set aside.

I remake the decision by allowing the appeals  as  "not  in  accordance
with the law".

I make no direction as to anonymity.




                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                              24th July 2014
