
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08328/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6th September 2017                 |On 5th October 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Mrs Nazia
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Error of Law hearing - Mr S Whitwell, Home Office
Presenting Officer
                           Resumed hearing - Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home
Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr S Khan, instructed by Aston Bond Law Firm


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of Law

 2. At the hearing on 9th August 2017 I set aside the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge D A Pears promulgated on 23rd November  2016.  This
    was because, in determining the appeal, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    relied upon two unreported cases. However as accepted by  Mr  Khan,  no
    application had been made  to  admit  these  decisions  under  Practice
    Direction 11 in relation to citation of unreported determinations which
    requires  that  an  unreported  determination  may  not  be  cited   in
    proceedings before the Tribunal unless it relates to the Appellant or a
    member of his family or the Tribunal  gives  permission  in  accordance
    with the guidance in paragraphs 11.2 to 11.6 of the Practice Direction.
     Such permission had not been sought or obtained. In the absence of the
    grant of permission in relation to those decisions it is clear that the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge made an error of law such that  the  decision
    had to be set aside.

Remaking the decision

 3. The resumed hearing took place on 6th September 2017.   In  advance  of
    that hearing the Appellant's representatives submitted  an  application
    under  paragraph  11  of  the  Practice  Direction  to  rely  upon  the
    unreported cases  of  ECO  (Islamabad)  v  Rashid  Mahmood  (Appeal  No
    OA/00985/2013) and Mary Ann Pinder v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
    Department (Appeal No IA/13236/2013).  At  the  hearing  before  me  Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe objected to the submission of these two cases  on  the
    basis that the legislative provisions on which they are founded  differ
    from those under consideration in this case.  However I considered that
    the Appellant had shown that the Tribunal could be materially  assisted
    by the citation of these determinations which appeared to relate to the
    same or similar provisions in relation to the ability of  an  Appellant
    to rely upon an English  language  certificate  approved  by  the  Home
    Office.  In these circumstances I granted the application to rely  upon
    the two unreported cases.

 4. The background to this appeal is not in dispute.  The Appellant applied
    for entry clearance as the spouse of a British citizen.   She  obtained
    certificates issued by Educational Testing Service (ETS) TOEIC  on  2nd
    January 2014 in relation to English speaking and writing tests  and  on
    3rd January 2014 in relation to listening and reading  tests.   On  5th
    February 2015 the Appellant applied for entry clearance as the  partner
    of a British citizen. Her application was refused on 29th April 2015 on
    the basis that she could not meet the English language  requirement  in
    paragraph E-ECP4.1 of Appendix FM of  the  Immigration  Rules  because,
    although ETS was licensed to provide the test at the time the Appellant
    sat it, ETS was no longer an approved test provider  by  the  time  she
    submitted her application as it had been removed from the register on 1
    July 2014.

 5. Paragraph E-ECP4.1 of Appendix FM provides as follows;





      "English language requirement



      E-ECP.4.1. The applicant must provide specified evidence that they-
      (a) are a national of a majority English speaking country  listed  in
      paragraph GEN.1.6.;
      (b) have passed an English language test in speaking and listening at
      a minimum of level A1 of the Common European Framework  of  Reference
      for Languages with a provider approved by the Secretary of State;
      (c) have an academic qualification which is either  a  Bachelor's  or
      Master's degree or PhD awarded by an educational establishment in the
      UK; or, if awarded by an educational establishment outside the UK, is
      deemed by UK NARIC to meet or exceed the  recognised  standard  of  a
      Bachelor's or Master's degree or PhD in the  UK,  and  UK  NARIC  has
      confirmed that the degree was taught  or  researched  in  English  to
      level A1 of the Common European Framework of Reference for  Languages
      or above; or
      (d) are exempt from the English language requirement under  paragraph
      E-ECP.4.2."

 6. ETS was removed as an approved test provider by HC 198  by  way  of  an
    amendment to Appendix O  which  sets  out  a  table  of  approved  test
    providers. Paragraph 1 of HC 198 provides:

         "1. In Appendix O, in the table, delete the row containing  "TOEIC"
         and the row containing "TOEFL iBT Test"."

 7. The Implementation section of the Statement of Changes  in  Immigration
    Rules states:

         "The changes set out in paragraph 1 of this statement, which remove
         Educational Testing Service (ETS) as  an  approved  test  provider,
         take effect on 1 July 2014."

 8. The key provisions are contained at page 2 of  HC  198  which  provides
    transitional provisions as follows;


         "However -


         (a) Appendix O as it applied on 30 June 2014 will apply to a person
             who makes an application for entry clearance before 1  October
             2014 where:
             i. the relevant Confirmation of  Acceptance  for  Studies  has
                  been assigned by a sponsor which is a UK  Recognised  Body
                  within the meaning of the Immigration Rules or a  body  in
                  receipt  of  public  funding   as   a   higher   education
                  institution  from  the  Department  for   Employment   and
                  Learning in Northern Ireland, the Higher Education Funding
                  Council for England, the Higher Education Funding  Council
                  for Wales, or the Scottish Funding Council; and
             ii. the course is:
                  aa. a pre-sessional course as defined in note (ii) to  the
                      table in paragraph 245ZW(b) of the Immigration  Rules
                      and lasts no longer  than  three  months;  or  ab.  a
                      foundation degree as defined in paragraph  6  of  the
                      Immigration Rules; or ac. a foundation course awarded
                      at a minimum of  level  3  on  the  revised  National
                      Qualifications Framework, or awarded  on  a  directly
                      equivalent basis in the devolved administrations.


         (b) other than in a case falling  within  (a),  Appendix  O  as  it
             applied on 30 June 2014 will apply to a person  who  makes  an
             application for entry clearance to enter the UK before 22 July
             2014; and


         (c) Appendix O as it applied on 30 June 2014 will apply to a person
             who makes an application for leave to remain in the UK  before
             1 July 2014."

 9. The decision in ECO (Islamabad) v Rashid  Mahmood,  relied  on  by  the
    Appellant, made a finding based on the interpretation of paragraph  281
    of the Immigration Rules which were applicable at that time.  Paragraph
    281 required an applicant to produce an original English language  test
    certificate from a test provider approved by the  Secretary  of  State.
    The Appellant in that case produced a certificate  from  EDEXCEL  which
    was approved at the date on which the Appellant sat the  test  but,  by
    the time the Appellant made his application for  entry  clearance,  the
    body was no longer approved.  In  his  decision  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Clive Lane found that it did not make logical  sense  that  an  English
    language certificate would be rendered invalid retrospectively when the
    provider ceased to appear on the list of approved test  providers.   He
    concluded;

         "Such an argument would indicate that, during periods when the test
         provider appeared on the Secretary of State's list, the Appellant's
         certificate was valid but that, at any time when the  provider  did
         not appear on the list, it became invalid.  It would also mean that
         a valid certificate would be  rendered  useless  if,  for  whatever
         reason, the approved provider subsequently ceased trading."

10. He found that the fact that the provider was approved the Secretary  of
    State on the date that the test was  passed  showed  that  the  quality
    standard which the provision existed to meet had been met and that  "It
    makes no sense that a valid certificate  might  drift  in  and  out  of
    validity  depending  on  the  vagaries  of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    registration system". Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lane  concluded  that  the
    Appellant met the requirements  of  paragraph  281.   In  the  case  of
    Pinder, although not required to determine the  matter,  the  President
    made an obiter comment that he would have been  minded  to  follow  the
    decision in Mahmood.

11. I accept Mr Khan's submission that the provisions of paragraph 281  and
    Appendix FM are virtually identical.  I  accept  that  the  Appellant's
    English language certificates were valid for  two  years  and  that  it
    would appear that the Appellant could meet the requirement of  Appendix
    FM by showing that she has passed an English language test.

12. However Ms Willocks-Briscoe  relied  on  the  wording  of  HC  198,  in
    particular the transitional provisions at paragraph (b) which  provides
    that the version of Appendix O as it applied on 30th  June  2014  would
    apply to anyone making an application for entry clearance or  leave  to
    enter the UK before 22nd July 2014.

13. Therefore the Appellant in this case had a transitional period in which
    she could have made an application for entry clearance relying  on  her
    ETS certificate.  However the Appellant did not  make  the  application
    for over a year after she sat  the  test.   There  is  nothing  in  the
    decision in  Mahmood  to  suggest  that  there  were  any  transitional
    provisions applicable  to  the  removal  of  the  test  provider  which
    provided the certificate relied on by the Appellant in that  case.   In
    that case the Appellant  was  told  after  the  application  for  entry
    clearance  that  the  cancellation   of   the   tester's   status   had
    retrospective effect on certificates obtained when the provider was  on
    the register.  The decision in Mahmood goes to the need  for  certainty
    for applicants in submitting English language certificates valid at the
    time they were obtained.

14. However the situation for the Appellant in Mahmood  is  different  from
    that of the Appellant  in  the  instant  appeal.  The  purpose  of  the
    Immigration Rules is to provide clear guidance to  an  Appellant.   The
    information about the changes and the transitional provisions  were  in
    the public domain. By the time she made the application  the  Appellant
    had gone significantly beyond the transitional period. By that time she
    could and should have known that the certificate upon which she  relied
    was no longer recognised by the Secretary of State.

15. Mr Khan submitted that the HC 198 does not specifically expressly state
    that all previous tests have been invalidated.  However in my  view  it
    does not need to.  HC 198 is sufficiently clear to let applicants  know
    that their certificates would only  be  recognised  during  the  period
    covered by the transitional provisions.

16. I accept that the effect  of  HC  198  is  that  the  English  language
    certificate submitted by the Appellant did not meet the requirements of
    E-ECP4.1 of Appendix FM at the date of her application.

17. In these circumstances the Appellant has not demonstrated that she  can
    meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 4th October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 4th October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
