
IAC-AH-KEW-V2
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08749/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th December 2014                         |On 16th January 2015          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                      MRS ZAHRAA SAMI DAKHIL AL-HASAWI
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Gibson-Lee, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Shilliday, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Iraq  born  on  14th  May  1985.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance as a partner under Appendix FM of
    the Immigration Rules.   Her  application  was  refused  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer on 26th February 2013 on the basis that the Appellant
    had not provided satisfactory evidence  that  her  Sponsor's  financial
    circumstances were as  she  claimed  and  that  she  had  not  provided
    satisfactory evidence  that  her  Sponsor's  income  met  the  required
    amount.  Therefore the application  was  refused  under  paragraph  EC-
    P.1.1(d) of Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Wellesley-Cole sitting at Taylor House on 2nd July  2014.
    In a determination promulgated on 15th July 2014 the Appellant's appeal
    was allowed.

 3. On 23rd July 2014 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds  of  Appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds contended that the judge  had  erred
    in law by allowing the appeal outright and that it was  submitted  that
    the  correct  approach  was  that  where  the  issue  turned   on   the
    misapplication or failure to apply a policy rather than a provision  of
    the Rules the correct approach was to find the decision to  be  not  in
    accordance with the law and  to  remit  the  application  back  to  the
    Respondent.  Further, or in the alternative, it was contended that  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge had  at  paragraph  9  of  her  determination
    applied the incorrect relevant date.  It was contended that in Appendix
    FM applications the relevant date is the date of application and not as
    applied by the learned judge the date of decision and consequently  any
    findings made on the income requirement  are  vitiated  by  a  material
    misdirection in law as to the applicable relevant date.

 4. On 4th August 2014 Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  McClure
    refused permission to appeal.  The Grounds of Appeal  were  resubmitted
    and on 30th October 2014 Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede granted permission
    to appeal.  Judge Kebede considered that there was  arguable  merit  in
    the grounds that the judge had erred by allowing  the  appeal  outright
    and that it was also arguable, given  the  indication  from  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager at paragraph  3  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager's
    review that the tax documents were subsequently produced that the judge
    had erred in  her  consideration  of  the  available  evidence  at  the
    relevant time.

 5. On 27th November 2014 the Appellant's  instructed  solicitors  filed  a
    Rule 24 response to the Entry Clearance Officer's  Grounds  of  Appeal.
    It is against that background  that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  This is an  appeal  by  the
    Secretary  of  State.   For  the  purpose  of   continuity   throughout
    proceedings Mrs Al-Hasawi is referred to herein as  the  Appellant  and
    the Secretary of State as the Respondent.  The Appellant appears by her
    instructed Counsel Mr Gibson-Lee.  The Secretary of  State  appears  by
    her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Shilliday.

Submissions

 6. Mr Shilliday  albeit  acting  for  the  Secretary  of  State  indicates
    agreement with much that is written within  the  Rule  24  response  by
    Counsel instructed on behalf of the Appellant.  The specific reason for
    refusal by the Entry Clearance Officer was that  the  Sponsor  had  not
    provided sufficient evidence for the purposes of Appendix FM-SE of  the
    Rules to demonstrate his self-employed earnings as a cab driver between
    the commencement of his self-employment in March 2012 and the  date  of
    application.   His  employed  earnings  at  Tesco  were  accepted.   Mr
    Shilliday submits that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred  in  law
    in allowing the appeal outright and that  the  correct  approach  would
    have been to have found the decision to be not in accordance  with  the
    law on the basis that the policy had not been taken into  consideration
    thus effectively remitting the matter to the Entry  Clearance  Officer.
    He  seeks  to  rely  on  the  authorities  of  UKUS  (Discretion:  When
    Reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC) and Sultana and Others [2014]  UKUT
    00540 (IAC).  He submits that Sultana builds on the  decision  in  UKUS
    and that the matter should be sent back to the  executive  to  consider
    and to make a decision within its policy guidance.

 7. Mr Gibson-Lee submits  that  when  looking  at  the  amount  of  income
    required to meet the relevant Rule there is guidance that says cash  in
    hand can be taken into account  providing  the  correct  tax  is  paid.
    However he submitted it is not a question of exercising discretion  but
    that the Secretary of State has  actually  failed  to  follow  its  own
    guidance and that the maladministration by the Secretary  of  State  is
    due to the failure of the Entry Clearance Officer/Manager  to  consider
    the relevant policy not an issue of delay.  He submits  that  IDIs  are
    not Rules and the effect is that in fact  there  has  been  a  complete
    disregard of the Rules and policy by the Secretary of State and that on
    that basis the Tribunal has jurisdiction  to  deal  with  it  and  that
    providing I found that the Entry  Clearance  Officer  and  Manager  had
    their policy guidance and instructions in mind when  dealing  with  the
    application they have exercised their  discretion  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge was entitled to substitute  her  own  findings  on  that
    exercise of discretion and therefore there is no material error of  law
    disclosed.  He asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

The Relevant Authorities

10. I have given due consideration to the relevant authorities to  which  I
    am referred.

    UKUS (Discretion: When Reviewable) [2012] UKUT 00307 (IAC)


         "1.   If a decision maker in the purported exercise of a discretion
             vested in him noted his function and what was required  to  be
             done when fulfilling it and then proceeded to reach a decision
             on that basis, the decision is a lawful one and  the  Tribunal
             cannot intervene in the absence of a statutory power to decide
             that the discretion should  have  been  exercised  differently
             (see s 86(3)(b) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
             2002).


         2.   Where the decision maker has failed to exercise  a  discretion
             vested in  him,  the  Tribunal's  jurisdiction  on  appeal  is
             limited to a decision that the failure  renders  the  decision
             'not in accordance with the law'  (s  86(3)(a)).  Because  the
             discretion is vested in the Executive, the appropriate  course
             will be for the Tribunal to  require  the  decision  maker  to
             complete his  task  by  reaching  a  lawful  decision  on  the
             outstanding application, along the lines set  out  in  SSHD  v
             Abdi [1996] Imm AR 148. In such a case, it makes no difference
             whether there is such a statutory power  as  is  mentioned  in
             paragraph 1 above.


         3.   If the decision maker has lawfully  exercised  his  discretion
             and the Tribunal has such a statutory power, the Tribunal must
             either (i)  uphold  the  decision  maker's  decision  (if  the
             Tribunal is unpersuaded that the decision  maker's  discretion
             should have been  exercised  differently);  or  (ii)  reach  a
             different decision in the exercise of its own discretion."

11. The issues were  considered  further  in  Sultana  and  Others  (Rules:
    Waiver/Further Enquiries; Discretion) [2014] UKUT  00540  (IAC).   That
    decision is authority for


         "(1)   Paragraph [D] of Appendix FM-SE is an  example,  within  the
             context of the requirement to supply  specified  evidence,  of
             the increasing influence of discretionary powers of waiver and
             further enquiry in the Immigration Rules.


         (2)     Where applicants wish to  invoke  any  discretion  of  this
             kind, they should do so when making the relevant  application,
             highlighting the specific provision of the Rules  invoked  and
             the  grounds  upon  which  the  exercise  of   discretion   is
             requested.


         (3)      Where any request of this kind  is  made  and  refused,  a
             brief explanation should be provided by the decision maker.


         (4)       A refusal to exercise a discretionary power as  described
             in (1)  above  may  render  an  immigration  decision  not  in
             accordance  with  the  law,  under  section  84(1)(e)  of  the
             Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

         (5)     Powers of waiver are  dispensing  provisions,  designed  to
             ensure that applications suffering from certain minor  defects
             or omissions can be readily remedied."

Findings

12. The fact that there has been an error in law in the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge is conceded.  What is not conceded is that that error of  law  is
    material.  If I find that the Upper Tribunal did not have their  policy
    guidance and instruction in mind when dealing with the application then
    it follows that they have not exercised their discretion and, as  such,
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge must be set aside and re-
    made to the extent that the Entry Clearance Officer decision is not  in
    accordance with the law.  The effect therefore would be  to  remit  the
    appeal for reconsideration.  The argument that is put to me  forcefully
    by the Appellant's legal representatives is that whilst on the face  of
    it there is a technical error of law that error is immaterial  in  that
    the Sponsor had  adequate  maintenance  for  the  relevant  period  and
    provided that he had sufficient documents to demonstrate  that  he  had
    (which they contend that he did)  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  was
    entitled to reach the decision that she did.

13. Mr Gibson-Lee has quite openly invited me to find that there  has  been
    maladministration on behalf of the Secretary of State.  I do  not  find
    that that is the case.  An Entry Clearance Officer or Manager does  not
    look at the appeal until it  is  listed.   He  merely  deals  with  the
    application that is before him.  I would agree with the contentions put
    to me by Mr Shilliday that  the  Secretary  of  State  cannot  be  held
    accountable for the way in which the appeal is listed by the First-tier
    Tribunal.  IDIs in common with comparable instruments of the  Secretary
    of  State's  guidance  or  policy  are  subservient   in   nature   and
    notwithstanding  their  legal  status  can  nonetheless  feature  in  a
    Tribunal's review of whether a decision was in accordance with the law.
     However in this instance I am satisfied that the policy  guidance  and
    instructions were not being considered by the Entry  Clearance  Officer
    or the Entry Clearance Manager when they dealt  with  the  application.
    It thus follows particularly when applying  the  authorities  mentioned
    herein that not only is there an error of law but that it  is  material
    and that it was wrong of the First-tier Tribunal to  allow  the  appeal
    outright.  As is put to me by both advocates if I make such  a  finding
    the correct approach is to set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and remit the matter to the Secretary of State.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge to allow the  appeal  outright
is wrong in law and I find a material error of  law  in  the  determination.
The decision is remade to the extent the Entry Clearance Officer's  decision
is not in accordance with the law and is  remitted  to  him.   Direction  is
given to the Entry Clearance Officer when reconsidering this matter to  have
proper regard to the relevant requirements of Annex FM as  at  the  date  of
the original decision.

No anonymity direction is made.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  Rule  13  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)
Rules 2014.  No application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Signed        Date 15th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed        Date 15th January 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

