
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08795/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 10th September 2014                          |On 8th October 2014        |
|                                                |                           |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                             mrs Nooria Hameedi
                          (no anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Z Jaffergi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born  on  1st  January  1946.
    The Appellant  applied  for  entry  clearance  as  an  adult  dependent
    relative under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.   The  Appellant's
    application was refused by the Entry Clearance  Officer  on  8th  March
    2014.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal O R Williams  on  21st  February  at  Manchester.   In  a
    determination promulgated on 11th March 2014 the appeal was  dismissed
    both under the Immigration Rules and on human rights grounds.

 3. On 9th April 2014 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    On 12th May 2014 First-tier Tribunal Judge Astle granted permission to
    appeal.  Judge Astle noted that the grounds asserted  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge had erred in assuming that the Respondent dismissed
    the application under both E-ECDR.2.4 and 2.5 in  the  absence  of  the
    second page of the refusal.  The grounds  claim  that  the  judge  gave
    unnecessary weight to trivial and irrelevant issues at the  expense  of
    cogent ones and that the determination did not reflect what  transpired
    at the hearing.  Further it was argued that the judge did  not  provide
    adequate reasons for a number of findings and  that  the  determination
    lacked clarity and an incorrect standard of  proof  was  applied.   The
    grounds contended that the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
    security situation.

 4. Judge Astle considered that it was arguable that the judge had erred in
    finding that a page of the decision was missing and that the Respondent
    also refused the application under E-ECDR.2.5.  He noted that there was
    no indication in the copy decision  provided  that  there  was  such  a
    missing page.

 5. On 10th June 2014 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response contends that  the  Grounds
    of Appeal have no merit and seek nothing further than disagreement with
    the cogent findings of the judge.  They state that the judge considered
    all the evidence that was available to him and  came  to  a  conclusion
    open to him based on that evidence, the Rules and relevant case law  on
    the balance of probability and that the determination does not disclose
    any error.  At paragraph 6(b) the Rule 24 reply states that it is clear
    that the basis for  the  conclusion  by  the  judge  is  based  on  the
    Appellant's Grounds of Appeal which dealt with both  2.4  and  2.5  and
    that this was confirmed by the Home Office Presenting Officer.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Jaffergi.  The Secretary of State appears by her Home Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submissions/Discussions

 7. Mr Jaffergi submits that the primary Grounds of Appeal  relate  to  the
    refusal under E-ECDR.2.5 to be found at paragraph  20  and  21  of  the
    determination and as to the finding at paragraph 6 with regard  to  the
    purported second page of the refusal letter.  He acknowledges that  the
    original copy has come from the Respondent's bundle  but  submits  that
    there was nothing to suggest that any part of the  refusal  letter  was
    missing.

 8. Mr Harrison takes me to the Notice of Refusal  and  confirms  that  the
    appeal was refused under E-ECDR.2.4 and whilst acknowledging that there
    is at the end of that sentence an or points out that there  is  nothing
    seemingly missing from the Notice of Refusal and suggests that that  is
    a typographical error.  In any event he points out that the refusal  is
    under 2.4 and that the Grounds of Appeal raise 2.5.  He further  points
    out that the Home Office did give  due  consideration  to  2.5  at  the
    hearing and that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  mentioned  it  in  his
    determination.  If there is an error so far as a reference to a missing
    page is concerned, Mr Harrison suggests that it is immaterial,  but  in
    any event the judge has made it clear at paragraph 6 in his final three
    lines therein and that in any event it makes no difference  if  2.5  is
    imported as the Judge has at paragraph 13 onwards of his  determination
    dealt with the appeal under 2.4.

 9. Mr Jaffergi acknowledges  that  the  manner  in  which  the  judge  has
    addressed the issue does not render  the  decision  flawed  because  he
    accepts that the judge has addressed E-ECDR.2.4, but submits the  judge
    would have been entitled to consider 2.5 if the  judge  had  considered
    that an issue arose and that this is not what  has  happened  here  and
    that he has not given the Appellant an opportunity to address  it.   He
    submits that this is relevant so far as it goes to  the  attitude  that
    the judge has taken towards the appeal.

10. Mr Jaffergi goes on to suggest that the judge  has  applied  the  wrong
    test under 2.4 and that the requirement is  that  the  Appellant  needs
    long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks but that paragraph 13
    of the determination sets out that the test is that  the  Appellant  is
    unable to perform everyday  tasks  and  he  submits  that  there  is  a
    difference between these sentences and  that  it  infects  the  overall
    assessment.  He submits that the judge is equating ability  to  survive
    with not requiring long-term care and has therefore failed to carry out
    a proper assessment under Article 8.

11. Mr Jaffergi acknowledges that the judge has  been  satisfied  with  the
    evidence and that the question is  whether  or  not  the  circumstances
    amount to what the Rules require but submits that the judge has  failed
    to take into account  the  mental  health  of  the  Appellant  and  her
    depression and loneliness since her husband has died.  He submits  that
    I should find a material error of law and set aside  the  decision  and
    submits that the judge did not appreciate the case that was  being  put
    to him and did not give due and proper consideration to the Appellant's
    mental health.  He does not consider this is  a  case  that  should  be
    remitted for rehearing but that it should just be remade  allowing  the
    appeal.

12. So far as Article 8 is concerned he submits that this  is  inadequately
    dealt with in the findings at paragraph  31,  that  there  are  serious
    issues to be balanced outside the Rules and that there is  therefore  a
    material error of law.

13. Mr Harrison starts by relying on the Rule  24  response,  pointing  out
    that the determination makes an  assumption  that  there  is  something
    missing from the decision letter.  If there is, then  he  submits  that
    that is immaterial but his  main  stance  is  that  there  is  actually
    nothing missing.  He  points  out  that  the  determination  gives  due
    consideration to E-ECDR.2.4 and gives  five  or  six  reasons  for  his
    conclusions at paragraphs 14 to 19 of his  determination.   He  submits
    that he has addressed the Appellant's mental health at paragraph 18 and
    that the arguments of the Appellant's legal representatives  amount  to
    no more than mere disagreement.

14. Mr Harrison submits that Judge Williams has given due consideration  as
    to whether the Appellant is in need  of  assistance  and  has  set  out
    detailed factors at paragraph 15 of his determination  regarding  this,
    based on the  Sponsor's  description  and  the  judge  has  come  to  a
    conclusion, which he was entitled to, that the Appellant was capable of
    looking after herself.  He asked me to consider the wording of 2.4  and
    the requirement for long-term personal care and that this was not found
    by the Entry Clearance Officer and this factor was not  found  to  have
    been made out by the judge.  He submits that the decision was  open  to
    the judge on the evidence that was before him and that he was  entitled
    to draw the conclusions that the Appellant could look after herself  as
    set out at paragraph 13.

15. So far as Article 8  is  concerned  Mr  Harrison  submits  it  is  only
    necessary for the judge to go on to consider if  there  are  compelling
    circumstances outside the Rules and  that  the  judge  carried  out  an
    Article 8 assessment and made  findings  that  are  open  to  him.   He
    contends that there is no material error of law and asks me  to  uphold
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

16. Mr  Jaffergi  in  response  accepts  that  if  read  in  isolation  the
    determination makes sense but that on the actual  evidence  before  the
    judge he contends that Judge  Williams  has  not  considered  the  case
    properly and that it  is  appropriate  to  read  paragraph  13  of  the
    determination  alongside  paragraph  3  of  the   Appellant's   witness
    statement.  He submits that the Appellant's depression (to use his  own
    words) "pushes her over the edge."  He submits that the state  of  mind
    of the Appellant is such that she is not  eating  properly  and  taking
    care of herself and therefore that she can meet the  Immigration  Rules
    and if she cannot he submits that there are compelling circumstances to
    allow the appeal outside the Rules.   He  asks  me  to  set  aside  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and to  remake  the  decision
    allowing the appeal.

The Law

17.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account   immaterial   consideration,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

18. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

The Immigration Rules

            19. E-ECDR.2.4  The applicant or, if  the  applicant  and  their
                partner are  the  Sponsor's  parents  or  grandparents,  the
                applicant's partner, must as a result  of  age,  illness  or
                disability  require  long-term  personal  care  to   perform
                everyday tasks.

    E-ECDR.2.5    The applicant or, if the applicant and their partner  are
                the  Sponsor's  parents  or  grandparents,  the  applicant's
                partner  must  be  unable,  even  with  the  practical   and
                financial help of the Sponsor, to obtain the required  level
                of care in the country where they are living, because

                (a)    it is not available and there is no  person  in  that
                    country who can reasonably provide it; or

                (b)    it is not affordable.

Findings

20. It is contended in the Grounds  of  Appeal  that  the  judge  erred  in
    assuming that the Respondent dismissed the application  under  both  E-
    ECDR.2.4 and 2.5 in the absence of the second page of the refusal.  The
    judge has done a thorough  job.   He  has  looked  at  both  paragraphs
    particularly bearing in mind that the Home Office Presenting Officer at
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing indicated he relied  on  both  grounds.
    It is accepted that the word or to be found at the  end  of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's reasons for refusal cannot be right.  Either  there
    should be more inserted or it should not  be  there  at  all.   However
    there is nothing to suggest that there should be an additional page and
    whilst the First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the second page of  the
    refusal letter was missing, it is my view that in fact it was not.   In
    any event I agree with the contention made by Mr  Harrison  if  2.5  is
    imported, because the judge has very thoroughly  addressed  the  issues
    under 2.4.  I agree with that and indeed even Mr Jaffergi agrees in his
    submissions that it would not render the decision to be flawed.   I  am
    consequently satisfied that the argument therefore  with  regard  to  a
    purported missing page does not add anything to  the  Appellant's  case
    and that there is no material error  of  law  on  that  point  for  the
    reasons given.

21. The issue thereafter moves on  to  an  argument  when  considering  the
    Appellant's appeal under  E-ECDR.2.4  of  Appendix  FM  the  judge  has
    applied the wrong test.  That is not the case.  The judge  has  carried
    out a very detailed and thorough analysis under 2.4 which are  set  out
    at paragraphs 14 to 19 of the determination.  The judge has  given  due
    and proper consideration to the Appellant's mental health, noting  that
    the Appellant has been able to attend Kabul Medical University, consult
    with a psychiatrist  and  that  the  Appellant  has  not  received  any
    medication for some three years which the judge was perfectly  entitled
    to conclude undermined the claimed  chronicity  of  her  symptoms.   In
    addition the Appellant has in the alternative gone on to consider  2.5.
    The findings of the judge reflect that he has correctly considered  the
    law.  Mr Jaffergi is wrong in his assertion that the judge  has  failed
    to give due and proper consideration to the Appellant's  mental  health
    and he has applied the correct test.  The judge was  entitled  to  make
    the findings that he did at paragraph 13 and there is no material error
    of law in the decision under the Immigration Rules.

22. Finally it is necessary to address the issue under Article  8.   It  is
    wrong to try and suggest, as is put to me, that all that  is  addressed
    is at paragraph 31 of the  determination.   The  judge  has  looked  at
    Article 8 in considerable detail under paragraphs 22 to 31.  The law is
    now to be found so far as claim for Article 8 outside  the  Immigration
    Rules is concerned in Gulshan and  decisions  that  postdate  it.   The
    Tribunal in Gulshan made clear and has repeated subsequently in Shahzad
    (Article 8: legitimate aim) [2014] UKUT 00085 (IAC) at paragraph (31):

         "Where an  area  of  the  rules  does  not  have  such  an  express
         mechanism, the approach in R (Nagre) v Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department [2013] EWHC 720 (Admin) ([29]-[31]  in  particular)
         and Gulshan (Article 8 - new Rules - correct approach) [2013]  UKUT
         640 (IAC) should be followed: i.e. after applying the  requirements
         of the rules, only if  there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside them is it necessary for Article 8
         purposes  to  go  on  to  consider  whether  there  are  compelling
         circumstances not sufficiently recognised under them."

23. The Court of Appeal in MM (Lebanon) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
    Department [2014] EWCA Civ 985 at paragraph 128 went on to state:

         "Nagre does not add anything to the debate save for  the  statement
         that if a particular person is outside the  Rule  then  he  has  to
         demonstrate, as a preliminary to a consideration outside  the  Rule
         that he has an arguable case that there may  be  good  grounds  for
         granting leave to remain outside the  Rules.   I  cannot  see  much
         utility  in  imposing  this  further  intermediary  test.   If  the
         applicant cannot satisfy the Rule, then there either is or there is
         not a further Article 8 claim.  That will have to be determined  by
         the relevant decision maker."

24. I am satisfied that the judge has given due and proper consideration to
    all the appropriate factors relating to a claim under Article 8 outside
    the Immigration Rules and no material error of  law  is  disclosed.   I
    acknowledge that the overall affect of this determination will  be  one
    of disappointment to both the Appellant and her Sponsor.  I accept that
    the Appellant is elderly and that her son lives in the  UK  but  it  is
    appropriate for the Upper Tribunal to consider the issue as a matter of
    law and not as a court of sympathy.  For  all  the  above  reasons  the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal is shown to be  well  reasoned
    and discloses no material errors of law and the appeal is dismissed and
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose a  material  error
of law and the appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal is maintained.

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to Rule  45(4)(i)  of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.  No  application
is made to vary that order and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

