
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08931/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st August 2017                     |On 9th August 2017                   |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between


                             Zeinab Ghelichkhani
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Janjua of Janjua & Associates
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Atkinson
    made following a hearing on 29th March 2016.

 2. The history of this matter is as follows. Judge  Atkinson  allowed  the
    appeals of the appellant and her mother outside the  Immigration  Rules
    on Article 8 grounds.  There  was  no  challenge  to  the  decision  in
    relation to the appellant's mother.  His decision in  relation  to  the
    present appellant was challenged by the Secretary of State and, on 12th
    May 2017, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral found that he had erred in
    law and set aside his decision.  A copy of her reasons for doing so  is
    appended to this decision.

 3. A transfer order was made and the resumed hearing came before me on 1st
    August 2017.  The documentary evidence which I considered  consists  of
    the same bundles as were before the original judge. I also  heard  oral
    evidence from  the  sponsor,  the  appellant's  father,  Mohammad  Reza
    Ghelichkhani, who confirmed that the written statement which he  signed
    on 29th March 2016 was true and  accurate  and  should  be  adopted  as
    evidence in this hearing.

 4. Mr Janjua, on the appellant's behalf, accepted that the appellant could
    not meet the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules  in  relation  to
    dependent relatives and confirmed that the appeal was being brought  on
    Article 8 grounds outside the Rules.

Background

 5. The appellant is a citizen of Iran born  on  5th  November  1992.   Her
    father came to the UK and applied for asylum on 7th November 2000.  The
    application was refused on non-compliance grounds on 12th June 2001 and
    a subsequent appeal was treated as abandoned in  his  absence  on  12th
    June  2001.   The  sponsor  said  that  he  had  been  put  into   NASS
    accommodation and moved from place to place and he had no knowledge  of
    the appeal process at the time of the refusal  and  subsequent  appeal.
    He sought permission to appeal against the decision but was refused  on
    10th May 2005.  He then made a further application either  in  2006  or
    early 2007 which was not dealt with until  2010  when  he  was  granted
    indefinite leave to remain.

 6. At that point he was given a Home Office travel document. He  travelled
    to Iran in October 2010 and again in September 2011  and  August  2012.
    The present application for entry clearance was made on  24th  February
    2014.

 7. The sponsor said that he had always supported  his  wife  and  daughter
    financially and was currently  paying  her  university  fees.   She  is
    studying design.

 8. The sponsor was asked why he had not applied for entry clearance before
    2014.  He said that he had been to a solicitor and had been  told  that
    he needed a good level of  income  in  order  to  be  successful.   Mrs
    Petterson pointed out that the income levels only changed in July  2012
    and he could have applied before then.  He said that he was  not  aware
    of the Immigration Rules but he had had some financial problems and his
    account was overdrawn.  In his statement  he  says  that  he  had  been
    working full-time since July 2003 and had taken a second  job  in  July
    2014 to bring his income over the required threshold.

 9. He said that, following the issue of her visa, his wife had joined  him
    for a week but then returned to Iran  in  order  to  look  after  their
    daughter who could not live alone. His wife has five siblings  in  Iran
    and he has three.  Some of the cousins are in Canada and Australia, but
    some are in Iran.

Submissions

10. Mrs Petterson did not seek to challenge the sponsor's  account  of  his
    immigration history and accepted that there had been some delay by  the
    respondent of around four years in dealing with the  application  under
    the Legacy Scheme.  However, she said that there was an equal delay  by
    the sponsor in making the application for entry  clearance.   He  could
    have done so at any point after September 2010.  Prior to July 2012, he
    would not have had to meet the enhanced  maintenance  requirements  set
    out in the new Immigration Rules.  She accepted that by  the  time  the
    Secretary of State had made the decision, the appellant was no longer a
    minor, but, had she made a timely application outside  the  Immigration
    Rules it might well have met with success.

11. She accepted that the sponsor was supporting his  daughter  financially
    and that she presently lived with her mother in Iran, and  indeed  that
    the cultural norms there would prevent her living on her own.  However,
    there were other adult relatives available to support her.   There  was
    no family life to protect but,  even  if  there  was,  given  that  the
    appellant could not  meet  the  Immigration  Rules,  refusal  would  be
    proportionate.

12. Mr Janjua submitted that the sponsor's evidence was that he  would  not
    have been able to meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules at  an
    earlier stage because his income was insufficient.  He  would  have  to
    show, even before July 2012, that his income was  not  only  above  the
    income support level, but also sufficient to meet his housing costs and
    council tax.  It was the sponsor's evidence that he had been to  see  a
    solicitor and had been told that his income level was insufficient.

13. He submitted that it would be impossible for the sponsor's daughter  to
    live alone in Iran and the fact  that  his  wife  was  presently  there
    showed that the extended family members  could  not  provide  effective
    support.  The sponsor himself was fully integrated into UK society  and
    it was not reasonable to expect him to return.  The Secretary of  State
    was at fault in failing to deal with the application under  the  Legacy
    Scheme until the appellant was over 18, which weighed heavily in favour
    of her argument that severing this family was wholly  disproportionate.



Findings and Conclusions

14. This is an application  made  wholly  outside  the  Immigration  Rules.
    Compelling circumstances therefore need to be established in order  for
    the appellant to show that refusal would be a breach of her  Article  8
    rights, given that the Rules are compliant with Article 8 of the  ECHR.



15. The first question is whether there is family life in this  case.   The
    appellant was 22 years old at the date of application and  is  now  24.
    She was only 8 years old when the sponsor left for the United  Kingdom,
    and has seen her father on three occasions  since  then,  the  last  in
    2012.  However, it is quite clear that she has  always  been  dependent
    upon her father financially  and  is  still  in  full  time  education.
    Moreover, even though her mother has a visa to come and live in the UK,
    she chooses to stay with her daughter.  I  accept  therefore  that  the
    Kugathas test is met and that there are more than the  usual  emotional
    ties between the parents and the adult child.

16. The refusal maintains the status quo. However,  since  this  family  is
    living apart, and the sponsor's wife remains in  Iran  apart  from  her
    husband to be with the  appellant,  it  is  an  interference  with  the
    family's enjoyment of their family life together.

17. The refusal is lawful, since it is accepted that the appellant does not
    meet the requirements of the immigration rules.

18. The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest.  Paragraph 117 of the 2002 Act sets out the  public  interest
    considerations to  be  taken  into  account  in  deciding  whether  the
    decision is proportionate.

19. So far as speaking English is concerned, there is no evidence that  the
    appellant is able to speak anything  other  than  Farsi.   She  is  not
    financially independent, since her father is supporting her  university
    studies, although she may as a graduate become so in the future.

20.  There  was  a  delay  of  around  four  years  between  the  sponsor's
    application and leave being granted under the  Legacy  Scheme.   During
    that period the appellant was a child  and  had  the  application  been
    dealt with more expeditiously it would have been possible  for  her  to
    have joined her father in the UK, subject to  meeting  the  maintenance
    requirements of the Rules.

21. However, that significant delay is matched by  an  equally  significant
    delay between the  grant  of  the  leave  in  September  2010  and  the
    application for entry clearance in February 2014.  Until July 2012  the
    maintenance requirements of the Rules were less onerous.  It seems from
    the sponsor's statement that he has been in full-time employment  since
    July 2003.  Although his  evidence  was  that  he  had  some  financial
    difficulties and was overdrawn on his bank account, he  did  manage  to
    pay three sets of airfares to Iran and did not chose to take  a  second
    job until July 2014.  It seems to me that the sponsor and his wife took
    their time to decide whether they wanted to make their home in  the  UK
    or not.  The family had lived  apart  for  many  years.   They  clearly
    wanted to consider very carefully what  they  wanted  to  do  when  the
    option of making an application became available.

22. There do not appear to be any real barriers  to  the  sponsor  settling
    back in Iran.  He said that he had no problems when he  went  there.  I
    conclude that the  reason  why  the  application  was  not  made  until
    February 2014 was because the family  was  genuinely  undecided  as  to
    whether they wanted to settle in the UK together, or in Iran  together,
    or continue the life which they had had over many years, that of living
    apart.  Indeed there is some evidence  that  the  appellant  wanted  to
    remain in Iran given that she has only been studying at her  university
    for one year and four months.  The decision to undertake studies  there
    at a relatively late age must be an indication  of  her  commitment  to
    life in Iran.  The delay in the application is an  indicator  that,  so
    far as the appellant and her mother were  concerned,  the  scales  were
    reasonably finely balanced.

23. The appellant has a large number of close relatives in Iran.  She would
    not be living alone as a single woman.  Her mother  has  chosen  to  be
    with her pending the outcome of this appeal, but that is her choice.

24. I therefore conclude that the appellant has not established that  there
    are exceptional or compelling circumstances which require  a  grant  of
    entry clearance outside the Immigration Rules.

Notice of Decision

25. The decision of the original judge has been set aside.  It is remade as
    follows.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

26. No anonymity direction is made.





[pic]
Signed                              Date 8 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
