
[pic]
IAC-FH-NL-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08607/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 February 2016                  |On 18 February 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     HD
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms K. Sidhu, Bassi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ghani promulgated on 13 May 2015 in which  he  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision
    to refuse to grant entry clearance as a dependent child under paragraph
    297 of the immigration rules.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "In [20] it is arguable that in stating, "In  all  probabilities  I
         find that the money remittances were sent to the appellant's mother
         and not exclusively for the appellant's needs" and later,  "As  far
         as various visits by the appellant's father are concerned,  in  all
         probabilities he visited his mother as well  as  the  appellant....
         these visits could not have been exclusively  for  the  appellant",
         the Judge has erred in treating non-exclusivity  as  indicative  of
         not having "sole responsibility"."

 3. The Sponsor attended  the  hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives, following which I reserved my decision which I set out
    below with my reasons.

Submissions

 4. Ms Sidhu relied on the grounds of appeal.  In addition she directed  me
    to the evidence of contact in the Sponsor's travel to Gambia.   He  had
    visited in 2003, 2004, 2005, 2009, 2012 and 2014.  I  was  referred  to
    his statement at paragraphs [35] to [37].  He  had  not  been  able  to
    travel when his son was ill.  I was referred to paragraph [23]  of  the
    decision.  Ms Sidhu submitted that, in  addition  to  the  evidence  of
    visits, there had been evidence of calling cards, but nevertheless  the
    judge had found that "as regards  regular  contact  apart  from  recent
    evidence there is no sustained evidence of contact  over  a  period  of
    time".  It was not contested that when the Sponsor travelled to  Gambia
    it was not exclusively to see the Appellant, but also to see his mother
    and in connection with the business.

 5. In  relation  to  financial  support,  the  Appellant  lived  with  her
    grandmother and the money had been sent to her  grandmother.   She  was
    only one when she started living with her grandmother and now  she  was
    only 13 years old.  The  money  had  to  be  paid  to  an  adult.   The
    Appellant was the beneficiary of the money sent to her grandmother.

 6. The judge had placed no  weight  on  the  medical  evidence  [23].   In
    paragraph [22] the judge did not state  that  he  did  not  accept  the
    evidence relating to her school, for example the  school  reports.   It
    was submitted that there was no conclusion  regarding  the  educational
    evidence.

 7.  There  had  been  no   consideration   of   "serious   or   compelling
    circumstances".  I was referred to the case of SS Congo [2015] EWCA Civ
    387.  Even if the Appellant was not successful  under  the  immigration
    rules, having satisfied all of the other requirements  and  given  that
    there was family life between the Appellant and Sponsor, who had an ill
    child in the United Kingdom, the half-brother of the  Appellant,  there
    was evidence of serious and compelling circumstances  but  no  findings
    had been made.  There  was  no  reference  to  the  ill-health  of  the
    Sponsor's child in the United Kingdom  in  consideration  of  paragraph
    297(i)(f).

 8. Mr. Mills referred me to the case  of  TD  Yemen  [2006]  UKAIT  00049.
    There was no dispute here about the mother's involvement.   However  it
    is possible for  parental  responsibility  to  be  shared  between  the
    Sponsor in the United Kingdom and the carer abroad, which is  what  the
    judge had found here.  I was referred to paragraph [24] where the judge
    found that the Sponsor had not been exercising  a  "continuing  control
    and direction" over the Appellant's upbringing including making all the
    important decisions in her life.

 9. It was submitted that the Appellant had relied on the  visits  to  show
    ongoing sole responsibility but the judge had found that  the  evidence
    was not strong and that he could not  be  sure  whom  the  Sponsor  had
    visited.   Even  at  its  highest,  the  judge  had  not   found   sole
    responsibility.   I  was  referred  to  the  evidence  of  health   and
    education.  The medical letter had been found wanting and the judge had
    given it limited weight [22].  It was reasonable to ask why there would
    be regular contact with the clinic if the Appellant was  not  ill.   In
    conclusion he submitted that it was mere disagreement with the findings
    of the judge and the grounds did that not show that the judge used  the
    wrong approach or ignored the case of TD Yemen.

10. In relation to paragraph 297(i)(f) and Article 8, the judge  was  aware
    of the health issues of the Sponsor's son in the  United  Kingdom.   He
    submitted that it could be inferred that the judge  had  that  in  mind
    when coming to his decision.  He submitted that adequate  consideration
    had been given to serious  and  compelling  considerations  [25].   Mr.
    Mills  accepted  that  paragraph  297(i)(f)   was   not   confined   to
    circumstances in the home country and could relate to circumstances  in
    the  United  Kingdom.   It  was  arguably  relevant  therefore  to  the
    Sponsor's son.  However he submitted  that  even  at  its  highest  the
    Appellant would not meet the test. There was no error  in  the  judge's
    consideration regarding circumstances in Gambia.

11. In relation to SS Congo, the Appellant needed to  show  an  exceptional
    case.  The scope of the immigration rule was  relevant.   "Serious  and
    compelling family  or  other  considerations"  in  paragraph  297(i)(f)
    covered the majority of circumstances and the Appellant would  have  to
    go a long way to engage Article 8 outside the immigration  rules  given
    this broad scope.  There would  be  little  value  in  a  second  stage
    consideration given that sufficient consideration  had  been  given  to
    paragraph 297(i)(f).  Adequate consideration had been given to  Article
    8.

12. In response Ms Sidhu referred me to paragraph 51 of TD Yemen.  It was a
    "fact-rich" issue.  There was evidence of  phone  contact  and  visits.
    There was evidence of the ill child in the United  Kingdom.   Financial
    support had to be a consideration.  The  judge  had  been  looking  for
    exclusivity of financial support and visits.  Looked at in  the  round,
    weight had been given to the non-exclusivity of these factors  and  the
    test  had  not  been  properly  applied.   The  evidence   demonstrated
    continuing  control.   No  reference  was  made  to  the  grandmother's
    statement.

13. In relation to SS Congo, where an Appellant  was  unable  to  meet  the
    requirements of the  immigration  rules,  many  factors  needed  to  be
    considered including the finances of the Sponsor and the best interests
    of the child.  In relation to the interference with family life, family
    life could not continue in Gambia due to the illness of  the  Sponsor's
    son.  He is a British  citizen  and  had  the  right  to  be  with  his
    biological parent.  The judge had to take into consideration all of the
    factors, but he had only looked at  the  issues  raised  by  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.

Error of law

Immigration rules

14. The judge considers whether or not the Appellant meets the requirements
    of paragraph 297(i)(e) from paragraphs [18] to  [24].   He  quotes  the
    case of TD Yemen [19].  In  paragraph  [20]  he  find  that  the  money
    remittances were not sent exclusively for the Appellant's needs.

         "In all probabilities I find that the money remittances where  sent
         to  the  appellants  mother  [sic]  and  not  exclusively  for  the
         appellants needs."

15. Given that the Appellant is still a child, it is  of  course  the  case
    that she would not be able to receive any remittances herself but  that
    the money would have to be sent to an adult.  In order  to  demonstrate
    sole responsibility, it is not necessary for money  remittances  to  be
    sent exclusively for the child.  The judge had before him  evidence  of
    financial support.  He does not find that  the  Appellant  is  not  the
    beneficiary of  the  support,  but  only  that  such  support  was  not
    exclusively for her.  However instead of making a positive  finding  of
    financial support, the judge's approach to this has been to place  less
    weight on it because it was not exclusively for the Appellant.

16. Later in paragraph [20] the judge finds that the Sponsor's visits  were
    not exclusively to see the Appellant.

         "As far as various visits by the appellant's father  concerned,  in
         all probabilities he visited his mother as well  as  the  appellant
         and of course he has now established a business in Gambia as  well.
         These visits could not have been exclusively for the appellant."

17. Similarly, the judge has not found that the Sponsor's visits  were  not
    for the purpose of visiting the Appellant.  Given  that  the  Sponsor's
    mother lives in the Gambia looking after the  Appellant,  and  that  he
    established a business in the Gambia, a proportion of the profits  from
    which go to support the Appellant, it is not surprising, and it has not
    ever been suggested, that the visits were for the exclusive purpose  of
    seeing the Appellant.  However, in a similar way to financial  support,
    instead of making a positive finding as to the evidence of visits,  the
    judge has focused on the fact that these visits  were  not  exclusively
    for the Appellant.

18. Further, in relation to this evidence of visits, in paragraph [23]  the
    judge finds that there is no  sustained  evidence  of  contact  over  a
    period of time.  However, there was evidence  of  visits  made  between
    2003 and 2014 before him.  Reasons had been given as to why the Sponsor
    could not visit when his son in the United Kingdom was ill, having been
    diagnosed with leukaemia.  There was evidence of calling cards.   Given
    the fact that the judge has placed  less  weight  on  the  evidence  of
    visits as he has not found that there were  exclusively  to  visit  the
    Appellant, the fact that he later refers to the fact that there  is  no
    sustained evidence of contact shows that he has allowed his finding  in
    paragraph [20] to affect his consideration of evidence of contact.

19. These are the first two issues considered by the judge when making  his
    findings as to sole responsibility.  The next matter  he  considers  is
    the evidence from the Appellant's grandmother.  He finds that she  does
    not state anywhere why she can no longer continue to take care  of  the
    Appellant, and merely states that she wishes the Appellant to join  her
    father  in  the  United  Kingdom.   However  this  is  not  a  relevant
    consideration for the purposes of establishing sole responsibility.

20. In  paragraph  [22]  the  judge  turns  to  the  evidence  relating  to
    education.  He finds that there are  discrepancies.   However,  he  had
    before him evidence of school  reports  which  had  been  sent  to  the
    Sponsor, but he finds that there was no evidence that the  Sponsor  had
    requested the school reports.  Given that the Sponsor had received  the
    school reports, the judge has failed to give reasons for why  the  fact
    that there was no evidence that the Sponsor has requested them from the
    school was relevant.  He sets out the evidence, but he fails to make  a
    finding on the evidence as a whole,  either  the  weight  that  can  be
    attached to it, or what it shows.

21. In paragraph [23] he looks at the medical evidence.   Again,  he  finds
    that there are discrepancies, as a  result  of  which  he  attaches  no
    weight to the letter from  the  clinic  given  the  evidence  from  the
    Sponsor that the Appellant did not have any health problems.

22.  Even  if  the  educational   and   medical   evidence   does   contain
    discrepancies, either no findings are made, and where  they  are,  they
    are set against the backdrop  of  having  placed  less  weight  on  the
    evidence of financial support and visits due to the fact that they were
    not exclusively for the Appellant.  I find that the judge's approach to
    financial support and visits has infected  the  way  in  which  he  has
    approached the consideration of the rest of the  evidence  provided  by
    the Appellant to show sole responsibility under paragraph 297(i)(e).  I
    find that this is an error of law.

23. Further, I find that  there  has  been  no  adequate  consideration  of
    serious and compelling considerations.  It is considered  in  paragraph
    [25], a total of six lines.  The  wording  of  paragraph  297(i)(f)  is
    "serious and compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  make
    exclusion of the child undesirable".  As accepted by Mr. Mills,  it  is
    not restricted to the circumstances in the country where the  child  is
    living.  The judge considered the situation  in  Gambia  but  makes  no
    findings as to whether there are  any  serious  and  compelling  family
    considerations beyond this, for example relating  to  circumstances  in
    the United Kingdom.  The  judge  had  evidence  of  the  Sponsor's  son
    leukaemia.  He refers to this in paragraph [14] when  setting  out  the
    evidence of the Sponsor  and  the  fact  that  his  son's  illness  has
    prevented the Sponsor from visiting the Appellant.  However there is no
    consideration of the Sponsor's son's illness in the context of  serious
    or compelling family or other considerations.  Paragraph [25]  contains
    no analysis of this family situation in the United Kingdom  and  is  an
    inadequate consideration of paragraph 297(i)(f).

Article 8

24. Paragraph [26], which is only seven lines  long,  contains  the  entire
    analysis in relation to Article  8.   Given  that  there  has  been  an
    inadequate consideration of "serious and  compelling  family  or  other
    considerations", I find that there has been no  adequate  consideration
    of the totality of the family's circumstances in order to carry  out  a
    proper assessment of family life under Article  8.   It  was  submitted
    that family life could not continue in the  Gambia,  but  there  is  no
    consideration of this.

25. With reference to SS Congo,  in  ascertaining  whether  there  are  any
    exceptional  circumstances,  given  that  there  has  been  no   proper
    consideration of the circumstances in the Appellant's  case  under  the
    immigration  rules,  there  cannot  be  said  to  have  been  a  proper
    consideration of whether there are any exceptional circumstances  above
    and beyond those covered by the immigration rules.  Given the  family's
    circumstances, the failure to conduct a proper assessment under Article
    8 and the failure to give adequate reasons  for  why  the  decision  is
    "proportionate and justified", amounts to a material error of law.

Notice of decision

    The decision involves the making of an error on a point of  law  and  I
    set it aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.


Signed   Date 13 February 2016

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
