








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08420/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Determination Promulgated    |
|On: 2 July 2014                               |On: 25 July 2014             |
|Prepared:  19 July 2014                       |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MAILER

                                   Between

                      Entry Clearance Officer: Chennai

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               Ms Juveria Arif
                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Jafar, counsel (instructed by Lee Valley
Solicitors)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. I shall refer to the appellant as the Entry Clearance Officer  and  to
      the respondent as "the claimant."


   2. The claimant is a national of India, who appealed against the decision
      of the respondent refusing to grant her entry clearance to the  UK  as
      the wife of Mr Abdul Mohammad, who has leave to remain in the UK as  a
      Tier 2 migrant.


   3. The claimant's application was refused on 28th February  2013  on  the
      basis that she had previously been refused entry clearance  in  August
      2012 pursuant to paragraph 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules as a false
      and forged employment  letter  had  been  submitted  as  part  of  her
      application.


   4. The respondent asserted that as a consequence, her current application
      fell to be refused under paragraph 320(7B) of the Immigration Rules.


   5. Before the First-tier Tribunal Judge, the claimant contended  that  in
      submitting her earlier application, she had relied on the services  of
      an immigration consultant who,  unbeknown  to  her,  and  without  her
      knowledge, had submitted a false document.


   6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  regard  to  the  evidence  of  her
      sponsor. The claimant had not appealed the initial  refusal  of  entry
      clearance as he was about to apply for a further Tier 2 visa  and  was
      informed that the appeal would in any event take  between  six  months
      and a year to be heard.  When the sponsor was granted a further  visa,
      he returned to India to help the claimant make a  further  application
      for entry clearance.


   7. He had appointed an immigration  consultant  in  making  the  original
      application. He was subsequently informed by that consultant  that  he
      had thought that the letter from his previous employer "was  a  little
      old" and as there was no time to contact the sponsor, he  "updated  it
      himself."


   8. It was on the basis of those facts that  the  Home  Office  Presenting
      Officer submitted to the First-tier Tribunal Judge  that  the  sponsor
      had accepted that the letter  in  question  was  a  forgery.  He  also
      asserted that the claimant would have appealed the first  decision  if
      she was not implicated in this forgery. Accordingly, paragraph 320(7B)
      had been properly applied.


   9. On behalf of the claimant it was submitted that the sponsor had  given
      a reasonable explanation as to why the initial decision had  not  been
      appealed. In any event, there had been nothing to  be  gained  by  the
      submission  of  the  false  letter  and  that  it  appeared  that  the
      consultant had felt under pressure owing  to  his  previous  delay  in
      making the application. It was also submitted that  paragraph  320(7B)
      required the Entry Clearance Officer to show that the claimant herself
      had used deception.


  10. In the findings and conclusions, the Judge noted that the claimant had
      now made a further application for  entry  clearance  and  it  is  not
      asserted that she has relied on any false documents or representations
      in support of her current application. In order to show that paragraph
      320(7B) can lawfully be applied to the claimant's current application,
      the entry clearance officer had to show that the claimant herself  had
      used deception in relation to the previous application.


  11.  The  claimant  in  her  evidence  had  stated  that  she  signed  the
      application form without noticing the alteration to  the  letter  from
      the sponsor's employer.


  12. There were other letters from the employer, none  of  which  had  been
      forgeries. That confirmed that the sponsor was employed by  that  firm
      until 17th August 2012, as asserted. Accordingly, the Judge found that
      there was no basis for the claimant or the sponsor to have submitted a
      further forged letter.


  13. There was also a declaration by a Mr Mirza Baig  who  stated  that  he
      provided the claimant with  a  visa  service  to  assist  her  in  her
      application to join her husband. He admitted that he had  "manipulated
      the letter" from the employer by changing the date. His sole intention
      was to submit documents which were no more than 28 days  old.  Neither
      the claimant nor the sponsor had been aware that he had done this.


  14. In his oral evidence, the sponsor explained that he gave the agent the
      letter from the  employer  dated  25th  January  2012  when  he  first
      instructed him. This must have been the letter that he  "manipulated."
      There was also a further letter from the employer dated 14th  December
      2012, confirming that he would have been happy to provide  an  updated
      letter if he had been asked to do so.


  15. In the event, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  found  that  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer had not established that the  claimant  herself  had
      used deception as required by paragraph  320(7B)  of  the  Immigration
      Rules.


  16. The Entry Clearance Officer was granted permission to  appeal  against
      that decision by First-tier Tribunal Judge J M Holmes, dated 22nd  May
      2014. In setting out the factual history at paragraph 2, Judge  Holmes
      stated that "the sponsor admitted  to  the  Judge  that  the  previous
      application for entry clearance  had  been  refused  by  reference  to
      paragraph 320(7A) because a  forged  letter,  which  the  sponsor  had
      forged" had been submitted in support of it.


  17. Clearly, that  is  not  correct.  As  already  noted,  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge stated at paragraph 10 of the  determination  that  the
      claimant had not denied that the consultant had been used and that  he
      had submitted a forged letter. There had  been  no  finding  that  the
      sponsor himself had been aware of such forgery, let alone that he  had
      forged it.


  18. Judge Holmes then goes on to state at paragraph  3  of  the  grant  of
      permission decision that the Judge found that  the  first  application
      had been properly  refused  by  reference  to  paragraph  320(7A)  but
      nevertheless went on to find that "since it was the  sponsor  and  not
      the appellant who had forged the letter"  paragraph  320(7B)  did  not
      apply to the  current  application.  Judge  Holmes  stated  that  that
      approach was arguably wrong. "....Dishonesty by at least  the  sponsor
      was  now  established  by  admission,  and  the  current   application
      therefore fell to be refused by reference to paragraph 320(7B)  unless
      one of the seven specified exceptions applied, which they did not."


  19. Again, it is evident that Judge Holmes  incorrectly  stated  that  the
      First-tier Tribunal Judge had found that it was the  sponsor  who  had
      forged the letter.


  20. In the Entry Clearance Officer's reasons for appealing, it  was  noted
      at paragraph 5 that the Judge was correct in  stating  that  paragraph
      320(7B) does not,  unlike  320(7A),  include  a  requirement  for  the
      claimant herself to have used deception. He failed to have  regard  to
      AA (Nigeria) v SSHD [2010] EWCA Civ 773 that dishonesty  or  deception
      is needed, albeit not necessarily that of the  applicant  himself,  to
      render a "false representation" a ground for mandatory refusal.


  21. The deception relied on  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  was  that
      perpetrated by the agent who admitted having changed the date  of  the
      employment letter. Accordingly although the appellant herself may  not
      have  been  aware  that  the  letter  had  been  changed,  there   was
      nevertheless a mandatory refusal required under paragraph 320(7B) that
      "must still apply."


  22. It has accordingly never been asserted by the Entry Clearance  Officer
      that the appellant's husband had in any way been a  party  himself  to
      the forgery.


  23. At the hearing on 3rd July 2014, Mr Tufan relied on  the  reasons  for
      permission. He submitted that the deception need not have been that of
      the claimant herself to render a "false representation" a  ground  for
      mandatory refusal. Her knowledge was accordingly immaterial.


  24. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Jafar submitted that AA, supra, did not
      assist  the  entry  clearance  officer's  argument.  He  referred   to
      paragraphs 26 and 27 of AA, where the  word  "deception"  is  given  a
      capital letter because it is a defined term  in  paragraph  6  of  the
      rules. It is provided as follows: "in paragraph 320(7B) and 320(11) of
      these  rules:  'Deception'  means  making  false  representations   or
      submitting  false  documents  (whether  or   not   material   to   the
      application) or failing to disclose material facts."


  25. The Court of Appeal went on to observe that in the definition referred
      to, the parenthesis "whether or not material to the application"  does
      not include the reference to the applicant's  knowledge  contained  in
      both the rule at paragraph 322(1A) and 320(7A) where  the  parenthesis
      reads "whether or not material to the application, and whether or  not
      to the applicant's knowledge".


  26. It follows that if "deception" required dishonesty as it  prima  facie
      does, then paragraph 320(7B) contains nothing  to  say  about  how  an
      applicant who may have previously breached immigration rules by making
      false representations other than dishonestly, for instance because the
      false representations were false without the applicant's (or anyone's)
      knowledge, should be treated,  where  he  falls  within  none  of  the
      conditions (A2-B) referred to.


  27. The Court went on to state that although paragraph 320(7B) is relevant
      to the consequences for re-entry of  a  breach  of  immigration  rules
      involving "deception" it is only paragraph 322 which deals  with  what
      amounts to a ground for refusing leave to remain. Thus  paragraph  322
      is headed "refusal of  variation  of  leave  to  enter  or  remain  or
      curtailment of leave".


  28. From paragraph 65 onwards of AA, the Court discussed  whether  "false"
      in paragraph 320(7A) meant simply "incorrect" or had  the  meaning  of
      "dishonest." From  the  ensuing  analysis,  the  Court  preferred  the
      meaning of "dishonest."


  29. At paragraph 76, the Court concluded  that  whether  as  a  matter  of
      interpretation solely of the relevant  rules  in  paragraphs  320(7A),
      320(7B) and 322(1A) as well as assurances given in the Lords debate as
      supplemented by the Minister's letter  to  ILPA,  the  answer  becomes
      plain, and in essence is all of a piece. Dishonesty  or  deception  is
      needed, albeit not necessarily  that  of  the  applicant  himself,  to
      render a "false representation" a ground for mandatory refusal.


  30. At paragraph 77, the Court had  regard  to  the  consequences  for  an
      applicant whose false representation was in no way dishonest  and  who
      would then suffer not only mandatory refusal but would also be  barred
      from re-entry for ten years if removed or deported.


  31. Most seriously was the possibility on the respondent's interpretation,
      that an applicant  for  entry  clearance  who  had  made  an  entirely
      innocent misrepresentation, innocent not only so far as  his  personal
      honesty is concerned but also in its origins, would be barred from re-
      entry under paragraph 320(7B)(ii) for ten years, even if he  left  the
      UK voluntarily.


        Assessment


  32. From that analysis,  I  am  satisfied  that  there  is  a  significant
      difference in the wording relating to paragraph 320(7A) of  the  rules
      from that contained in paragraph 320(7B).


  33. I am accordingly satisfied that  the  respondent  has  the  burden  of
      showing on the balance of probabilities that the claimant herself  had
      the necessary mens rea. Insofar as paragraph 320(7A) is concerned, her
      mens rea would not be relevant. The agent in her case clearly had  the
      necessary  intention  to  deceive  which,  following  the  wording  of
      paragraph 320(7A) meant that the appellant's  application  had  to  be
      refused. That wording however is not  repeated  or  incorporated  into
      paragraph 320(7B).


  34. I have also had regard to a decision of the Upper Tribunal  which  was
      not referred to by either  party:  Ozhogina  and  Tarasova  (Deception
      within paragraph 320(7B) - Nannies) Russia [2011]  UKUT  00197  (IAC).
      There, Mr Justice Burton concluded at paragraph 18, when referring  to
      AA (Nigeria), supra, that the inclusion of the words in paragraph (7A)
      "whether  or  not  to  the  applicant's  knowledge"   suggested   that
      dishonesty or knowledge of falsity was not required for the purpose of
      a justified refusal of entry clearance pursuant to paragraph (7A).


  35. By the Court of Appeal's consideration of the equivalent paragraph  in
      the rules (paragraph 322(1A)), that dishonesty was required  in  order
      for that paragraph to apply, the decision they  proposed  to  make  in
      relation to 320(7B) is a fortiori, because they would have been minded
      to distinguish between the two paragraphs.


  36. The court also stated at paragraph 21  that  whatever  the  conclusion
      might have been in relation to paragraph 320(7A)  in  that  case,  the
      Tribunal had  to  consider  the  Judge's  conclusion  in  relation  to
      paragraph 320(7B) which they were satisfied on its wording  imposes  a
      different test.


  37. There is no proviso as is contained in paragraph 320(7A), namely, that
      it applies whether or not it had  been  submitted  to  the  claimant's
      knowledge. There  is  not  that  proviso  contained  in  320(7B)  that
      deception as defined can arise whether or not the falsity, and  indeed
      its materiality, was to the applicant's knowledge.


  38. Further, by incorporating into paragraph 320(7B)  by  using  the  word
      "Deception", the definition of "Deception" in Rule 6, there  was  once
      again the omission  of  the  caveat  as  to  the  materiality  of  the
      applicant's knowledge of the falsity.


  39. The Court had regard at paragraph 23 to  the  drastic  consequence  to
      paragraph 320(7B) which is not present  in  paragraph  320(7A).  There
      would be a continued bar for  a  further  ten  years  since  the  last
      deception. That raises the bar for a construction of paragraph 320(7B)
      so that the Tribunal would on that basis  have  distinguished  between
      the two paragraphs.


  40. Finally, at paragraph 25, for the purpose of qualifying  for  the  ten
      year treatment under paragraph 320(7B) the nannies must  be  shown  to
      have made the  false  statements  with  the  deliberate  intention  of
      securing advantage in immigration terms.


  41. The Tribunal was therefore satisfied that the appellants in that  case
      did not "use deception" which  is  the  final  basis  upon  which  the
      Tribunal  distinguished  paragraph  7B  from  paragraph  7A   in   the
      application for entry clearance.  If  "used"  simply  meant  "supplied
      documents" then of course those appellants did,  but  given  the  high
      level of requirement for satisfaction for finding the applicability of
      paragraph 7B, the Tribunal was satisfied that  the  use  of  deception
      must have been, as the Judge  said,  with  the  deliberate  intent  of
      securing advantage  in  immigration  terms  by  the  use  of  a  false
      document, known to be false. That had not been the case.


  42. I accordingly find that the approach of the First tier Judge had  been
      correct in the circumstances.


     Decision


     The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  did  not  involve  the
making of any     error on a point of law. The decision  shall  accordingly
stand.







                               Signed                     Date 19/7/2014




                               Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer
