
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
OA/08476/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                 |   Decision & Reasons given orally at    |
|On 19 November 2018                 |hearing                                  |
|                                    |Sent out on 20 December 2018             |
|                                    |                                         |
|                                              |                               |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT

                                   Between

                              mr mazhar shafiq
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T. Muman, instructed by J M Wilson Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This appeal falls for consideration  by  this  Tribunal  following  the
    order of the Court of Appeal that it be reconsidered.

 2. The decision under appeal is that of the Entry Clearance Officer  dated
    12 March 2013.  That was a decision refusing  the  application  of  the
    appellant for entry clearance to the United Kingdom as a  spouse.   His
    wife is a British national and she  has  two  children  from  a  former
    relationship who attend today in court.

 3. The appeal was allowed by  Tribunal  Judge  Landes  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in a decision  of  14  February  2014.   The  Entry  Clearance
    Officer appealed to this Tribunal which dismissed the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer's appeal in a decision of 3 April 2014.  The matter  then  came
    to a halt awaiting developments elsewhere.  It  is  right  to  set  out
    briefly why that was.

 4. The judgment of Tribunal Judge Landes had been based on,  or  certainly
    in the Court of Appeal's view influenced by the decision of Blake J  in
    a case called MM v Entry Clearance Officer in which he  had  held  that
    the minimum income requirements of the Immigration Rules as  they  then
    were and as broadly speaking  they  have  continued  were  contrary  to
    Article 8.  Mr Justice Blake's decision was overruled by the  Court  of
    Appeal MM [2014] EWCA Civ 985 and  that  decision  was  upheld  by  the
    Supreme Court in R (MM Lebanon) and Others v Secretary of State for the
    Home Department [2017] UKSC 10.  It was thus not until  2017  and  that
    judgment that it was clear beyond peradventure that basing  a  decision
    on the words of Blake J was erroneous in law.

 5. This case had in fact been one of those originally programmed  to  take
    part in the MM litigation in the Supreme Court.  It was  detached  from
    them and hence came to be heard separately  by  the  Court  of  Appeal,
    whose judgment is available as [2018] EWCA Civ 1776.  In that judgment,
    despite the eloquent submissions of Mr Muman who  appeared  before  the
    Court of Appeal as  he  appears  before  me  today  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, the Court of Appeal took the view, as I have indicated, that
    Judge Landes' view was influenced by the  erroneous  interpretation  of
    the law by Blake J and therefore took the view that the  appeals  would
    need to be reconsidered.

 6. That presents a  minor  procedural  difficulty  because,  as  Mr  Muman
    submitted to me, it was not entirely clear what  the  position  was  as
    related to the facts  found  by  Judge  Landes  as  distinct  from  the
    assessment and interpretation of them within the view she took  of  the
    meaning of the Rules; and also the extent to which it was necessary for
    the appellant to produce further evidence or to substantiate  his  case
    in any way.

 7. It does seem to me, however, that bearing in mind that the decision  of
    the Court of Appeal was at the end of July (even though the  order  was
    not effective until later), the appellant has, through his wife and the
    solicitors and Counsel who acted for  him,  had  every  opportunity  to
    assemble whatever material he chose  to  assemble;  and,  as  Mr  Muman
    frankly acknowledges to  me,  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  current
    situation: although on instructions Mr Muman has been able to  tell  me
    what the current situation is and I shall refer to it in a moment.

 8. The position therefore is that the decision of the Upper  Tribunal  and
    that of Judge Landes have both been quashed by the order of  the  Court
    of Appeal, and the appellant's appeal falls  for  reconsideration;  the
    appellant awaits a first lawful decision  on  his  appeal  against  the
    Entry Clearance Officer's decision.

 9. The material put before the Entry Clearance Officer was material  which
    was incapable of meeting the requirements of the Rules  in  respect  of
    the minimum income requirement.  It appears to be acknowledged that the
    only problem was that the application was made at a time when it  could
    not succeed because the sponsor's income had not been earned by her for
    a sufficiently long period.  Everybody at every stage appears  to  have
    taken the view that if only the application had been made a few  months
    later it would, far from failing, have been bound to succeed.   Indeed,
    that is the subject  of  comments  made  by  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    paragraph 45 of the  judgment  on  McCombe  LJ,  with  which  paragraph
    Lindblom LJ specifically agreed, to the following effect:

         "I would not wish to leave  the  case  without  saying  that  I  am
         surprised that in neither of these cases the Court of Appeal  heard
         two cases together did the respondent submit fresh applications for
         entry clearance after the initial refusals when it  appeared  clear
         that both applications have been premature and  that  very  shortly
         thereafter  the  minimum  income  requirement   would   have   been
         satisfied."

10. It is of note that in  this  case  at  least  the  Secretary  of  State
    suggested such a course in  May  2015,  admittedly  at  the  same  time
    proposing that her appeal should be allowed  and  that  the  respondent
    should pay her costs; and McCombe LJ  refers  to  further  developments
    without any noticeable outcome.

11. That is, as I pointed out to Mr Muman today, a matter of  some  concern
    in relation to the grounds that he now raises, to which  I  must  turn,
    starting from the position first that it is accepted that the appellant
    did not meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules at the  date  of
    the application; and secondly that there is no further evidence  before
    me other than that which was before the Entry Clearance Officer.

12. The first ground argued by Mr Muman is that the Entry Clearance Officer
    erred in law: and  that  is  to  say  the  decision  made  was  not  in
    accordance with the law for failure to  consider  s  55  and  the  best
    interests of the sponsor's children (that is  to  say  the  appellant's
    stepchildren).  That ground of appeal was available  to  the  appellant
    because this appeal is an appeal  unaffected  by  the  Immigration  Act
    2014.  But, first, it is perfectly clear that the ground was not raised
    before the First-tier Tribunal.  Secondly, there was no argument  about
    it before the First-tier Tribunal so far as anybody can tell.  Thirdly,
    there has been no application to amend the grounds.

13. That is not a good basis upon which to raise the ground at this stage.

14. In any event, it is a ground which if it succeeded could  succeed  only
    in a purely formal way and would not be a basis upon which  a  Tribunal
    properly advised would allow an appeal.  The reason for  that  is  that
    the best interests of the sponsor's children had not been  the  subject
    of any submissions to either the Entry  Clearance  Officer  or  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  At the stage  of  entry  clearance,  the  sponsor
    filled in the form, and as Mr Muman points out, there was at that stage
    no particular space for adding what the best interests of any  children
    would be; but there was copious documentation put in to the  First-tier
    Tribunal, and there was a statutory declaration made by the sponsor  in
    relation to the application to the Entry Clearance Officer.

15. Taking that material at its highest the sponsor's  position  was,  just
    before her marriage to the appellant, that the children  had  formed  a
    close bond with him and she was surprised that  that  had  happened  so
    quickly; but by the time the matter came to appeal she made  a  witness
    statement which does not mention the children at all, and so far as her
    oral  evidence  is  concerned  she  gave  evidence  of  the  children's
    relationships with their natural father, not of any  relationship  with
    the appellant, and said that shortly after the hearing she was going to
    visit her husband the appellant, and the children were  going  to  stay
    behind.

16. Even if there were  some  formal  failure  to  take  into  account  the
    interests of the children, and even if that had been a ground of appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal, it would on that evidence, as it appears to
    me, have been bound to be rejected.  There was simply no basis  in  the
    evidence for saying that the best interests of the  children  would  be
    affected by the Entry Clearance  Officer's  decision.   Further,  as  I
    noted in the course of  the  hearing,  as  the  proposal  was  for  the
    appellant to come to the United Kingdom and although he said  he  would
    work, there was no specific proposal for his employment.  The immediate
    result of his arrival would  have  been  a  decrease  in  the  family's
    finances because he would have had to be kept as well as his  wife  and
    stepchildren, thus reducing the resources available for  the  children.
    So far as ground 1 is concerned therefore there is  simply  nothing  in
    it: but in any event, it was not argued before the First-tier Tribunal,
    and is not in the grounds of appeal available to the appellant today.

17. The second ground upon which Mr Muman seeks success today, is that  the
    Entry Clearance Officer failed to take into account article 8  at  all,
    and that the appeal should succeed on the basis  that  entry  clearance
    should be granted outside the Rules - to the appellant who did not,  at
    the date of his application, meet the requirements of  the  Rules.   In
    conjunction with that, Mr Muman emphasises specifically, findings  made
    by Judge Landes (whose decision has been set aside) in  paragraph  [30]
    in particular.

18. She had looked in the previous paragraph to what she  regarded  as  the
    realistic financial situation and concluded that if the  appellant  was
    admitted to the United Kingdom  in  the  medium  term  there  would  be
    sufficient money for the couple.  She then  found  first  that  it  was
    disproportionate for the family to be further separated and was not  in
    the  best  interests  of  the  children,  who  should  be   forming   a
    relationship with their  stepfather.   I  have  already  indicated  the
    evidence on that, as I have on the  next  point  upon  which  Mr  Muman
    relies, that the children stand  to  directly  benefit  from  having  a
    father figure in  their  household  and  benefit  indirectly  from  the
    support the appellant could give to their mother. Those, of course, are
    matters upon which there was no evidence so far as one  can  tell  upon
    which the findings in favour of the appellant could have been made.

19. I therefore disregard those points argued by Mr Muman for the  purposes
    of article 8. The next one is this:  separation would  not  be  in  the
    order of a couple of months or  a  few  months;  finally,  it  was  not
    reasonable to expect the sponsor and her  British  children  to  uproot
    themselves to Pakistan.

20. Nobody doubts the last.  However, the position is as McCombe LJ  noted,
    and as I have noted, that the case before the  Tribunal  was,  and  has
    always been, that if the application had been made a few  months  later
    it would have succeeded.  It may be that if it had been  made  quite  a
    lot later it would have succeeded.  The argument outside the Rules  has
    to be  on  the  basis  that  refusal  is  disproportionate.   When  one
    considers whether refusal was disproportionate, one has  to  take  into
    account what the consequences of  refusal  were.  The  consequences  of
    refusal were simply that a new application would have to be made  at  a
    time when it could succeed.  The consequences of refusal were  not  the
    long-term exclusion of the appellant from  the  United  Kingdom.   They
    were simply that a new application would have to be made.

21.  I  do  not  understand  that  it   can   coherently   be   argued   as
    disproportionate to refuse an application when the only consequence  is
    that a new application has to be  made.   This  is  not  a  case  where
    anybody would have to go abroad to make the new application; it is  not
    a case where anybody is capable of  saying  that  the  new  application
    would not have succeeded; it is simply that the  application  made  too
    early would have to be remedied by an application made  at  the  proper
    time.  For those reasons it seems to me that the article 8 argument  is
    one which has no proper foundation.

22. There are characteristics of this appeal which have  troubled  me.   In
    particular, it is important to note and regret the delay which has,  as
    I understand it, now extended so long that circumstances  have  changed
    dramatically in the sponsor's family.  In particular, I  am  told  that
    the requirements of the Rules would not be met by an application today.
     That has a further consequence in  relation  to  the  outcome  of  the
    present appeal. As I observed to Mr Muman, and as I understand  it,  he
    accepted, even if today's appeal were to be allowed, that  would  be  a
    victory which would be  of  no  assistance  to  the  appellant  or  the
    sponsor. The Entry Clearance Officer, faced  with  an  allowed  appeal,
    would nevertheless have to determine whether the  requirements  of  the
    Rules meriting a visa were met at the present date, and I am told  that
    they would not be.

23. All that makes the observations, made possibly even then  too  late  by
    McCombe LJ,  of  considerable  importance.   I  do  not  know  why  the
    appellant and those advising him were told to pursue this appeal rather
    than to see what could be done  about  getting  the  appellant  to  the
    United Kingdom by a properly supported application as soon as possible.
     It may be that further enquiries need to be made about that,  but  for
    the reasons I have given, this appeal cannot succeed and I dismiss it.



                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                       Date: 7 December 2018
