
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Numbers:
OA/08377/2015

                                                   OA/08384/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 4 July 2017                            |On 19 July 2017                     |
|                                          |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                          abimbola adewale ayodele
                           victor adewale ayodele

                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr O Adebayo of David & Vine Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellants are citizens of Nigeria.  They are twins who  were  born
    on 9 June 1997.  They applied for entry clearance under para 297 of the
    Immigration Rules (HC 395 as  amended)  to  join  their  father,  Felix
    Babatunde Ayodele who is settled in the UK.   On  23  April  2015,  the
    Entry Clearance Officer ("ECO") refused each of the  applications.   On
    25 August 2015, the Entry Clearance Manager confirmed those decisions.

 2. The appellants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination
    sent on 29 September  2016,  Judge  Frazer  dismissed  the  appellants'
    appeals under Art 8 of the ECHR.  The appellants sought  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  Permission was initially refused by  the
    First-tier Tribunal but on 24 March 2017 the Upper Tribunal  (UTJ  Eyre
    QC) granted the appellants permission to appeal on the basis  that,  in
    reaching her decision under Art 8, the judge had failed to consider the
    application of para 297 of the Rules to the appellants.

 3. On 13 April 2017, the ECO filed a rule 24 notice seeking to uphold  the
    judge's decision.

The Hearing

 4. At the hearing, I initially heard submissions from both representatives
    on whether the judge had erred in law in failing to consider  para  297
    of the Rules. At the conclusion of those submissions, I indicated  that
    I was satisfied that there  was  a  material  error  of  law  and  both
    representatives agreed  that  I  should  remake  the  decision.   As  a
    consequence, I  heard  oral  evidence  from  the  sponsor  and  further
    submissions from both representatives in respect of Art 8.

Error of Law

 5. Before the First-tier Tribunal, the evidence was that the  sponsor  had
    moved to the United Kingdom in 1996.  A  month  after  he  did  so,  he
    discovered that  his  girlfriend  in  Nigeria  was  pregnant  with  the
    appellants.  They were born in  Nigeria  on  9  June  1997  whilst  the
    appellant was living in the UK.  In 2003, the appellants' mother  moved
    to the north of Nigeria to live with her new boyfriend.  At that  time,
    the appellants went  to  live  with  their  paternal  grandmother  (the
    sponsor's mother).  They lived with her until her death in 2012.  After
    the death of their grandmother, the appellants went to live with  their
    maternal uncle in Lagos.

 6. In 2013, the sponsor travelled to Nigeria and saw  the  appellants  for
    the first time.  He again visited Nigeria in 2014.

 7. The sponsor gave evidence that he sent money to  the  appellants  on  a
    regular basis and that he spoke to them on the telephone.  It  was  his
    support that provided clothing,  money  for  food  and  money  for  the
    appellants' school fees.

 8. The evidence was that when their uncle travelled, the appellants stayed
    with friends.

 9. At the time of the ECO's decisions, the appellants were 17 years and 10
    months old.  At the date of the hearing, the appellants were  18  years
    and 3 months old.

10. The judge accepted the evidence  before  her,  including  that  of  the
    sponsor.  The judge made a number of findings.

11. First, she did not accept that the relationship between the  appellants
    and the sponsor amounted to 'family life' within Art 8 (see  para  22).
    Secondly, in any event, the judge found that even if  family  life  had
    been established, the refusal of entry clearance was proportionate.

12. In reaching that latter finding, the judge accepted a  submission  made
    on behalf of the ECO, that the appellants could not succeed under  para
    297 of the Rules because they were over the age of 18 (see paras 17 and
    24).  Before me, Mr Adebayo submitted that was an error.

13. One of the requirements in para 297(ii)  is  that  the  individual  "is
    under the age of 18".  In applying para 297, however, the relevant date
    is the date of the ECO's decisions which was 23 April  2015.   At  that
    date, as I have already noted, the appellants were, in fact, under  the
    age of 18; they  were  17  years  and  10  months  old.   Consequently,
    contrary to the submissions made by the ECO before the judge, this  was
    not a basis upon which para 297 could be said not  to  apply  to  them.
    Indeed, even if they had reached the age of  18  by  the  date  of  the
    hearing, providing they were under 18 at the date  of  application,  by
    virtue of para 27 of the Rules they would be treated, in effect, as  if
    they were under 18 years of age.

14. Mr Adebayo submitted that  this  error  was  material  to  the  judge's
    decision as she had not dealt with the substantive requirements of para
    297 namely whether  the  sponsor  had  "sole  responsibility"  for  the
    appellants  (para  297(i)(e))  or  whether  there  were  "serious   and
    compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion  of  the
    child undesirable" (para 297(i)(f)).

15. Mr Mills submitted that any error was not material  as  the  judge  had
    found that no "family life" had been established between the appellants
    and sponsor and consequently he could not rationally  have  found  that
    the sponsor had "sole responsibility" or that there were  "serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations" in para 297(i)(e) and (i)(f)
    respectively.

16. For the reasons I will give shortly, the  appellants  did  not  have  a
    right of appeal on the basis that they  met  the  requirements  of  the
    Immigration Rules.  Nevertheless, in determining Art 8 it was incumbent
    upon the judge to consider whether the appellants met the  requirements
    of the Rules and, if they  did  not,  whether  there  were  "compelling
    circumstances" such as to outweigh the public interest and justify  the
    grant of leave outside the Rules (see R (Agyarko and  another)  v  SSHD
    [2017] UKSC 11 at  [47]-[48]).   The  judge  simply  made  no  relevant
    findings in relation to the substantive requirements of para 297 on the
    basis that she wrongly considered that it had no application because of
    the appellants' ages at the date of the hearing.  It would  appear,  on
    that basis, that the sponsor was not asked about, and as a  result  his
    evidence not directed towards, the issues relevant as to whether he had
    "sole responsibility" as set out in the well known case of  TD  (Yemen)
    (Paragraph 297(i)(e): sole responsibility)  [2006]  UKAIT  00049.   The
    judge's adverse finding in  relation  to  'family  life'  must,  in  my
    judgment, also be seen in the light of the fact that the  sponsor  (who
    appeared in person before the judge) may well have not appreciated  the
    nature of the issues relevant to para 297 and by extension then to  Art
    8.

17. In  the  circumstances,  I  do  not  accept  Mr  Mills'  submission  on
    materiality.  I cannot be confident that the  judge  would  necessarily
    have made an adverse finding, in particular in relation to the issue of
    "sole responsibility" under para 297(i)(e).

18. Thus, as I indicated at the hearing, I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge
    materially erred in law in dismissing the appellants' appeals under Art
    8.

Discussion

19. I now turn to remake the decision.

    The Scope of the Appeal

20. At the hearing, I explored with the representatives the  scope  of  the
    appellants' rights of appeal in this case; in  particular  whether  the
    right of appeal was limited to Art 8 alone as a result of the amendment
    to s.82 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (the  "NIA
    Act 2002") by s.15 of the Immigration Act 2014.  Both  representatives,
    having considered the relevant commencement provisions,  accepted  that
    the appellants' rights of appeal were limited to Art  8  of  the  ECHR.
    That is the effect of Art 9 of the Immigration Act  2014  (Commencement
    No. 3, Transitional and Saving Provisions) Order 2014 (SI 2014/2771) as
    amended by the Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement No.  4,  Transitional
    and Saving Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015 (SI 2015/371), Art 8.

21. The effect of Art 9(1)(c) of  the  Commencement  No.  3  Order  can  be
    summarised as follows.  Where an application for  entry  clearance  was
    made before 6 April 2015 but a decision on that application is made  on
    or after 6 April 2015, the applicable appeal rights are those  in  s.82
    of the NIA Act 2002 in force prior to its  amendment  by  s.15  of  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  However, if the decision is also "a  refusal  of
    an asylum, protection or human rights claim", then  the  appeal  rights
    are governed by s.82 in force as a  result  of  the  amendment  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014.

22. The applications for entry clearance were made before 6 April 2015  but
    the decisions were reached after 6 April 2015.  However, an application
    for entry clearance under para 297 falls within Part 8 of the Rules and
    is deemed to be a "human rights application" by the Secretary of  State
    (see Home  Office,  "Rights  of  Appeal"  (version  3.0)  at  page  9).
    Consequently, the new version of s.82 of the NIA Act  2002  applied  to
    these appeals and, therefore, in effect the appellantS only had a right
    of appeal under Art 8.  The earlier  appeal  rights  which  would  have
    included a ground that the decision was  not  in  accordance  with  the
    Immigration Rules did not apply to them.

    Paragraph 297

23.  Nevertheless,  for  the  reasons  I  have  given  above,  whether  the
    appellants did or did not satisfy the  requirements  of  para  297  was
    relevant in determining their Art 8 claim.

24. The relevant provisions of para 297, which I have referred  to  already
    above, are found in para 297(i)(e) and (i)(f).  It  was  not  suggested
    that any  of  the  other  requirements  of  para  297  were  in  issue.
    Paragraph 297, so far as relevant provides as follows:

         "The requirements to be met by a person seeking indefinite leave to
         enter the United Kingdom as the child of a  parent,  parents  or  a
         relative present and settled or being admitted  for  settlement  in
         the United Kingdom are that he:

         (i)  is seeking leave to enter  to  accompany  or  join  a  parent,
             parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:

             ....

             (e)  one parent is present and settled in the  United  Kingdom
                  ... and  has  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  child's
                  upbringing; or

             (f)  one parent or a relative is present and  settled  in  the
                  United Kingdom ... and there are  serious  and  compelling
                  family or other considerations which make exclusion of the
                  child undesirable and suitable arrangements have been made
                  for the child's care; ..."

25. In this appeal, Mr Adebayo placed much  reliance  upon  the  submission
    that  the  sponsor  had  "sole  responsibility"  for  the   appellants.
    Guidance on the meaning of "sole responsibility" can be  found  in  the
    AIT's decision in TD at [52] as follows:

         "Questions of "sole responsibility"  under  the  immigration  rules
         should be approached as follows:

         i.   Who has "responsibility" for a child's upbringing and  whether
             that responsibility is  "sole"  is  a  factual  matter  to  be
             decided upon all the evidence.

         ii.  The term "responsibility" in the immigration rules should  not
             to be understood as a  theoretical  or  legal  obligation  but
             rather as a practical one which, in each case, looks to who in
             fact  is  exercising  responsibility  for  the  child.    That
             responsibility may have been a  short  duration  in  that  the
             present arrangements may have begun quite recently.

         iii.      "Responsibility"  for  a  child's   upbringing   may   be
             undertaken by individuals other than a child's parents and may
             be   shared   between   different   individuals:   which   may
             particularly arise where the child remains in its own  country
             whilst the only parent involved in its  life  travels  to  and
             lives in the UK.

         iv.  Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved in  the
             upbringing of the child, it will be exceptional  that  one  of
             them will have sole responsibility.

         v.   If it is said that  both  are  not  involved  in  the  child's
             upbringing, one of the indicators for that will  be  that  the
             other has abandoned or abdicated his responsibility.  In  such
             cases, it may well be justified to find that  that  parent  no
             longer has responsibility for the child.

         vi.  However, the issue of sole responsibility is not just a matter
             between the parents.  So even if  there  is  only  one  parent
             involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may  not  have
             sole responsibility.

         vii.      In  the  circumstances  likely   to   arise,   day-to-day
             responsibility (or decision-making) for  the  child's  welfare
             may necessarily be shared with others (such  as  relatives  or
             friends) because of the geographical  separation  between  the
             parent and the child.

         viii.    That, however, does not prevent  the  parent  having  sole
             responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.

         ix.   The  test  is,  not  whether  anyone  else   has   day-to-day
             responsibility, but whether the parent has continuing  control
             and direction of the child's upbringing including  making  all
             the  important  decisions  in  the  child's  life.   If   not,
             responsibility is shared and so not "sole"."

26. When an appeal lay on the ground that a decision was not in  accordance
    with the Immigration  Rules,  and  when  that  decision  was  an  entry
    clearance decision, the facts had to be ascertained as at the  date  of
    decision (see s.85A(2) of the NIA Act 2002 prior to  amendment  by  the
    Immigration Act 2014).  The facts were not to be taken as at  the  date
    of the Tribunal hearing.  Even if Art 8  was  relied  upon,  since  the
    appeal was against a refusal of entry clearance,  the  same  limitation
    applied.

27. Under the current appeal provisions in the NIA Act 2002  following  its
    amendment by  the  Immigration  Act  2014,  in  determining  whether  a
    decision (whether a refusal of entry clearance or  otherwise)  breaches
    Art 8, the Tribunal may now consider  any  matter  which  it  considers
    relevant to the substance of the decision including  a  matter  arising
    after the date of decision (see s.85(4)).

28. Consequently, whether a breach of Art 8 is established must be  decided
    upon the facts as they are at the date of the hearing.  It may well  be
    that that also means that, unlike the  earlier  position,  whether  the
    Rules are or are not met must  also  be  decided  as  at  the  date  of
    decision since its relevance lies in determining whether  a  breach  of
    Art 8 is established.  In this case, however, it is not suggested  that
    the factual situation has materially changed since the date of decision
    other than whatever relationship  exists  between  the  appellants  and
    sponsor has continued.

    Findings

29. The evidence before the judge  was,  as  I  set  out  above,  that  the
    appellants lived in Nigeria initially with their  mother  between  2003
    and 2012, with their paternal grandmother after their mother left,  and
    after their paternal grandmother's death in  2012  they  lived  with  a
    maternal uncle.  The sponsor  did  not  see  the  appellants  until  he
    visited Nigeria in 2013 when they were 14/15 years old.   He  has  seen
    them on a further occasion in 2014.  In his  evidence  before  me,  the
    sponsor said that each visit was about two weeks in duration.

30. Before the judge, the evidence was that the sponsor provided  financial
    support for the appellants which  covered  clothing,  food  and  school
    fees.  The judge accepted this evidence.  There was no evidence  before
    the judge as to what other, if any,  involvement  the  sponsor  had  in
    their lives.

31. In his evidence before me, the sponsor said  that  he  did  have  'sole
    responsibility' for them since they were born.  The sponsor  said  that
    he had made decisions about the children long before he had  met  them.
    When they were living with their mother, he had communicated  with  her
    and he had chosen the school.  He told me that he communicated with the
    school and paid the school fees.  He said that he chose the courses for
    them and he bought clothes and sent money for them.  He told them which
    church to attend and, when they were younger, he told them when  to  go
    to bed to sleep.  He told me  that  when  the  appellants'  grandmother
    died, he agreed that they could live with  their  maternal  uncle.   He
    said that he did not meet their uncle before they went to live with him
    but the children had told him about their uncle.  He had spoken to  the
    uncle on the telephone and had done so regularly before the appellants'
    grandmother died.  He told me in his evidence  how,  when  he  went  to
    Nigeria in 2013, he had met the uncle and gone to his home where he met
    his own children for the first time.

32. The sponsor said that he spoke to the children  about  every  two  days
    calling the number of the uncle  or  friends.   He  told  me  that  the
    children, when they finished their education next month, needed to know
    about IT and would do  a  one  year  college  course  before  going  to
    university.  He said that his daughter wanted to be a  lawyer  and  his
    son wanted to be an engineer but he  was  also  keen  on  football  and
    becoming a footballer.

33. In his evidence, the sponsor accepted that there was no  evidence  from
    the school concerning any contact with them and there was nothing  from
    the appellants' uncle.

34. Mr Adebayo invited me to find the sponsor to be credible.   He  pointed
    out that the judge had made no negative  findings  in  respect  of  the
    sponsor.  He invited me to place weight on the  evidence  given  orally
    before me.  He submitted that the sponsor made the  key  decisions  for
    the appellants,  for  example  where  they  were  to  live  when  their
    grandmother died and he  had  been  responsible  for  their  choice  of
    school.  In addition, he provided the financial support which the judge
    had accepted.  He submitted that the sponsor had 'sole  responsibility'
    for the appellants.

35. Mr Mills accepted the sponsor provided financial support but, following
    TD "that was not in itself enough to  establish  sole  responsibility."
    Mr Mills relied on the fact that the sponsor had not met  his  children
    until 2013 when they were about  16  years  of  age.   They  had  spent
    virtually  all  of  their  childhood  without  their  father  and,   he
    submitted, that should present rather more of  an  uphill  struggle  to
    establish sole responsibility than if he had been with them in  Nigeria
    and had left.

36. Mr Mills invited me to take into account that  the  sponsor's  evidence
    about the appellants' uncle was vague and, although he  had  ultimately
    said that he had decided whether they should live with  the  uncle,  he
    was initially unable to give his full name and had accepted that he had
    not met the uncle prior to the appellants going to live with him.

37. Mr Mills pointed out that there was no  supporting  evidence  from  the
    appellants' uncle or their  school  as  to  his  involvement.   It  was
    reasonable, Mr Mills submitted, to expect  him  to  produce  supporting
    evidence of that nature.  Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the  sponsor  was
    little more than an absent father who provided  financial  support  and
    had visited them, during the course of  their  whole  lives,  only  for
    about four weeks.   Mr  Mills  submitted  that  the  evidence  was  not
    sufficient to establish that the sponsor had  sole  responsibility  for
    the appellants.

38. It is clear from the case law, summarised in TD, that the touchstone of
    "sole responsibility" is the continuing control and  direction  by  the
    parent in the UK in  respect  of  the  "important  decisions"  about  a
    child's upbringing.   Whilst  the  parent  in  the  UK  may  have  sole
    responsibility, the day-to-day care may well  reside  with  the  carers
    abroad.

39. As I have already indicated, there was no  evidence  before  the  judge
    that the sponsor made any  "important  decisions"  in  the  appellants'
    lives.  I accept that evidence of  that  nature  may  well,  given  the
    judge's view that para 297 did not apply and the  sponsor  appeared  in
    person, not have led to relevant questions being asked.  Before me, the
    sponsor contended that he did have sole responsibility (he said  so  in
    express terms) and that he made decisions,  for  example  as  to  which
    school they should attend and, in their earlier years, when they should
    go to bed at night.  He also decided that they should live  with  their
    maternal uncle when their grandmother died in 2012.

40. The burden of proving that the sponsor had sole responsibility for  the
    appellants lies upon the appellants  on  a  balance  of  probabilities.
    There is little evidence of any substance that the sponsor was actively
    involved in the appellants' lives between 1996 when he came to  the  UK
    and 2003 when their mother left and the appellants went  to  live  with
    their paternal grandmother.  The sponsor  said,  in  cross-examination,
    that he had communicated with their mother when she was  alive  and  he
    had chosen the school.  However, there was no supporting evidence  from
    the school in relation to that or the  subsequent  period  since  2003.
    The appellants are now legally represented and it would  be  reasonable
    to expect supporting evidence could be obtained from the school showing
    contact with the sponsor and his involvement in any decisions  relating
    to their schooling.  Its absence is relevant as to whether I accept his
    evidence on this matter (see TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40).

41. Whilst, as Mr Mills acknowledged in his  submissions,  it  is  in  some
    respects supportive of the sponsor's claim to have sole  responsibility
    that the appellants went to live with his mother when their own  mother
    left, the fact remains that apart from financial support,  there  is  a
    complete paucity of independent  evidence  concerning  his  involvement
    with decisions made about the children  prior  to  their  grandmother's
    death.  I have already dealt with the matter of their  schooling.   The
    sponsor's evidence that he made  the  decision  (as  I  understood  his
    evidence) each day as to when they  would  go  to  bed  is  simply  not
    credible.  Indeed, it contradicts his evidence that he  spoke  to  them
    regularly but not every day.  In relation  to  his  statement  that  he
    chose which church they should attend, again  there  is  no  supporting
    evidence.

42. The sponsor also said that, when their grandmother died, it was he  who
    chose that they should live with their maternal uncle in Lagos  on  the
    advice of the appellants.  The reason for that was he  did  not  really
    know and had never met their uncle.   Again,  there  is  no  supporting
    evidence from the appellants' uncle as to  the  sponsor's  relationship
    with the appellants either before 2012 or thereafter  since  they  have
    been living with him.  Given the sponsor's claim that he is in  contact
    with their uncle, there is no doubt that such evidence could be readily
    obtained and it would be reasonable to expect it.  There is no evidence
    from the appellants themselves who are now 20 years of  age.  Likewise,
    it would be reasonable to expect this.  Its absence is telling.   Apart
    from financial support, the entirety of the appellants' case rests upon
    the evidence of the sponsor.

43. I had no doubt that the sponsor had and has  a  relationship  with  his
    children and is in contact with them and provides them  with  financial
    support.  He has, however, on the evidence not established on a balance
    of probabilities that he has sole responsibility for  them.   At  best,
    responsibility for the appellants has  been  shared  first  with  their
    mother, then with their grandmother and latterly with their  uncle.   I
    do not accept that it is established that the  sponsor  makes  all  the
    important decisions in their lives.

44. For that reason, I am  not  satisfied  that  the  appellants  meet  the
    requirements in para 297(i)(e) of the Rules.

45. In his oral submissions, Mr Adebayo did not  specifically  address  the
    requirement in para 297(i)(f), namely whether there  were  serious  and
    compelling  circumstances  which  made  exclusion  of  the   appellants
    undesirable.  For the reasons I give below, in considering whether  the
    appellants can succeed outside the Rules under Art 8 on the basis  that
    there are "compelling circumstances", I conclude that  the  requirement
    in para 297(i)(f) is not met on the evidence before me.

46. I turn now then to consider Art 8.  In doing so, I  apply  the  5-stage
    test in R (Razgar) v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27 at [17].

47. First, although the contact between the appellants and sponsor  is,  on
    the evidence, limited to telephone calls and two  visits  in  2013  and
    2014 of around two weeks' duration  each,  I  bear  in  mind  that  the
    sponsor provides financially for his children.  I  apply  the  approach
    set out in the well-known case law summarised in Rai v ECO [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 320 at [17]-[20].  It is a fact-sensitive assessment having  regard
    to all the circumstances.  In those  circumstances,  I  am  content  to
    accept that there is family life with them despite the fact  that  they
    are now, albeit just,  adults.   Of  course,  the  maintenance  of  the
    decisions to refuse entry clearance  will  not  affect  that  position.
    However, Art 8 also protects further development of family life  which,
    I accept, would be likely if the appellants came to the UK.  For  these
    reasons, therefore, I accept that Art 8.1 is engaged.

48. Secondly, as regards Art 8.2, the respondent's decisions are clearly in
    accordance with the law, namely the Immigration Rules and the decisions
    are in pursuance of a  legitimate  aim,  namely  effective  immigration
    control.

49. Thirdly, the crucial issue is  that  of  proportionality.   That  issue
    requires a fair balance to be struck between the  public  interest  and
    the rights and interests of the appellants and sponsor protected by Art
    8.1 (see Razgar at [20]).  In R (MM) (Lebanon) and Others v SSHD [2017]
    UKSC 10 at [43], the Supreme Court reminded us that the "central issue"
    is:

         "Whether a fair  balance  has  been  struck  between  the  personal
         interests of all members of the family in maintaining their  family
         life ... and the public interest in controlling immigration."

50. In carrying out that balancing  exercise  and  reaching  a  finding  on
    proportionality, the Tribunal must "have regard" to  the  consideration
    set out in s.117B of the NIA Act 2002.

51. There is a public interest in effective immigration control given  that
    the appellants cannot meet the requirements of the Rules (see s.117B(1)
    of the NIA Act 2002).  The public interest is entitled to "considerable
    weight" (see MM at [75]; and also Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016]  UKSC  6  at
    [46] and Agyarko at [46]-[48]).  In respect of s.117B, no evidence  was
    led before me as to whether the  appellants  speak  English.   However,
    even if they do, at best that is a neutral  factor  applying  s.117B(2)
    (see Rhuppiah v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 803 at [59]-[61]).  As regards the
    appellants' "financial independence", there was no evidence  that  they
    would be financially independent in the UK but rather that they  would,
    as they are in Nigeria, be  financially  dependent  upon  the  sponsor.
    Their stated aspiration of being students is entirely  consistent  with
    that view.  Because of that third party support,  the  public  interest
    set out in s.117B(3) applies (see Rhuppiah  at  [63]).   The  remaining
    provisions in s.117B(4), (5)  and  (6)  do  not  apply  in  this  entry
    clearance case.

52. The search is for "sufficiently compelling" circumstances  to  outweigh
    the public interest because the refusal of entry clearance would result
    in "unjustifiably harsh consequences" (see Agyarko at [48]).

53. Both appellants are now adults.  They have lived their entire lives  in
    Nigeria and have only seen their father, the sponsor for four weeks  in
    their whole lives.  The evidence is that he provides financial  support
    and this provides for the necessities of life and that accommodation is
    available from their uncle.  No doubt,  financial  support  could  also
    fund accommodation in Nigeria.  There was  no  evidence  before  me  to
    suggest otherwise.  In short, there  is  nothing  in  the  evidence  to
    suggest that the appellants have not been able  to  live  successfully,
    including being educated, in Nigeria since 2003 without  a  parent  but
    with support from other family in Nigeria and the  sponsor's  financial
    support  from  the  UK.   Although  they  have   continuing   financial
    dependence upon the sponsor, there is no reason to conclude that  their
    lives could not continue as before without  any  demonstrated  harm  or
    detriment to them as (now) young adults.  Continuing contact with their
    father can be maintained, as it has been effectively for over a decade,
    by regular telephone contact and visit (perhaps more regularly than  in
    the past) by the sponsor to Nigeria.

54. Applying the  approach  set  out  in  Agyarko,  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance to  the  appellants  does  not  produce  unjustifiably  harsh
    consequences  such  that  there  are  compelling  circumstances   which
    outweigh  the  public  interest.   Thus,  I  am  satisfied   that   the
    respondent's decisions do not breach Art 8 of the ECHR.





Decision

55. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellants' appeals under Art 8 involved the making of an error  of
    law.  That decision is set aside.

56. I remake the decision dismissing the appellants' appeals under Art 8.

57. No anonymity direction was requested.


                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  18, July 2017


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeals are dismissed, no fee award is made.


                                 Signed



                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  18 July 2017

