
[pic]
IAC-AH-LEM-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08762/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 September 2015                 |On 5 October 2015                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                               MR IMTIAZ AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
    who was  the  respondent  in  the  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  For the sake of convenience I shall refer to  the  appellant
    in this matter as "the Secretary of State" and to Mr  Imtiaz  Ahmed  as
    "the Claimant."

2.   The Secretary of State appeals a decision made by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge (Judge Bart-Stewart) ("FtT") who allowed  the  appeal  against  a
    decision to cancel entry clearance as a family visitor from Pakistan on
    the grounds that the Claimant's passport contained a fraudulent  stamp.
    The decision was promulgated on 1 May 2015.

Grounds

3.    The  grounds  of  appeal  contend  that  the  FtT  made   a   material
    misdirection of law in failing to fully consider paragraph 41(ii) which
    was the Statement of Changes to the  Immigration  Rules  HC1039  coming
    into effect on 6 April 2013 which included the provision ..  "does  not
    intend to live for extended  periods  in  the  United  Kingdom  through
    frequent or successive visits."

4.   It was further contended that the FtT erred by failing to  resolve  how
    an incorrect stamp  was  placed  in  the  Claimant's  passport  and  in
    considering the issue of deception the FtT applied  the wrong  standard
    of proof.

Permission to Appeal

5.   Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Nicholson on 30 June 2015.

6.   The grant referred to  R re B (children) [2008] UKHL 35  and  R  (N)  v
    Mental Health Review Tribunal Northern Region [2005] EWCA CiV  1605  as
    to the burden and standard of proof for deception which clarified  that
    the Tribunal  required  the  production  of   cogent  evidence  of   an
    allegation and the standard of proof is a balance of probabilities.

7.   First-tier Tribunal Judge Nicholson found it arguable that the FtT  had
    applied a wrong standard to the allegation that a fraudulent stamp  was
    contained in  the  Claimant's  passport  but  qualified  the  grant  of
    permission stating "although, for other  reasons,  it  is  questionable
    whether  this  will  materially  affect  the  outcome  of  the  appeal,
    permission is nonetheless  granted  on  ground  5.   I  do  not  refuse
    permission on the remaining grounds."

FtT decision and reasons

8.   In a decision and reasons the First-tier Tribunal allowed  the  appeal.
    The Claimant's sponsor attended the hearing to give evidence.

9.   The Claimant's passport contained a visa endorsed C family visit  which
    gave him leave to enter from 21 June 2012.  It  was  accepted  and  the
    Claimant admitted during interview, that he travelled to  the  UK  from
    Pakistan for the period 27 March 2013 to 15  September  2013.   It  was
    accepted that he had a history of frequent  visits  to  the  UK,  never
    breached Immigration Rules and had a large family in  the  UK  that  he
    visits. The Claimant was stopped when re entering the UK because of the
    exit stamp dated 7 May 2013 in his passport.  He  claimed  to  have  no
    knowledge of the alleged false stamp in his passport or how it came  to
    be in his passport.  The FtT considered the evidence which  included  a
    photocopy of the stamp in the  passport,  a  copy  of  the  handwritten
    Immigration Officer's notes recording that the Claimant stated that his
    last visit was for three months and he returned again on 14 April for a
    wedding.  The wedding invitation showed  a  date  for  6  August  2014.
    There was documentation from the  Airline  showing  that  the  Claimant
    travelled to Pakistan by air on 15 September 2013.

10.  The FtT took into account evidence that the  Claimant  was  a  frequent
    visitor to the UK to see many family members and  would  always  return
    within six months.  He generally stayed for five months.  He was not  a
    well man and wanted  to  spend  as  much  time  as  possible  with  his
    children.  [5, 6, 7]

11.  In its decision the FtT [9] had in mind that the effect of  refusal  of
    leave to enter was also to cancel continuing leave and entry clearance.
     However, there was no reference in the notice of refusal to particular
    provisions of the Immigration Rules.  The FtT found that  the  Claimant
    did not dispute that the passport contained the endorsement dated 7 May
    2013 as the date he returned to  Pakistan.   The  FtT  found  that  the
    Immigration Officer agreed that the Claimant returned to Pakistan on 15
    September 2013 which was confirmed by the airline.  The FtT found  that
    as the period of the visit  was within six  months,  the  Claimant  was
    lawfully entering and visiting as per his visa and that it could be "no
    more than a suspicion" that the stamp was fraudulently  obtained.   The
    FtT concluded "The burden of proof on an allegation  of  dishonesty  or
    forgery is on the respondent and the standard high.  I find that burden
    is not discharged."

Error of Law Hearing

12.  At the hearing before me Ms  Isherwood  represented  the  Secretary  of
    State.  There was no appearance by or on behalf of the Claimant in this
    matter.  I heard submissions  from  Ms  Isherwood  who  relied  on  the
    grounds of appeal and argued that  paragraph  321  of  the  Immigration
    Rules ought to have applied as it was clear there had been a fraudulent
    stamp placed in the Claimant's passport whether or  not  he  was  aware
    that it had been dishonestly or fraudulently obtained.  And,  that  the
    FtT ought to have considered paragraph 41(ii) of the Immigration Rules.

13.  Ms Isherwood confirmed that there had been no evidence produced by  the
    Secretary of State to show that the date stamp was false.  There was no
    examination or documentary verification report produced.  It  had  been
    accepted that the Claimant entered and remained in the UK for  a  visit
    and returned to Pakistan on 15 September 2013.

14.  Ms Isherwood further confirmed that  the  immigration  decision  was  a
    refusal of leave to enter and curtailment of leave. There had  been  no
    reference to either paragraph 41(ii) or paragraph 320 and/or 321 in the
    notice or reasons for refusal.  Accordingly Ms Isherwood conceded  that
    she could not properly raise any concerns as to the Tribunal's  failure
    to deal with these issues when they had not in fact been raised in  the
    refusal decision.



Findings and Conclusion

15.  I am satisfied that the decision made by the FtT discloses no  material
    error of law.  The Tribunal made brief  reference  to  the  burden  and
    standard of proof as regards deception in its decision and reasons. The
    reference made to a high standard certainly indicates that the Tribunal
    applied a standard of proof higher than the balance  of  probabilities,
    which would be an error in law.  However, I find that any error is  not
    material to the outcome of the determination.  The Tribunal  considered
    the evidence before it and found that it amounted to "a suspicion" that
    the passport may have been falsified.  This  finding  cannot  meet  the
    required standard of balance of probabilities.  The Tribunal also  took
    into account the additional material and considered the evidence in the
    round, and made proper findings and conclusions having  regard  to  the
    evidence before it.

16.  Furthermore in view of the fact that the immigration decision  made  no
    reference to the Immigration Rules under paragraph 41 and/or  paragraph
    320, there can be arguable material error  of  law  in  the  Tribunal's
    failure to consider the same.

Notice of Decision

I dismiss the appeal.

The grounds disclose no material errors of law in  the  determination  which
shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Date 2.10.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee  award.



Signed   Date 2.10.2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black

