
[pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V3

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08072/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 January 2016                           |On 25 April 2016              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BANGKOK

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [O C]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms M Rhind, IR Immigration Law LLP


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   It will be convenient to refer to [OC] as the  appellant,  as  she  was
    before the First-tier Judge,  and  to  refer  to  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer as the respondent, accordingly.

2.    The  appellant  appealed  to  the   First-tier   Judge   against   the
    respondent's decision of 10 June 2014 refusing to grant her  indefinite
    leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a parent  settled  in
    the United Kingdom.  The Entry Clearance Officer was not satisfied that
    the sponsor, the appellant's mother, had sole  responsibility  for  her
    upbringing or that there were serious or compelling reasons making  her
    exclusion undesirable.

3.   The appellant was born on [ ] 2002.  Her parents were divorced in  June
    2006 and custodial rights in respect  of  the  appellant  were  granted
    solely to her mother and the father was required to pay 3,000 Baht  per
    month by way of maintenance.  This  payment  was  to  be  made  to  the
    appellant's mother, hereafter referred to as the sponsor. Subsequent to
    the divorce the appellant and the  sponsor  lived  with  the  sponsor's
    parents, Mr and Mrs [S].  The sponsor met her new husband, Mr  [K],  in
    2006.  In 2009 she moved to the United Kingdom and  married  him  here.
    The appellant remained in  Thailand  with  the  sponsor's  parents.  In
    December 2013 the sponsor was granted indefinite leave to remain in the
    United Kingdom.  The evidence was  that  since  moving  to  the  United
    Kingdom the appellant has visited the sponsor here on one occasion  and
    the sponsor has visited Thailand at least once a year, usually with  Mr
    [K], and stays with the appellant and with the grandparents.

4.   The judge set out at paragraphs 12 and  14  of  the  determination  the
    evidence derived from interviews by the Entry  Clearance  Officer  with
    first Mr [C], the appellant's father, and second Mrs [S], her  maternal
    grandmother.  When asked who chose which school the appellant  attends,
    both said that Mrs [S] does, she also consents to the applicant joining
    school excursions.  They both agreed that  the  appellant  has  contact
    with her father.  Her father said that she saw him two to three times a
    year and the grandmother said that it was twice a  year.  He  said  the
    last time they met was in Bangkok when she came to apply for a visa and
    the grandmother said the same.  He said that the appellant contacts him
    once a week and the grandmother said it was every two to three days. He
    also said  that  they  speak  on  the  phone  and  via  Facebook.   The
    grandmother also when asked whether she consulted  her  daughter  about
    the appellant joining a school excursion said no  the  mother  consents
    me. They both agreed that the father contributes financially.  He  said
    that it was 3,000 Baht every month by  transfer  to  the  grandmother's
    account and she said that it was 1,500 Baht every month to her account.



5.   Mr [C] subsequently, in a statement dated 11 September 2014, sought  to
    clarify some of the responses upon which the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    relied in coming to his  conclusion.   For  example  he  said  that  he
    assumed that the grandmother made the decisions because  the  appellant
    lived with her but that he himself did not look after  or  support  the
    child himself, so he had no involvement in how she  was  raised  or  in
    making decisions about her. As regards his financial  contribution,  he
    said that in the early days after he and his wife separated he did help
    support their daughter financially but in the last few years he had not
    been able to send money to her.  With regard to frequency of visits, he
    said that in the past three years he had not been to visit the child at
    her grandparents' home.

6.   There was also a purported clarification by the grandmother of some  of
    the responses on which the Entry Clearance Officer  relied.   She  said
    that she had been confused at the telephone interview. She said that it
    was the sponsor who had wanted the appellant to attend  the  particular
    school and she carried out those  wishes  and  ensured  the  child  did
    attend.

7.   With regard to contact between mother and child, she  said  that  there
    was phone contact between them every Sunday but that on other days they
    corresponded by electronic means that  she  did  not  understand.   She
    believed that her response to the question how often the child saw  her
    father was incorrectly recorded and that he had not visited  the  child
    for two years although prior to that he had visited  regularly  as  had
    been recorded.  Again with regard to how often they met  and  spoke  on
    the phone and how often they were in contact, she  said  she  had  been
    referring to the pattern of contact for about two years  ago  and  said
    that since then the appellant's father had been less attentive  but  he
    did contact her at least once  a  month.   As  regards  his   financial
    contributions, she said that he had not paid  anything  for  two  years
    although he used to pay money and said that she should  not  have  said
    that he gave her money every month.

8.   At paragraph 22 the judge said that insofar as  responses  recorded  by
    the Entry Clearance Officer and the  telephone  interview  appeared  to
    contradict that assessment of her grandparents  and  her  grandparent's
    life,  he  was  content  that   that   was   in   part   explained   by
    misunderstanding  or  confusion  on  the  grandmother's  part  in  that
    interview. He considered that in any event it  was  quite  possible  to
    read  her  responses  as  indicating  that  she  did  have   day-to-day
    responsibility for the child but that that did  not  exclude  the  true
    situation  which  he  found  to  be  the  case  that  the  mother   has
    responsibility in terms of paragraph 297(i)(e).

9.   The judge attached weight to a statement of the  sponsor  dated  August
    2014 disagreeing with  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer's  decision.   He
    referred to the fact that she had always  planned  that  the  appellant
    would eventually move to the United Kingdom to  be  with  her  and  her
    husband but she always wanted her to know how to  speak  and  write  in
    Thai so she was able to learn these things  while  in  Thailand  before
    joining her mother.  She said that it was she, the sponsor, who decided
    which school the child would go to and that she was  still  paying  for
    her school fees.  She referred to the fact that she  had  also  decided
    that the appellant should take English language lessons so she had been
    paying for her to take English classes outside school.  She  said  that
    her parents look after her daughter well but now that she, the  mother,
    is the one responsible for her and they would not be able to look after
    her so well if she did not provide them  with  the  money  to  pay  for
    everything that the appellant needs. She said that the  appellant  does
    talk to her biological father using Facebook and he  sees  her  once  a
    year when he stays with her at her parents' home for about two  nights.
    He is not paying the 3,000 Baht every month,  he  gave  money  but  not
    regularly as he did not have the money to give her and he had not given
    any money for her  this  year  at  all.   The  judge  noted  that  that
    statement was made before the  sponsor  was  aware  of  what  had  been
    recorded in the  sponsor's  ex-husband's  and  her  mother's  telephone
    interviews and that this was important because it was  not  written  to
    contradict evidence of which she  was  aware  but  was  intended  as  a
    narrative of what she understood the position at the time  to  be.   As
    regards the father's evidence, the judge said that he had not abandoned
    or abdicated his responsibility in respect of his daughter, although he
    was paying at least at one time his maintenance requirements and at one
    time visited her  regularly  and  contacted  her  by  phone  and  other
    electronic means.  The judge said that everyone who gave an account  in
    person by way of a statement including the father himself  agreed  that
    over the years his commitment in terms of both  contact  and  financial
    contributions had diminished.  The  judge  said  that  insofar  as  the
    impression from the interview was at odds  with  the  evidence  of  the
    sponsor and her husband, Mr  [K]  and  the  subsequent  "clarification"
    statements from the grandmother and the father, he preferred the  later
    evidence and in that regard he paid particular regard to the  sponsor's
    statement.

10.  The judge went on to conclude that the mother had  sole  responsibility
    for  the  appellant's  upbringing  and  in  the  alternative  that  the
    appellant would satisfy the requirements of  paragraph  297(i)(f).   He
    took into account the decision in Mundeba [2013] UKUT 00088 (IAC), that
    the appellant's best interests were served by living with a parent  and
    that could  only be her mother as her father was  unable  to  care  for
    her.  He went on to  say  that  clearly  continuity  of  residence  was
    important, but it would be difficult to see how that could outweigh the
    child's best interests in  living  with  a  parent,  particularly  when
    everybody who had been involved  in  her  upbringing  and  she  herself
    believed that was best for her and were prepared to arrange  and  agree
    to it.  That was the case even if there  were  no  concerns  about  her
    welfare in Thailand.  It was not that she was losing contact  with  her
    culture or family roots. Her mother had  ensured  that  she  stayed  in
    Thailand long enough to establish her cultural identity and  she  would
    no doubt visit her grandparents and could  maintain contact with her by
    electronic means.  Hence the appeal was allowed.

11.  The Secretary of State challenged the judge's  decision  on  the  basis
    that the interview of the father and the grandmother  essentially  gave
    the same replies with regard to the father's financial support  of  the
    appellant and the frequency of his visits to her.  It was  argued  that
    the subsequent "clarification" statement of the sponsor  to  which  the
    judge referred was merely a  self-serving  document,  and  the  judge's
    decision that he  preferred  the  evidence  in  that  statement  lacked
    adequate  reasons  and  failed  to   explain   how   there   could   be
    misunderstanding in the grandmother's interview when the  answers  were
    consistent with those of the appellant's father. Permission was granted
    on all grounds.

12.  In his submissions Mr Jarvis relied on the grounds and argued that  the
    judge had a duty to resolve material matters  in  dispute  between  the
    parties and make specific findings about the matters in  dispute.   The
    answers  in  the  interview  with  the  father  and   the   grandmother
    corroborated each other and showed that they both played  a  materially
    significant role in the child's life.  This was in  contrast  with  the
    later statements which the judge addressed.  He believed the  sponsor's
    evidence that things had changed. The core issue however  was  the  two
    matters which materially corroborated each other and it was not  enough
    to say the judge preferred  the  sponsor's  evidence.   It  was  not  a
    rationality challenge, but the disputes had to be resolved lawfully and
    it was unclear why the corroboration  did  not  materially  affect  the
    sponsor's evidence.

13.  As regards allowing the appeal under subparagraph (f), inexorably  that
    finding was unlawful as the judge would have to deal with the fact that
    it followed from a failure to show  sole  responsibility  which  was  a
    different factual scenario in that the appellant would have been  shown
    to have been cared for by the family in contrast to the  findings  that
    were made.  This had not been  addressed  in  paragraph  32.   In  that
    alternative scenario, the father's interests would  have  to  be  taken
    into account and they were just as significant as the refusal of  entry
    clearance to the child. The paragraph  missed  the  point  and  it  was
    therefore unlawful in respect of that  matter  also  in  light  of  the
    errors referred to earlier by Mr Jarvis.

14.   In  her  submissions  Ms  Rhind  referred  to  paragraph  24  of   the
    determination.  The judge had said  that  he  preferred  the  sponsor's
    evidence where it was at odds with  earlier  evidence.  He  gave  clear
    reasons as to why that was the case. The  sponsor's  evidence  predated
    the receipt of the Entry Clearance Officer's  interview  transcript  so
    she did not  know  what  was  in  it.   The  last  three  sentences  of
    paragraphs 24 were of particular relevance.   The  judge  had  accepted
    there were misunderstandings, at least on the part of  the  grandmother
    in response to the ECO's questions. The contended consistency  was  not
    there as could be seen from the fact that the  father  and  grandmother
    gave different figures as to the amount being contributed  financially.
    That was important because the Entry  Clearance  Officer  claimed  that
    their evidence was entirely consistent.   At  paragraph  22  the  judge
    referred to a misunderstanding or confusion in part and  reference  was
    made to the clarifying statement by the grandmother.  Also she had said
    there were errors by the Entry Clearance Officer  or  the  interpreter.
    It was open to the judge to find that the grandparents' explanation was
    consistent.  Also  the  judge  had  put  the  sponsor's  statement  and
    clarifying statements in the context of  all  the  evidence.   He  made
    clear at paragraph 4 of the determination what evidence was before him.
     There were no challenges to any of the other  evidence  including  the
    evidence of  other  family  members,  which  also  preceded  the  ECO's
    transcripts. The judge had given reasons for preferring  the  sponsor's
    evidence and it was clear that he had had the benefit of other evidence
    and found the explanations plausible and the sponsor to be credible.

15.  The judge had seen and heard evidence about the father's  inability  to
    care for the appellant and there was also evidence as regards the  day-
    to-day care and the sponsor's evidence and the findings in  respect  of
    sole responsibility.  The grant of permission  seemed  to  add  to  the
    ECO's  grounds  in  referring  to  a  misdirection  in  regard  to  the
    appropriate test.  It was not a test of exceptionality but  a  question
    of  who  had  continuing  control  over  the  child's  upbringing,  and
    reference was made to paragraph 19 in Buydov [2012] EWCA  Civ  1739  in
    respect of this.  This was a case referred to by the judge who  granted
    permission.  It was a question of continuing control by the parent.

16.  If the Tribunal disagreed it was open to the judge in  the  alternative
    to find as he did at paragraph 32  with  regard  to  subparagraph  (f).
    There was no need in that paragraph to find that the sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility.  The guidelines in Mundeba had been properly  followed.
    The father was unable to care  for  the  child  due  to  his  financial
    circumstances.  Her best interests had been considered, and it had been
    intended all along that she should live with her  mother  and  everyone
    including her father agreed.  The grandparents were ageing and had less
    ability to care and her cultural roots had  developed.   There  was  no
    error of law in the decision.

17.  By way of reply, Mr Jarvis said that there  was  no  disagreement  with
    the legal tests set out but there was with the approach to the evidence
    and he argued that the evidential findings  were  not  safe.   If  sole
    responsibility were not made out then the consequences of that  had  to
    be factored in, for example whether the father would be unable to  care
    for the appellant, and that had not been done.  If there were a  proper
    alternative finding the grandparents would  have  been  found  to  have
    shared care with the mother and that was a different relationship  from
    the usual grandparent/ child relationship.  It highlighted what had not
    been done.

18.  The Entry Clearance Officer had not said the  evidence  of  the  father
    and grandmother in interview was identical, but both had described  the
    same arrangements of monthly payments and the payments were transferred
    and the level of contact and the role of the grandparents,  so  it  was
    clearly corroborated and there  was  no  real  direction  towards  that
    important feature of the evidence by the judge.

19.  It was  arguably  irrational  to  decide  as  the  judge  had  done  at
    paragraph 24 on the basis of the latest statement by the sponsor as  it
    had always been the purpose of the application for her  to  claim  sole
    responsibility and it would be surprising if she did not  say  she  had
    such responsibility and it was difficult to understand  why  the  judge
    should give such weight to it.  It should be contrasted with  what  was
    said in the  interviews  and  the  ultimate  findings  at  the  end  of
    paragraph 24 with regard  to  visits  and  money  in  contrast  to  the
    interviews.

20.  I reserved my determination.

21.  The judge set out correctly the relevant legal tests in this case  both
    as they are stated in the relevant  Immigration  Rules  and  also  with
    regard to the guidance in particular from TD [2006] UKIAT 00049.   With
    regard to the "sole responsibility" test, paragraph  52  of  TD  is  of
    particular relevance.  There among other things it is  emphasised  that
    the question of who has responsibility for  a  child's  upbringing  and
    whether that is sole is a factual matter  to  be  decided  on  all  the
    evidence and  the  term  "responsibility"  is  a  practical  one  which
    requires in each case looking  at  the  question  of  who  in  fact  is
    exercising responsibility for the  child.   It  may  be  undertaken  by
    individuals other than a child's parents  and  may  be  shared  between
    different individuals but even if there is only one parent involved  in
    the child's upbringing that parent may not  have  sole  responsibility.
    Day-to-day responsibility or decision making for  the  child's  welfare
    may necessarily be shared with others  such  as  relatives  or  friends
    because of the geographical separation between the parent and child but
    that does not prevent parents having  sole  responsibility  within  the
    meaning of the Rules.  The test is not whether anyone else has  day-to-
    day responsibility but whether the parent has  continuing  control  and
    direction of the child's upbringing including making all the  important
    decisions in the child's life and if not responsibility is  shared  and
    therefore not  sole.

22.  An important question in this case is whether the  judge  was  entitled
    to prefer the subsequent explanations given in respect of the  evidence
    of the father and the grandmother, and  in  particular  to  attach  the
    weight that he did to the "clarification"  statement  of  the  sponsor.
    There were similar explanations from the  father  and  the  grandmother
    also.  The judge said at paragraph 22 that with regard to what was said
    by the grandmother at interview, it was  quite  possible  to  read  her
    responses as indicating that she had day-to-day responsibility for  the
    appellant but that did not exclude the sponsor having responsibility in
    terms of  the  Rule.   However  it  is  clear  from  the  grandmother's
    interviews that she said she chose the school the  applicant  attended.
    She attended the parent/teacher meetings, signed the applicant's school
    report every  term  and  consented  to  the  applicant  joining  school
    excursions.  That goes a long way towards indicating that she has  more
    than day-to-day responsibility.  That  was  supported  in  the  answers
    given by the father at interview.  In light of the responses  given  by
    the father and the grandmother on that matter and also  the  extent  of
    contact that the father had with the child and the regular payments and
    the way in which they were made, albeit there is the discrepancy in the
    amount, I consider that that evidence was such  as  to  show  that  the
    sponsor had not established  sole  responsibility.   I  should  say  in
    passing that I agree with Mr Jarvis that the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    did not say that the two interviews contained identical responses.  But
    they are essentially similar if not identical on most key points.

23.  The question then is whether the judge was entitled  in  light  of  the
    resiling from those interview answers by the father and the grandmother
    together with the statement from the sponsor, to conclude that in  fact
    she does have sole responsibility.

24.  In my  view  the  judge's  reasoning  in  this  regard  is  inadequate.
    Bearing in mind the coincidence between the two interviews,  I  do  not
    consider that the judge was entitled to  include  that  this  could  be
    explained  in  part  by  misunderstandings   or   confusions   on   the
    grandmother's part.  That does not, as the grounds point  out,  explain
    the very similar answers given  by  the  father.   There  is  no  clear
    addressing of the reasons for preferring  the   subsequent  explanation
    for his answers by the father in contrast to what he said at interview.
     Although no  doubt  it  was  appropriate  to  take  into  account  the
    clarification statement from the sponsor, that in  my  view  was  given
    excessive weight such as to make the reasoning unlawful.  It  may  well
    be that she was unaware of what had been recorded  in  the  interviews,
    but she was clearly aware of the fact that  the  application  had  been
    refused, and, as Mr Jarvis argued, it is  hardly  surprising  that  she
    would give the evidence that she did in that statement given  that  the
    basis of the claim all along was that she had sole responsibility.

25.  In sum, I do  not  consider  that  the  judge  properly  addressed  and
    properly reasoned  his  conclusions  on  the  differences  between  the
    position as set out in the  interviews  and  the  statements  from  the
    father and the grandmother resiling from that and the statement of  the
    sponsor.  The determination in this regard is inadequately reasoned and
    therefore unlawful.

26.  As regards the findings in respect  of  paragraph  297(i)(f),  again  I
    agree with Mr Jarvis that it was not possible simply to deal  with  the
    matter in the abstract as in effect the judge did there.  Such findings
    had to be made on the basis that the appeal  had  not  succeeded  under
    subparagraph (e), and as a consequence that there  would  have  been  a
    finding that the sponsor does not have sole  responsibility  which  has
    clear implications for the role that therefore would have had  to  have
    been found to have been played by the father and  the  grandparents  in
    the appellant's life rather than simply emphasising as  that  paragraph
    does the best interests of the child.  Accordingly I  do  not  consider
    that the determination is saved by paragraph 32.

Notice of Decision

27.  In conclusion, I consider that the extent to which the decision has  to
    be revisited is such that it is most  properly to be dealt  with  by  a
    full rehearing before the First-tier Tribunal and that is to take place
    at Taylor House before a judge other than Judge Rayner. There will be a
    time estimate of two hours.  A Thai interpreter is to be booked.

   No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

