
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08767/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st September 2016                |On 5th September 2016                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             Andra Zoltan Banati
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Avery, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance by or on behalf of the respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant in this appeal is the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department and to avoid confusion I shall refer to her as  being,  "the
    claimant".

2.    The  respondent  is  a  35  year  old  Hungarian  national  who   made
    application to the claimant for admission to the United Kingdom.

3    On 15th May, 2015, the claimant refused  the  respondent's  application
    which led to the respondent purporting to  appeal  the  decision.   The
    immigration decision was made under Regulation 19  of  the  Immigration
    (European Economic  Area)  Regulations  2006  (the  Regulations).   The
    claimant said this in refusing the application:

         "You have sought admission to the United Kingdom under  EC  law  in
         accordance with Regulation 11 of the Immigration (European Economic
         Area) Regulations 2006 on the  ground  that  you  are  a  Hungarian
         national.  However I am satisfied that your exclusion is  justified
         on serious grounds of public policy.

         More specifically, on 23rd February, 2010  you  were  convicted  of
         fraud offences in Hungary and sentenced  there  to  ten  months  in
         prison; on 7th March, 2012 you were convicted of fraud offences and
         sentenced in Hungary to one year and four months in prison; on 24th
         September, 2012 you were  again  convicted  of  fraud  offences  in
         Hungary  where  you  were  sentenced  to  two  years'  imprisonment
         suspended for five years.

         Furthermore, in December, 2014 you were  arrested  in  the  UK  for
         shoplifting  and  fraud  offences.   Not  only  therefore  is  your
         exclusion from the United Kingdom justified due to having  received
         prison sentences of over two years, but also on the basis  of  your
         propensity to reoffend.

         I therefore refuse your admission to enter the  United  Kingdom  in
         accordance with Regulation 19."

4.   The respondent's representative gave Notice of Appeal  and  the  appeal
    came for hearing on the papers in Belfast  before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge S Gillespie in February, 2016.

5.   The judge purported to find that the decision of the claimant  was  not
    in accordance with the law and allowed the appeal, to the extent  that,
    "the Secretary of State should if she  deems  it  appropriate  make  an
    immigration decision which carries an in country right of appeal".  The
    judge  reached  that  conclusion  having  already  concluded  that  the
    Secretary of State was entitled to issue an immigration decision to the
    effect that the respondent's exclusion  from  the  United  Kingdom  was
    justified.

6.   Before  me  today  I  have  no  appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent.  Instead I have received a copy of a facsimile bearing  the
    appeal number, addressed "Honourable Court!" and saying:

         "Today's hearing can not go because I did not get a paper  which  I
         can enter the country.  My lawyer will be  there!  I  am  confident
         that the laws  are  complied  with  and  that  the  illegal  status
         terminated!

         [Signed]

         Andras Zoltan Banati".

7.   I was  satisfied  that  the  respondent  had  received  Notice  of  the
    Hearing.   No  representatives  have  made  themselves  aware  to   the
    Tribunal.  The matter was listed for hearing at  10.00  am.   At  13.45
    there was  still  no  appearance  on  the  respondent's  behalf  and  I
    concluded that in the circumstances I would proceed to hear the appeal.

8.   For the claimant, Mr Avery suggested that the proper challenge  to  the
    Secretary of State's decision would have been by way of judicial review
    rather than an  appeal  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal,  which  had  no
    jurisdiction  to  hear   the   appeal.    However,   the   respondent's
    representatives did not proceed with a  judicial  review,  but  instead
    purported to appeal the decision.

9    The  judge  found  that  the  decision  of  the  claimant  was  not  in
    accordance with the law because, he said, the respondent  was  entitled
    to an in  country  right  of  appeal  under  Regulation  27(2)  of  the
    Regulations.  At the time of the hearing, the  respondent  was  out  of
    country.  He made an out of country  appeal,  but  the  judge  did  not
    consider that.  Instead he purported to find that the decision  of  the
    claimant was wrong because she had denied the respondent an in  country
    right of appeal.

10.   Regulation  27(1)  of  the  Regulations  provides  that   subject   to
    paragraphs (2) and (3), a person may not appeal, under  Regulation  26,
    whilst he is in the United Kingdom  against  an  EEA  decision  (a)  to
    refuse to admit him to the United Kingdom, which is the  case  in  this
    appeal, and subparagraph (2) says that paragraphs (1)(a) to (aa) do not
    apply where the person is in the United Kingdom,  but  of  course  this
    respondent was not in the United Kingdom. He was out of country and  he
    only had an out of country right of appeal.

11.  The respondent has an out of country  right  of  appeal  which  he  has
    sought to exercise.  I set aside the judge's  determination.   I  remit
    this  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   It   remains   for   the
    respondent's out of country appeal to be determined by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  It should be determined  by  a  judge  other  than  Judge  S
    Gillespie.



Notice of Decision

The determination is set aside. The appeal  (which  is  an  out  of  country
appeal) is remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal  for  hearing  afresh  by  a
judge other than First Tier Tribunal Judge S. Gillespie.


Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

