
IAC-AH-CJ-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08673/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 August 2014                     |On 23 March 2015                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                              Bilal Abdul Nasir
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     Entry Clearance Officer - islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Hashmi, instructed by Kingswell Watts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Bilal Abdul Nasir, was born on 22 August 1982 and  is  a
    male  citizen  of  Pakistan.   The  appellant  had  applied  for  entry
    clearance to the United Kingdom as a partner under paragraph EC-P1.1 of
    Appendix FM of HC 395 (as amended).  The Entry Clearance Officer  (ECO)
    Islamabad refused his application on 20 March 2013  and  the  appellant
    appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Mensah)  which,  in  a
    determination promulgated on 21 February 2014,  dismissed  the  appeal.
    The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal concern findings made by the judge in respect  of
    the sponsor's income.  Considering a number  of  P60s  and  wage  slips
    provided by the sponsor, the judge noted a discrepancy between the wage
    slips and  the  form  P60  [9].   The  grounds  of  appeal  suggest  an
    explanation for the discrepancy and state that the material to  explain
    the problem which concerned the judge was before her at the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.  However, for reasons which I will explain below,  it
    was unnecessary for the Upper  Tribunal  to  consider  the  grounds  in
    detail because this application was bound to fail under the Immigration
    Rules in any event.

 3. In the notice of refusal, the ECO had taken  issue  with  the  evidence
    provided of the sponsor's savings and income.  The ECO had written:

         Your sponsor is not  exempt  from  the  financial  requirements  as
         defined  by  paragraph  E-ECP3.3.   You  have  not  provided   bank
         statements showing salary payments as evidence  of  your  sponsor's
         gross income from their employment/you and your  sponsor's  savings
         and other income sources.  These documents  are  specified  in  our
         guidance and must be provided.  You  have  failed  to  provide  the
         specified documents of  your  sponsor's  employment.   I  therefore
         refuse your application under paragraph EC-P1.1(d) of  Appendix  FM
         of the Immigration Rules (E-ECP3.1).

 4. The sponsor and appellant have not provided the documents  referred  to
    in the refusal notice.  In those  circumstances,  the  application  was
    bound to fail.  Whilst I acknowledge,  from  the  submissions  which  I
    heard in court, that the appellant may  have  an  explanation  for  the
    apparent discrepancies which troubled Judge Mensah, the  problem  posed
    by the failure to  satisfy  E-ECP3.1  remain  insurmountable.   Nothing
    would therefore be gained by my setting aside the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination since I would have to remake the decision  by  dismissing
    the appeal.  In the circumstances, I dismiss this appeal.

NOTICE OF DECISION

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed        Date 28 February 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

