
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: OA/08840/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Columbus House, Newport    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 18 December 2015                 |On: 27 January 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MANILA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     V S
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Halligan, Counsel instructed by Dias Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal is subject to an anonymity order by the First-tier Tribunal
    pursuant  to  rule   13   of   the   Tribunal   Procedure   (First-tier
    Tribunal)(Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules  2014.   Neither  party
    invited us to rescind the order and we continue it pursuant to rule  14
    of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698  as
    amended).

 2. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Del Fabbro in which he allowed the appeal  of
    VS, a citizen of the Philippines,  against  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse to grant leave  to  enter  the  United  Kingdom  for
    settlement as the child of the Sponsor NC. We shall refer to VS as  the
    Claimant, although she was the Appellant in the proceedings below.

 3. The application  for  leave  to  enter  was  refused  by  reference  to
    paragraph 297(1) and 320(7A) of the Immigration Rules (HC395) on 1 July
    2014.  The Claimant exercised her right of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  This is the appeal which came before Judge Del Fabbro  on  5
    May  2015  and  was  allowed.   The  Secretary  of  State  applied  for
    permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   The  application  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Simpson on 22  July  2015  in  the
    following terms

          1. The respondent seeks permission to appeal against  a  decision
             of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Del  Fabbro)  who,  in  a
             decision promulgated on  16  June  2015,  allowed  A's  appeal
             against the Manila ECO's decision to  refuse  leave  to  enter
             under paragraph 297(i) as the  dependent  child  of  a  person
             present and settled in United Kingdom.

          2. A  was  refused  entry  clearance  because  a  false  marriage
             certificate had  been  submitted  yet  the  birth  certificate
             asserted that the  parents  were  married.  The  ECO  was  not
             satisfied as to the identity  of  A  and  in  any  event,  the
             submission  of  false  documents  or  the  making   of   false
             representations,  whether  or  not  the   knowledge   of   the
             appellant, undermined the credibility of the  application  and
             the application was therefore refused under paragraph 320(7A).

          3. The respondent avers that the Judge has made a material  error
             of law in that:

               a) the judge failed to make the findings in relation  to  the
                  identity and nationality of the appellant even though this
                  is clearly a fact in issue of a material matter;

               b) the judge failed to apply his mind to  the  domino  effect
                  that results  from  the  sponsor's  reliance  on  a  false
                  marriage certificate as proof of identity or nationality;

               c) the judge failed to properly consider the requirements  of
                  paragraphs 320(7A) and 320(3) of the immigration rules;

               d) the judge erred in failing to observe that the  evidential
                  burden had properly shifted to the appellant to show  that
                  a marriage certificate  was  not  in  fact  required  when
                  issuing a birth certificate or a Philippines passport;

               e) the judge's finding that the appellant can  meet  all  the
                  requirements  of   paragraphs   297(i)   is   flawed   and
                  unsustainable.

          4. It is clear that the absence of a presenting officer  has  had
             serious implications in  this  case  if  only  because  it  is
             arguable that the judge did not consider whether  the  sponsor
             had sole responsibility of the appellant.  Such  consideration
             must flow from the fact that a false marriage certificate  had
             been relied upon. It is arguably not relevant that  there  was
             no  indication  that  the  appellant  was  not  the  sponsor's
             daughter; what had to be shown was that the appellant's mother
             had sole responsibility and that has not been established.

 4. A rule 24 response was filed on behalf of the Claimant  on  15  October
    2015 addressing the grant of permission and opposing the appeal.

 5. At the hearing before us the Secretary of State was represented  by  Mr
    Richards and Mr Halligan appeared for the Claimant. Answering questions
    from us Mr Richards accepted that the Entry Clearance Manager's  review
    did not list the marriage certificate amongst the papers  submitted  in
    support of the application but said that it must have  been  submitted.
    The fact that it is missing from the list does not mean that it was not
    submitted and it was quite clear that the Entry Clearance  Officer  had
    looked at it. It was difficult to say from the bundle how it came to be
    with the papers or how the birth certificate of the Claimant's brother,
    K, came to be there. Mr Richards confirmed that he  emailed  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer and was told that the original  marriage  certificate
    had been submitted and a  copy  had  been  sent  to  him.  Mr  Richards
    produced the copy.  He  accepted  that  this  copy  was  an  altogether
    unsatisfactory document:  it has the appearance of being  scanned  from
    another document using optical  character  recognition  (OCR)  software
    causing a distorted and jumbled result. Mr Richards said that he  could
    not assist any further over the allegation that  a  fake  document  had
    been submitted. He accepted that there was no evidence put  forward  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to support  the  assertion  that  Filipino  law
    required the production of the parents' marriage certificate to  obtain
    a birth certificate and passport. So far as  findings  in  relation  to
    paragraph 297(i)(f) were concerned Mr Richards relied upon the  grounds
    of appeal and said that these findings were not adequately reasoned. We
    did not ask Mr Halligan to address us.

Error of law

 6. In our judgement the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  does  not
    contain a material error of law. The grounds of  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal raise only two substantive issues. The first  relates  to  the
    marriage certificate of the Claimant's parents which  is  said  in  the
    notice of refusal to have  been  provided  with  the  application.  The
    second  relates  to  the  finding  that  the   Sponsor   had   parental
    responsibility for the Claimant.

 7. So far as the first ground is concerned  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer
    asserts that the Claimant's parents' marriage certificate was  provided
    with the application, that this certificate was false  and  that  as  a
    result the Claimant's birth certificate and passport were not  reliable
    evidence of her identity because a false  marriage  document  had  been
    used to obtain them.

 8. Where an allegation of forgery is made the burden of proof  is  on  the
    party making it. This is a common law principle  and  its  consequences
    for a matter such as this are summarised in the headnote to  RP  (proof
    of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086

         "An allegation of forgery needs to be proved by evidence and by the
         person making it.  The procedure under s108 of the 2002 Act remains
         available to respondents.  A bare  allegation  of  forgery,  or  an
         assertion by an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  that  he  believed  the
         document to be forged can in these circumstances carry  no  weight.
         The Tribunal treats a document as forged only on the basis of clear
         evidence before it. KS (Allegations by respondent: proof required?)
         Pakistan [2005] UKAIT 00171should  not  be  read  as  implying  the
         contrary."

 9. Whereas the notice of refusal contains are clear allegation of  forgery
    it is not even clear that the document in question was  submitted  with
    the application. Mr Richards submission that 'it  must  have  been'  is
    perhaps one explanation for how the document came to be with the  Entry
    Clearance Officer's file but there are  other  potential  explanations.
    The document itself, helpfully requested by Mr Richards  and  shown  to
    us, is wholly unsatisfactory. As we note above the document is  a  copy
    that appears  to  have  been  irredeemably  corrupted  by  use  of  OCR
    software. Where it is not clear  that  the  document  in  question  was
    submitted with the application and the document itself is not available
    in remotely readable format it must in our judgment be  impossible  for
    the Entry Clearance Officer to meet the burden of proof of showing that
    a false document had been submitted or false  representations  made  in
    support of the application. The domino effect  of  this  must  be  that
    there is no reason to doubt the reliability  of  the  Claimant's  birth
    certificate and passport. In any event as Mr  Richards  accepted  there
    was  no  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunals  to  support  the
    assertion that a parents marriage certificate and a  birth  certificate
    is required to for the issue of a Filipino passport.

10. In reaching our conclusion that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  did  not
    err if law the decision and reasons shows that the Judge was very  much
    alive to the issues that we have referred to above. At paragraph 17 the
    Judge notes

         "... there is no evidence that a marriage certificate was  actually
         relied upon or used in this application".

    At paragraph 18 the Judge adds

         "... there is no evidence before  me  that  the  birth  certificate
         issued  by  Saudi  authorities  and  recording  the  birth  of  the
         appellant in Jeddah was false. Likewise there is no evidence before
         me that the passport relied upon by this Appellant  was  issued  to
         her on the basis of a false marriage certificate  relating  to  her
         parents married status."

    In our judgment the First-tier Tribunal Judge's conclusion at paragraph
    22 that there was no dishonesty or false representation  on  behalf  of
    the Claimant is unassailable.

11. So far as the second ground is concerned  the  complaint  made  by  the
    Entry Clearance Officer in the grounds of appeal to the Upper  Tribunal
    is firstly by reference to the Claimant's identity  referring  back  to
    her parents'  marriage.  For  the  reasons  given  above  this  is  not
    sustainable.  The  only  other  ground  of  challenge  is  the  Judge's
    acceptance of the oral evidence of the Sponsor "unchallenged because of
    lack  of  a  home  office  presenting   officer".   This   is   equally
    unsustainable, where the Entry Clearance Officer (through the Secretary
    of State) elects not to field a presenting officer  to  challenge  oral
    evidence given by a party to the proceedings this cannot  detract  from
    the weight given to that evidence. The decision and reasons shows quite
    clearly that the Judge considered  the  evidence  of  the  relationship
    between the Claimant and the Sponsor on the basis  of  the  documentary
    evidence and the oral evidence of the Sponsor. The  Judge's  conclusion
    that the Claimant is the daughter of the Sponsor  and  that  there  are
    serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations  which  make
    exclusion of the child undesirable was open to the Judge and reveals no
    error of law.

CONCLUSION

12. The making of the previous decision did not involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of  law.  The  Entry  Clearance  officer's  appeal  is
    dismissed


Signed:     Date:

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
