
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08926/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 October 2017                            |On 13 November 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - LAGOS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    mrs Maryclaret Obumneme Azubuike-Nna
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Mr O Coleman, Counsel, Perera & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State has been granted permission  to  appeal  against
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Martins promulgated  on  30th
    January 2017 to allow the appeal of the respondent against the  refusal
    of the Entry Clearance Officer  to  grant  her  entry  clearance  as  a
    partner, under Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules.

2.   For ease of reference the respondent will now be  referred  to  as  the
    applicant.

3.   The applicant is a citizen of  Nigeria  born  on  18  June  1987.   She
    married the sponsor Mr Azubuike-Nna in Nigeria on 18 August 2014.   The
    sponsor gave evidence at the hearing before  Judge  Martins.   He  said
    that he met the applicant on 27 January  2011  whilst  on  a  visit  to
    Nigeria.  They  kept  in  contact  and  began  a  relationship.   Their
    marriage took place on 18 August 2014 in Nigeria  in  the  presence  of
    family and friends.

4.   The couple  made  an  online  application  on  4  March  2015  and  the
    applicant was asked to attend for interview on 6 March 2015, when  they
    were asked to complete more forms at the  British  High  Commission  in
    Lagos, Nigeria.  The Entry Clearance Officer  refused  the  applicant's
    application because  he  was  not  satisfied  that  she  fulfilled  the
    relationship and financial requirements.  He also  concluded  that  the
    applicant's rights under Article 8 of the ECHR were not being  breached
    and that the application did not raise  any  exceptional  circumstances
    such that the applicant would fall  for  a  grant  of  entry  clearance
    outside the Rules.

Findings and Conclusions

5.   The judge held as follows:

         "41. I had the opportunity of hearing the appellant and  his  uncle
             give evidence which they did in a straightforward and  helpful
             manner and I find them credible.  On the evidence before me, I
             find that the appellant and  sponsor  are  in  a  genuine  and
             subsisting  relationship  and  intend  to   live   permanently
             together as husband and wife.   There  is  evidence  of  their
             relationship since 2011, evidence of visits  the  sponsor  has
             made  to  the  appellant,  their  subsequent   marriage,   his
             subsequent support of her financially and in other ways.

         42.  In terms of the financial requirements under the Rules, it  is
             clear that the relevant documentation required to be presented
             with the application were missing and so it is clear that  the
             appellant cannot succeed under the Immigration Rules, as there
             is no discretion in respect of these requirements.

         43.  It is argued on the appellant's behalf however, that given the
             documentation that is now before the Tribunal,  which  clearly
             shows that the appellant does meet the financial requirements,
             given the length of time the couple have had  to  wait  to  be
             reunited and the length of time it will take should they  have
             to make another application, in all  the  circumstances  there
             were exceptional circumstances such that  the  matter  can  be
             looked at under Article 8 of the ECHR outside of the Rules and
             entry clearance granted, otherwise  the  interference  in  the
             family  life  of  this  couple  is  being   disproportionately
             interfered with in the pursuance of the legitimate aim of firm
             immigration control.

         44.  In this regard I do find that the appellant  and  the  sponsor
             enjoy family life and have tried to make  the  best  of  their
             situation by regular visits by the sponsor  to  the  appellant
             and constant communication.  Of the fact that the situation as
             it stands is also an interference in their family life,  there
             is no doubt.  The sponsor reasonably has explained that having
             established himself in the United Kingdom,  particularly  from
             an employment point of view and the fact that  he  has  a  son
             here and other family members, and therefore his life  in  the
             United Kingdom, it is not possible for him to  uproot  himself
             and join the appellant in Nigeria.  Clearly  the  interference
             is in pursuance of the legitimate aim of  immigration  control
             and the question is whether the interference that  ensues,  is
             disproportionate to that legitimate aim.   Given  my  findings
             above I conclude that the interference is disproportionate and
             therefore results in a breach of the appellant  and  sponsor's
             family life.

         45.  Having considered all the evidence, I come to  the  conclusion
             that on the totality of it, for the reasons given  above,  the
             appellant has discharged the burden on her."

6.    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Doyle  granted  the  Secretary  of  State
    permission to appeal the judge's decision.  He said as follows:

         "2.  The grounds assert  that  the  judge  allowed  the  appeal  on
             Article 8 ECHR grounds after finding that the appellant  could
             not meet the Immigration Rules.  The grounds of appeal  argued
             that the judge's findings are inadequately reasoned and do not
             identify  circumstances  sufficiently  compelling  to   engage
             Article 8.


         3.   Between [1] and [39]  the  judge  sets  out,  in  detail,  the
             issues, the grounds of appeal, the evidence  and  submissions.
             The judge's findings of fact are found between [41] and  [45].
             His (sic her) Article 8 assessment is found at [43] and [44].


         4.   It is arguable that the findings at  [43]  and  [44]  are  too
             brief to form an adequate analysis of  proportionality.    The
             Grounds  of  Appeal  identify  an  arguable  error   of   law.
             Permission to appeal is granted."

7.   Mr Tarlow relied on  the  grounds.   He  reiterated  that  no  adequate
    reasons were given by the judge at paragraphs 43 and 44 as to why there
    were exceptional circumstances which went outside the Rules and  within
    the ambit of Article 8.

8.   Mr Coleman relied on his Rule 24 response.  He said  that  the  judge's
    decision is at paragraph 44.  He relied on paragraph 107 of SS  (Congo)
    & Ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 where the  Court  of  Appeal  reiterated  the
    principle in Mukarkar that a decision cannot be said to be in error  of
    law if it is without irrationality or illegality.  He said that this is
    a decision that other judges would not have made but it is  within  the
    range of a decision that a judge would make.

9.   He said that the judge found the witnesses credible.  The  sponsor  has
    a 12-year old child and is in employment.  At the date of  the  hearing
    the applicant met the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules.    The
    sponsor had provided documents evidencing the amount  of  tax  payable,
    paid or unpaid for the last full financial year that is  the  period  6
    April 2013 to 5 April 2014, self-assessment dated 27 October 2013, self-
    assessment statement dated April 2014, self-assessment statement  dated
    December 2014 showing the amount  brought  forward  from  the  previous
    statement.  There were documents for the last full financial year  from
    6 April 2013 to 5 April 2014.  There was  proof  of  registration  with
    HMRC as self-employed and in this regard a copy of  the  sponsor's  tax
    return for 2015 to 2016 was submitted, as was notice  to  complete  tax
    return for 2013 to 2014.  There was  also  evidence  of  ongoing  self-
    employment through evidence of payment of Class  2  National  Insurance
    Contributions.

10.  Mr Coleman said that the judge noted at paragraph 39 that  the  ongoing
    delay and passage of time amounted to compelling factors so as to allow
    the appeal under Article 8.  He submitted that the judge  was  entitled
    to take into account new evidence of pre-existing facts in  reaching  a
    decision.

11.  He submitted that the assessment of proportionality at 44 was  entirely
    adequate.  The judge concluded that the marriage was  genuine  and  the
    financial requirements had been met and therefore the appeal fell to be
    allowed under Article 8.  There was no error of law in doing so.

12.  Following consideration of the submissions by the parties, I find  that
    the judge's decision did not contain an error of law  for  the  reasons
    stated by Mr Coleman.  The judge considered all the evidence  that  was
    before her.  She gave adequate reasons for  her  findings.   Mr  Tarlow
    failed to identify what more the judge could have  said  or  done  that
    would have been considered  to  be  adequate  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.

13.  In the circumstances, I find that the  judge's  decision  allowing  the
    applicant's appeal should stand.


Notice of Decision

The Entry Clearance Officer's appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date: 10 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun



