
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Numbers:
OA/08079/2014

                                                OA/08077/2014

                                                OA/08090/2014

                                                OA/08078/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15th March 2016                            |On 26th April 2016            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                     r k
                                     d n
                                     j k
                                     k c
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Hodson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms C Johnstone, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Uganda born respectively  on  15th  July
    1998, 23rd September 1999, 17th June 2000 and 4th December  2002.   The
    Appellants had made application  for  entry  clearance  to  join  their
    sister for leave to remain in the United Kingdom pursuing a  claim  for
    humanitarian protection.  Their applications were  considered  pursuant
    to paragraph 319X of the Immigration Rules.  Notices  of  Refusal  were
    issued by the Entry Clearance Officer on 16th June 2014.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeals came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Kelly sitting at Hatton Cross on 27th February 2015.   In
    a decision and reasons promulgated on 16th March 2015  the  Appellants'
    appeals were dismissed.  Anonymity directions were made in  respect  of
    each Appellant.  No application is  made  to  vary  that  order  and  I
    consequently extend the anonymity direction to this decision.

 3. On 14th April 2015 Grounds of Appeal were lodged by the  Appellants  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  Permission to appeal was refused on 3rd June  2015
    by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pooler.  On 16th June 2015  renewed
    Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Those  grounds
    were considered by Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek  and  permission  was
    granted on 31st July 2015.  Judge Kopieczek set out  detailed  reasons.
    He noted that on one view the matters advanced in the grounds on  close
    analysis amount only to a disagreement with the judge's  assessment  of
    the facts and if there is merit in the grounds it seemed  to  him  that
    they were to be found in grounds 2  and  3,  ground  4  not  in  itself
    revealing that the outcome of the appeal would have been any  different
    if the judge's findings are "serious and compelling" and unsustainable.

 4. However he did consider as to  grounds  2  and  3  that  there  may  be
    something in the point about the lack of any findings  in  relation  to
    the Appellants' living conditions, although the argument would have  to
    be good with reference to the evidence that was before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  He noted that on an initial perusal there could be  said  to
    be scant hard evidence about the Appellants' living conditions  and  as
    far as he can see there are only two  paragraphs  said  to  show  their
    accommodation in Uganda.  The remainder of the evidence seems to him to
    be within the Sponsor's account only which does not  particularly  rely
    on their living conditions.

 5. He has significant doubt about the arguability of ground  1  not  least
    because the First-tier Judge had to deal with the case as put on behalf
    of the Appellants i.e. it is the Appellants' elderly  aunt  who  is  in
    effect the only person who they have to look after them.   Nevertheless
    he does not limit the grounds that may be  argued.   He  was  satisfied
    that there was sufficient in the grounds to reveal that the  First-tier
    Tribunal may have erred in law in its assessment of  the  "serious  and
    compelling" issue.

 6. On 19th August 2015 the Secretary of State responded to the Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The response submits that the grounds amount  to
    mere disagreement with the findings of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.
    They note that at paragraph 23 the First-tier Tribunal Judge found that
    the children's father had not abandoned  them.   At  paragraph  26  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge found that Ms Koburugi was  another  relative
    who was able to offer the Appellants support.  The First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge had also taken into account the authority of Mundeba at paragraph
    32 and had taken into account all of the evidence in the round  finding
    that  there  were  no  serious   and   compelling   family   or   other
    considerations that made their exclusion from the  UK  undesirable  and
    that these were findings open to the judge based on the evidence before
    him.

 7. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellants appear by  their  instructed
    Counsel Mr Hodson and by their Sponsor Ms DN (who  is  the  Appellants'
    sister).  Mr Hodson is familiar with this matter.  He  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal and he is the author of both  the  grounds  and
    renewed Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer Ms Johnstone.

Submissions/Discussions

 8. Mr Hodson relies on the renewed Grounds of  Appeal.   He  submits  that
    there are four Grounds of Appeal.  He starts  with  the  fourth  ground
    namely that the First-tier Tribunal Judge fell into  error  as  regards
    the accommodation of the Sponsor.  He points out that the issue was  to
    be considered as it appertained at the time of decision  and  therefore
    he submits that there is a material error of law.  He submits that  the
    judge's finding at paragraph 33  that  the  property  continued  to  be
    available to Miss K or that the Appellants would be permitted to reside
    there was wrong and that the Entry Clearance Officer  in  refusing  the
    applications had not challenged whether the Sponsor  actually  occupied
    the property at the time of decision nor was any adverse point made  by
    the Presenting Officer or taken by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  to
    this effect.   He  submits  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    committed a  material  error  of  law  by  in  effect  considering  the
    circumstances as regards the Sponsor's accommodation as appertaining at
    the time of the hearing rather than that at the date of the immigration
    decision.

 9. Mr Hodson states that the other  three  grounds  should  be  considered
    together and these revolve around paragraph  319X  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.  He notes that the relevant paragraph is set out at paragraph  4
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision.  He points out that  there
    is no reference within the  Rule  to  "sole  responsibility"  and  that
    notwithstanding that the judge commences her assessment of  the  appeal
    by considering the Sponsor's claim that her father  had  abdicated  all
    responsibility for the Appellant and that the elderly aunt has had sole
    responsibility for their care since their departure from  their  family
    home.  He submits that the findings at paragraphs  22  and  24  of  the
    First-tier Judge's decision implies  that  the  judge  considered  that
    there is applicability for the concept of  'sole  responsibility'  when
    clearly there is not.

10. Secondly he submits that there has been  an  acknowledgement  that  the
    Appellants' aunt has played a significant role in the upbringing of the
    children and at paragraph 25 that  the  judge  has  accepted  that  her
    health is likely to be in decline and that she  will  be  significantly
    less able to help and care for the Appellants than she  once  was.   He
    submits that these findings amount to serious and compelling family and
    other considerations implying that the care of the  children  by  their
    aunt who has been their main carer cannot be sustained  as  before  and
    that the judge has given wholly  inadequate  and  unsound  reasons  and
    nonetheless finding these considerations do not mean that the exclusion
    of the children is undesirable.

11. Further he emphasises that the suggestion he gleans in paragraph 29  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision  that  the  poor  record  of
    attendance and  achievement  at  school  implies  that  there  will  be
    difficulties in the children adjusting to the  far  better  educational
    provisions of this country hardly constitutes a proper reason  that  it
    is in the best interests of the Appellants to remain as they are.

12. He contends the judge has failed to take into account the  letter  from
    RK to her Sponsor and that this letter  is  borne  out  by  the  school
    report referred to at paragraph 29  of  the  decision.   He  notes  the
    consent form to DNA testing is signed by a person named AM who is  said
    to be no more than  a  neighbour  who  accompanied  the  children.   He
    submits that the judge relied on the most flimsy of evidence to come to
    the finding that he did and that there is evidence in  the  substantive
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal at pages 224 to 225 as to how ill
    the Appellants' aunt it.

13. Thirdly he turns to the living conditions of the Appellants.  He points
    out these have been described by the Sponsor in her evidence before the
    First-tier Tribunal and at that stage she set out how she had  regained
    contact with the children and given an explanation  of  the  conditions
    they are living in.  She points out that bare maintenance  is  provided
    and photographs have been shown that they are dwelling in  a  hut.   He
    submits that this is evidence to show  that  this  is  where  they  are
    living with their aunt and that  these  conditions  are  basic  in  the
    extreme e.g. they have to walk to fetch water.  He  submits  the  judge
    has not referred to this.  He further submits at paragraphs 29  and  30
    of the judge's decision are not properly reasoned.

14. In reply Ms Johnstone relies on the Notice of Refusal pointing out that
    the judge correctly identified the circumstances of relatives  and  who
    was responsible for the children's care.  She admits that  the  judge's
    analysis at paragraph 27 invokes the correct test and that reasons have
    been given.  She reminds me that the matters have been considered based
    on the application form and on the witness statement of the Sponsor.

15. So far as living conditions are concerned she submits  that  Mr  Hodson
    has exaggerated the position pointing out that there is no reference to
    the lack of running water in the Sponsor's written  testimony  nor  has
    there been  a  housing  report,  showing  the  conditions  that  it  is
    purported the children are living in, provided.  She  reminds  me  that
    contact is made by mobile phone and through facebook  and  that  modern
    technology appears to be available  to  the  Appellants.   Further  she
    points out there is no reason provided as to why the children have been
    missing school and the conclusions reached at paragraph 29 by the judge
    are ones that were open to her.

16. He further submits that the findings at paragraph 25 were open  to  the
    judge based on the Sponsor's own evidence.  She  reminds  me  that  the
    parties have been separated for over ten years and that  no  visit  had
    taken place.  She submits that there is  no  evidence  to  support  the
    grounds and no evidence of serious or  compelling  circumstances.   She
    asked me to dismiss the appeal.

The Law

17.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

18. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

19. This is an appeal under the Immigration Rules.   The  burden  of  proof
    when the matter was heard before the First-tier Tribunal Judge  was  on
    the balance of probabilities.  I remind myself that this is  an  appeal
    and that the issue before me is whether or  not  there  is  a  material
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   I  am
    not rehearing the appeal nor considering the appeal as  being  properly
    decided and reasoned, by imposing my  own  view  against  that  of  the
    judge.  The  judge  at  first  instance  heard  the  evidence.   It  is
    difficult not  to  be  sympathetic  with  the  position  in  which  the
    Appellants find themselves.  They are all minors living in  Uganda.   I
    totally accept that their living conditions  cannot  match  those  that
    would be found in the UK.  However this  of  itself  does  not  provide
    compelling reasons for allowing an  appeal.   The  issues  have  to  be
    addressed as matters of law and not as matters of sympathy.

20. Sympathetic therefore as I am to the  Appellants'  circumstances  I  do
    not, having given due consideration to all the issues raised, find that
    there are material errors of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The judge has considered the relevant  law.   This  is
    paragraph 319X of the Immigration Rules.  She has recited the  relevant
    paragraph at paragraph 4 of her decision.  She  has  applied  it.   The
    Appellant's Sponsor has limited leave to remain in the  United  Kingdom
    as the beneficiary of  humanitarian  protection.   It  is  consequently
    necessary for the  Appellants  to  show  that  there  are  serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which makes  their  exclusion
    undesirable and that suitable  arrangements  have  been  made  for  the
    children's care.  Those were the issues extant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge.   The  judge   has   given   these   issues   detailed
    consideration.  She has heard the evidence and oral  testimony  of  the
    Sponsor.  She has made findings at paragraph 23 as she was entitled  to
    that the Appellants had not established that their  father  was  absent
    from their lives.  The judge acknowledges that their father is  someone
    who is likely to  do  as  little  as  possible  to  administer  to  his
    children's practical and emotional needs and she has then  gone  on  to
    consider the role of the Appellant's aunt and the  role  that  she  has
    played since the death of their mother in 2003.

21. Clearly the aunt is ageing and that her health  is  declining  but  the
    judge has given due consideration to these factors at paragraphs 24 and
    25 and whilst she may well have made  an  error  in  the  ages  of  the
    children by twelve months  I  am  not  persuaded  that  this  error  is
    material.

22. Further I acknowledge that reference is made to the letter from RK  and
    I further accept that it is not specifically  referred  to  within  the
    decision.  However I find that its content reflects  issues  that  have
    been considered by the judge in that the decision reflects  the  aunt's
    health and the burden that is placed upon the eldest Appellant.  Whilst
    the letter is sad the overall picture presented in this matter has been
    given due, full and proper consideration by the judge.

23. In addition the judge has gone on to analyse  the  school  reports  and
    whilst a conclusion that the children are unlikely  to  make  a  smooth
    transition to the secondary education in the United  Kingdom  and  that
    such a conclusion is speculative it does not in itself I  am  satisfied
    reach the threshold that would engage  paragraph  319X(ii).   The  fact
    remains the judge has identified the  responsible  relative  who  looks
    after the children and  has  given  detailed  reasons  particularly  at
    paragraphs 27 and 30.  I agree with the submission made by Ms Johnstone
    that the judge has applied the correct test and made findings that  she
    was entitled to.  Further the judge has noted that  the  children  have
    been separated for over ten years from their elder sister,  that  there
    has never been any visits and that they have modern technology contacts
    i.e. mobile phones and facebook.  Further as Ms Johnstone  points  out,
    the evidence relating to their home  conditions  is  very  limited  and
    their home position was given due consideration by the First-tier Judge
    in general consideration throughout her decisions and reasons.

24. Finally whilst I note the submission made with regard to  accommodation
    the judge was I find entitled to reach  the  conclusion  that  she  did
    having given due consideration to the evidence that was produced to her
    and that when looked at in the round the judge was entitled to come  to
    the finding that the provisions of paragraph 319X  of  the  Immigration
    Rules were not met.  In such circumstances the  decision  discloses  no
    material error of law and the Appellants' appeals are dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


