
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
OA/08751/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 24 May 2016                            | On 6 June 2016                   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                              MR SHAOWEN ZHANG
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                    Claimant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance by or on behalf of the Claimant


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant in this error of law matter is the  Secretary  of  State.
    I shall refer to the parties as  "the  Secretary  of  State"  and  "the
    Claimant" (who was the appellant in the proceedings before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal ("FTT")).  There was no appearance by or on behalf of the
    Claimant at the hearing before me to consider whether or not there  was
    a material error of law by the FTT.

2.   The Claimant is a citizen of China whose date  of  birth  is  3  August
    1990.  His appeal was decided on  the  papers  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Nolan), who allowed the appeal against the Secretary of  State's
    refusal to grant leave to remain as a Tier 4 Student with reference  to
    the  general  grounds  of  appeal  under  paragraph  322(1A)   of   the
    Immigration Rules, HC395 (as amended). The FtT concluded that there was
    insufficient evidence to show that the Claimant had used  deception  in
    obtaining his English language certificate. The decision giving rise to
    a right of appeal was a removal decision under Section 10(1)(b) of  the
    Immigration and Asylum Act 1999, which gave rise to an out  of  country
    appeal right.  The Claimant Mr Zhang returned to China and submitted  a
    notice and grounds of appeal dated  1  August  2014  stating  that  the
    decision was not in accordance with the law and he had not obtained the
    TOEIC through deception.


3.   The decision and reasons sets out the burden and standard of  proof  at
    [10]. The FtT stated that the burden was on the Secretary of State  and
    the standard of proof for deception was "a high degree of  probability"
    that deception has been used.  The FtT considered the generic  evidence
    relied on ion such cases by the Secretary of State and  cited  guidance
    in the Upper Tribunal decision of R (on the application of Gazi) v SSHD
    (ETS - judicial review) 1JR  [2015]  UKUT  327  (IAC)  [13].   The  FtT
    concluded that the generic evidence was insufficient to  discharge  the
    high degree of probability required [15].  The FtT  took  into  account
    the following:

         "He did score very well in his test, but  he  argues  that  he  has
         already completed qualifications in the UK taught in  English,  and
         thus he has a very good English ability already and had  no  reason
         to cheat in his test.  I accept this.  The level he has achieved in
         the test is consistent with his current academic level as  set  out
         in his (now cancelled) CAS, which states  that  he  is  progressing
         onto the main graduate diploma course now as he  has  improved  his
         English sufficiently during the previous year."

Grounds of Application

4.   It is contended on behalf of the Secretary of State  that  firstly  the
    FtT applied the wrong standard of proof.  Further that the  FtT  failed
    to place sufficient weight on the generic  evidence  and/or  failed  to
    give adequate reasoning for rejecting the same.

Permission

5.   Permission was granted by FtT Judge Garrett on  8  April  2016  on  the
    grounds that the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  by  applying  the  wrong
    standard of proof in considering the respondent's evidence.

Error of Law Hearing

6.   At the start of the hearing I indicated to Mr  Bramble  that  the  main
    issue for determination was  whether  or  not  the  error  of  law  was
    material.  I was satisfied that the FtT erred  in  law  by  applying  a
    higher test by reference to a "high degree of  probability",  than  the
    ordinary civil standard  when  considering  the  respondent's  evidence
    alleging deception.

7.   Mr Bramble relied on the recent decision  of  Qadir  arguing  that  the
    situation had now been clarified by the Upper Tribunal  to  the  effect
    that there is a two-stage approach to be applied in these  cases.   The
    head note in Qadir is as follows:

         "(i) The Secretary of State's generic evidence, combined  with  her
             evidence particular  to  these  two  appellants,  sufficed  to
             discharge the evidential burden of proving  that  their  TOEIC
             certificates had been procured by dishonesty.

         (ii) However, given the multiple frailties from which this  generic
             evidence was considered to suffer and, in  the  light  of  the
             evidence adduced by the appellants,  the  Secretary  of  State
             failed to discharge the legal burden of proving dishonesty  on
             their part."

8.   Mr Bramble submitted that the FtT focus was  solely  on  the  issue  of
    whether or not the Secretary of State had discharged the burden  having
    regard to the generic evidence  provided.  Following  Qadir,  this  was
    sufficient to discharge the burden to the civil standard on the part of
    the  respondent.   Mr  Bramble  submitted  that  the   FtT's   approach
    thereafter is flawed as it failed to consider what evidence  there  was
    or make any findings as to what the Claimant relied on  in  support  of
    his claim that he had not acted dishonestly.

9.   In respect of the findings at [15] made by the FtT, Mr  Bramble  argued
    that this was not sufficient to show  that  the  second  stage  of  the
    process had been satisfied.  He argued that  having  erred  in  law  by
    applying a higher  benchmark  the  whole  determination  was  infected.
    However, he acknowledged that if the Upper Tribunal were to accept that
    the Secretary of State had effectively demonstrated  evidence  to  meet
    the first hurdle then the question remained whether or  not  there  was
    evidence from the claimant sufficient to satisfy that he was a  genuine
    student.

10.  It is to this  latter  issue  that  I  now  turn.   I  agree  with  the
    submissions made by Mr Bramble as to the two stage approach outlined in
    Qadir in the head note quoted above. The FtT  did  go  on  to  consider
    other evidence as set out in [15] in respect of the second  stage.  The
    FtT looked at the CAS and the grounds of appeal. There was  no  witness
    statement and no account from the Claimant before the FtT. I  take  the
    view that there was insufficient evidence before the FtT  to  make  the
    findings that it did at [15], and furthermore that its consideration of
    all the evidence was tainted by the error as to the standard of proof.

Decision

11.  I find a material error of law in the decision and reasons which  shall
    be set aside.  The Secretary of  State's  appeal  is  allowed  to  that
    extent.  The decision falls to be remade.

Remaking the decision

12.    I am conscious of the fact that this is an  out  of  country  appeal,
    the Claimant requested a paper hearing and further  time  in  which  to
    provide documentary evidence, which was refused.  In the light  of  the
    fact that neither he nor his representatives have taken steps to pursue
    this matter or to adduce any evidence whatsoever, I am satisfied that I
    can go on to remake the decision on the basis of the evidence before me
    having regard to the correct standard of proof. I  am  unable  to  find
    that the Secretary of State has discharged the evidential burden on the
    balance of probabilities to show that the invalid test was obtained  by
    deception.  The only  evidence  adduced  in  addition  to  the  generic
    evidence is a CAS (C1-3) withdrawn on 21.5.2014 which states  that  the
    application was withdrawn by the student who will  defer  his  studies.
    In addition at (B1-3) copies of ETS source data are produced which fail
    to give full details as to  the test date and the  Claimant's  date  of
    birth and are not reliable evidence as to material facts. There  is  no
    evidence to tie in the source data with the CAS. There is  no  evidence
    relied on by the Secretary of State  such  as  an  interview  with  the
    Claimant seeking to question him about the allegation made. I  rely  on
    and apply the guidance in Qadir [58-68] regarding the standard of proof
    in TOIEC deception cases.  It is reiterated that the  standard  is  the
    civil standard the balance of probabilities but that  is  qualified  in
    terms of the need to have strong evidence compatible with the level  of
    seriousness of the allegation and potential consequences. The  question
    is whether there is evidence  of  sufficient  cogency  to  warrant  the
    conclusion that the burden has been discharged to the  civil  standard.
    In this instance I find that the evidence relied on by the Secretary of
    State fails to meet the standard of proof.

13.  I remake the decision by substituting a decision to allow the appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed                                  Date 3.6.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have decided to make no fee award.




Signed                                  Date 3.6.2016

GA Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge G A Black
