
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
OA/08879/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bennett House, Stoke         |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2nd June 2017                      |       On 20th June 2017              |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                     BS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                       Entry Clearance Officer - AMMAN
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Park of Dicksons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision  of  Judge  O'Hagan  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 7th November 2016.

 2. The Appellant is a male Iraqi citizen born 1st December  1999.   He  is
    now 17 years of age.

 3. The Appellant applied for entry clearance to enable  him  to  join  his
    father, to whom I shall refer as the Sponsor, and who is settled in the
    United Kingdom.

 4.  The  application  was  refused  on  12th  May  2015.   The  Respondent
    considered paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration  Rules.   The  Respondent
    noted the Sponsor left  Iraq  in  February  2000,  approximately  three
    months after the Appellant was born.  The Appellant  had  been  in  the
    care of his grandparents since 2002.  The Respondent was not  satisfied
    that the Sponsor  has  had  sole  responsibility  for  the  Appellant's
    upbringing, and the application was refused with reference to paragraph
    297(i)(e).  The Appellant appealed to the FtT,  and  the  hearing  took
    place on 11th October 2016.  The  FtT  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
    Sponsor.  The FtT took into account that  there  had  been  a  previous
    appeal hearing in 2012, in which it was found that the Sponsor had  not
    had sole responsibility for the Appellant's  upbringing.   The  FtT  in
    October 2016 made the same finding, having considered further evidence.
     The FtT also found that there were no serious and compelling family or
    other considerations which made exclusion of the Appellant  undesirable
    and  therefore  the  requirements  of  paragraph  297(i)(f)  were   not
    satisfied.

 5. The FtT went on to consider Article 8 of  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights (the 1950 Convention) outside the  Immigration  Rules  and
    concluded that the Respondent's decision to refuse entry clearance  was
    proportionate.

 6. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds seeking permission are set out below;

         "The learned judge erred in his determination and reasons;

         (a)  On six occasions he refers to the male  appellant  as  female:
             paragraphs 30, 33 (x 2), 37 (x 2) and  41.   Justice  must  be
             seen to be done.  However these errors suggest a serious  lack
             of care in considering the facts and evidence of the case  and
             possibly a cut and paste approach.

         (b)  In paragraphs 39-41 he  appears  to  hold  himself  out  as  a
             medical expert based partly upon his experience as a judge  in
             a  Social  Entitlement  Chamber.   As  such  he  exceeds   his
             authority and jurisdiction as a  judge  and  goes  beyond  the
             matters of which he is entitled to take judicial notice.

             It is further averred that he has failed to take into  account
             the  different  circumstances  of  northern   Iraq   including
             significantly lower life expectancies and has  based  some  of
             his findings upon medical practices  of  western  Europe,  and
             that (paragraph 40) he has misread the medical  evidence  that
             the Appellant's grandfather could not walk 'for long periods'.

         (c)  He was wrong to consider the security problems and lawlessness
             in the relevant area of northern Iraq as at August 2016.   The
             correct time would have been in the first half  of  2015  (the
             date of the application's subsequent refusal (12/5/2015)) when
             the region was considerably more dangerous.

         (d)  Paragraph 42 suggests that a finding  that  Article  15(c)  of
             European Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29th  April  2004  is
             met is required for the Appellant  to  prove  that  there  are
             serious and compelling ... other considerations which make the
             exclusion of the  Appellant  undesirable.   Such  an  approach
             places an excessive burden upon the Appellant.  Further he has
             failed to take account of FCO's advice against travel  in  the
             area.

         (e)  He has failed to take into account;

             (i)  the fact that the Sponsor has decided that the  Appellant
                  (his dependent son) should join him in the United  Kingdom
                  is indicative of him having sole  responsibility  for  the
                  Appellant's upbringing, such a  decision  being  the  most
                  important affecting his life;

             (ii) the Sponsor's evidence that his parents demurred  to  him
                  in matters relating to the Appellant's upbringing and  the
                  fact that they did not wish to take responsibility for the
                  Appellant, that being the Sponsor's duty;

             (iii)    the cultural values of northern Iraq  which  lead  to
                  the  Appellant's  mother  severing  links  with  him   and
                  abandoning responsibility for him once she  had  remarried
                  and had a second family (paragraph 33(iii) (iv)).

         (f)  (Paragraph 41) Having found 'he will need guidance and support
             as he moves from childhood to  adulthood'  he  has  failed  to
             explain adequately why the Sponsor, who is his closest  family
             member actively involved in his upbringing, should not be best
             placed to do that, and why the presumption in  favour  of  the
             parent should be  overlooked  in  favour  of  the  Appellant's
             elderly and infirm grandparents who  support  the  Appellant's
             application to join his father".

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the FtT E S Martins and  I
    set out below, in part, the grant of permission;

         2.   The grounds assert that the error of the  judge  in  mistaking
             the Appellant's gender shows a lack of care in considering the
             facts and evidence in the appeal.  It is also  submitted  that
             the judge appeared to hold himself out as  a  medical  expert,
             based partly upon his experience as  a  judge  in  the  Social
             Entitlement Chamber and so exceeded his authority.  The  judge
             is said to have erred, in considering matters beyond the  date
             of the ECO's decision and failed to  take  into  account,  the
             different circumstances of northern Iraq.  The judge  is  said
             to  have  placed  a  heavier  burden  than  required  on   the
             Appellant,  in  assessing  whether  there  are   serious   and
             compelling circumstances in his case.

         3.   The assertions made in the grounds are evident on the face  of
             the decision and disclose an arguable error of law.

         4.   All grounds are arguable.

         5.   An arguable error of law is shown.

 8. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of The Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  It was contended that the FtT had directed itself appropriately,
    although the author of the rule 24 response conceded that she  had  not
    seen  the  FtT  decision  which  was  not  attached  to  the  grant  of
    permission.

 9. Directions were issued making provision  for  there  to  be  a  hearing
    before the Upper Tribunal to decide whether the FtT decision  contained
    an error of law such that it should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

10. Mr Bates indicated that he had seen the  FtT  decision,  and  would  be
    making submissions to the effect that the FtT had not materially  erred
    in law.

11. I then heard oral submissions on behalf  of  the  Appellant.   Mr  Park
    submitted a further copy of the Foreign and Commonwealth Office  travel
    advice on Iraq last updated on 14th September 2016  which  contained  a
    map showing where the Appellant lived in northern Iraq.

12. By way of oral submissions Mr Park relied upon grounds (a) - (f) of the
    application for permission to appeal.

13. In brief summary Mr Bates contended that the  FtT  decision  showed  no
    material error of law.  The FtT had applied  the  correct  standard  of
    proof, considered all material evidence, and  applied  the  appropriate
    case law.

14. While it was accepted that the  FtT  had  mistakenly  referred  to  the
    Appellant as a female on occasions, it was submitted that this did  not
    amount to a material error, and the FtT had not exceeded its authority,
    when the judge had made reference to sitting as a judge in  the  Social
    Entitlement Chamber.  Mr Bates submitted that  the  FCO  travel  advice
    relates to British citizens intending to travel in that part  of  Iraq,
    and not to residents who have always lived  in  that  area.   Mr  Bates
    submitted  that  there  was  no  independent  background  evidence   to
    undermine the FtT findings.

15. Mr Park  then  made  oral  submissions  in  response,  reiterating  and
    expanding upon grounds (a) - (f) of the application for  permission  to
    appeal.  In conclusion Mr Park referred to MM (Lebanon) [2017] UKSC 10,
    pointing out that the Supreme Court found that  the  Immigration  Rules
    and IDIs failed to take  proper  account  of  the  duty  regarding  the
    welfare of children set out in section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009.  Mr Park accepted that because  MM  (Lebanon)
    was decided in February 2017, this point had not  been  raised  in  the
    application for permission to appeal and neither the Tribunal  nor  the
    Respondent had been given prior notice that reference would be made  to
    MM (Lebanon).

16. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

17. I do not find that the FtT materially erred in law.  I will address the
    grounds of appeal in the order  in  which  they  are  set  out  in  the
    application for permission;

      a) It is correct that the FtT made some references to the Appellant as
         a  female  in  four  paragraphs.   Overall  the  vast  majority  of
         references to the Appellant refer to him as a male.   It  is  clear
         that the FtT was aware that the Appellant is a male Iraqi  citizen.
         The errors as to gender may not create a  good  impression  on  the
         reader, but, without more, they do not indicate a serious  lack  of
         care in considering the facts and evidence, nor do they indicate  a
         "cut and paste" approach.

      b) I do not find that the FtT Judge held  himself  out  as  a  medical
         expert.   He  has  commented  upon  observations  made  by  medical
         colleagues.  It may have been more appropriate  for  this  to  have
         been  mentioned  at  the   hearing,   to   give   the   Appellant's
         representative an opportunity to respond, but I do not accept  that
         the comments made in paragraphs 39-41 demonstrate  that  the  judge
         exceeded his authority and  jurisdiction,  and  I  do  not  find  a
         material error of law disclosed in this ground.

      c) In my view the FtT was not wrong to consider the security  problems
         at August 2016.  I do not agree that the correct  time  would  have
         been in the first half of 2015.  This is an appeal against  refusal
         of a human rights claim.  The  FtT  is  entitled  to  consider  the
         evidence at the date of hearing.

      d) I do not accept that paragraph 42 indicates that the FtT  erred  in
         law.  In that paragraph the FtT considered  the  evidence,  finding
         that the evidence was indicative of "a reasonably functional  civil
         society in operation".   The  FtT  also  found  that  the  evidence
         "points to the existence of a  functioning  health  infrastructure.
         It is clear from the evidence that there is a functioning education
         system".  The FtT also found  the  evidence  indicated  functioning
         commerce.  I find that the FtT  took  an  appropriate  approach  to
         considering whether there were any serious and compelling family or
         other  considerations  which  made  exclusion  of   the   Appellant
         undesirable.  The FCO travel advice is of limited value, as this is
         advice to British citizens intending to travel in  Iraq,  and  does
         not relate to Iraqi citizens who have always lived in that area.

      e) I find no merit in this ground.  The  fact  that  the  Sponsor  has
         decided that the Appellant should join him in the United Kingdom is
         not  indicative  of  him  having  sole   responsibility   for   his
         upbringing.  The FtT took into account the Sponsor's evidence,  and
         in my view took into account all material evidence.   The  FtT  was
         obliged to  consider  the  Devaseelan  principles  and  did  so  at
         paragraphs 28 and 29.  In my view the FtT was correct in  recording
         at paragraph 29 that;

             "I was being asked to do the very thing that Devaseelan says I
             should not do; to consider arguments intended to undermine the
             earlier judge's decision".

      f) I do not accept that the FtT has failed to provide adequate reasons
         in paragraph 41.  The decision needs to be read as a  whole.   This
         was an  appeal  against  refusal  of  a  human  rights  claim.   An
         important issue  when  considering  the  appeal,  was  to  consider
         whether paragraph 297 was satisfied.  The FtT analysed all material
         evidence and found  that  paragraph  297(i)(e)  and  (f)  were  not
         satisfied, and adequate reasons were given for  those  conclusions.
         That was not the end of the matter, as the FtT went on to  consider
         Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.  Although setting  out  at
         paragraph 48(ii)  that  T  (Jamaica)  [2011]  UKUT  483  (IAC)  was
         authority for stating that section 55 of the  Borders,  Citizenship
         and Immigration Act 2009 does not apply to children  seeking  entry
         clearance to the  United  Kingdom,  the  FtT  also  considered  the
         guidance in Mundeba [2013] UKUT 88 (IAC)  at  paragraph  34.   This
         confirms that when an  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is  assessing  an
         application  under  the  Immigration  Rules,  there  must   be   an
         assessment of the child's welfare and best interests.  The  Supreme
         Court found in MM (Lebanon) that the IDIs in their current form  do
         not adequately fill the gap left by the rules, they  are  defective
         and need to be amended in line with the principles  established  by
         the ECtHR.  The section 55 duty stands on it own and it  should  be
         clear from the  rules  themselves  that  it  has  been  taken  into
         account.

18. I do not find MM (Lebanon) demonstrates an error  of  law  in  the  FtT
    decision.  The FtT in relation to Article  8  found  that  family  life
    exists between the Appellant and  Sponsor  and  that  the  Respondent's
    decision interfered with that family life.   The  FtT  then  considered
    proportionality.  The FtT took into  account  that  the  Appellant  had
    always lived in Iraq, that his strongest ties and  attachments  are  in
    Iraq, and this includes  ties  with  his  grandparents.   The  FtT  had
    already found that there were no serious and compelling family or other
    considerations which made exclusion of the Appellant undesirable.

19. Having found that the  requirements  of  paragraph  297  could  not  be
    satisfied, and recognising that that was not the end of the matter, the
    FtT carried  out  an  appropriate  proportionality  exercise,  and  was
    entitled to conclude that the Respondent's decision was proportionate.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the FtT  did  not  involve  the  making  of  a
material error of law such that the decision must be set aside.   I  do  not
set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

No anonymity direction was made by the FtT.  I make an  anonymity  direction
because the Appellant is a child.  Unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
family.   This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellant  and   to   the
Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.  This direction is made pursuant to  rule  14  of  The
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date         6th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date         6th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall










