

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                     Appeal
Number OA/08428/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Sheldon Court
                        Determination Promulgated
On 2nd July 2014
Prepared 4th July 2014
                                  On 4th July 2014
                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                             YOSEIF GEBRE HAFTU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mrs Y Haftu (Sponsor)
For the Respondent: Mr N Smart (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant applied to enter the UK under the provisions relating to
   family reunion for refugees, the Sponsor having been granted refugee
   status in the UK. The application was refused as it was not accepted that
   it had been shown that they had married and in any event the marriage had
   taken place in 2008 when the Appellant and Sponsor had left Eritrea in
   July 2008.

2. The Appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pacey at
   Sheldon court on the 14th of March 2014. The Judge allowed the appeal on
   family reunification grounds finding that the Appellant and Sponsor had
   married in Sudan after leaving Eritrea. The Judge made a reference to the
   Appellant's Sudanese refugee card and the absence of his Eritrean
   passport.

3. The Respondent sought permission to appeal in grounds of the 31st of
   March 2014. There were 2 grounds of appeal the first was that the Judge
   erred in the approach to the marriage as the parties had married after
   leaving Eritrea, it had not been found that Sudan was country of habitual
   residence and the requirements of paragraph 352A(ii) had not been met. It
   was also asserted that the Judge erred on the issue of whether the
   relationship had been shown to be subsisting. Permission was granted by
   Judge Page on the 1st of May 2014.

4. The Sponsor attended the Upper Tribunal hearing. The nature of the Home
   Office's case was explained to her. She confirmed that they had married
   in November 2008 after leaving Eritrea and that they had not returned to
   the country.

5. I indicated to the Sponsor that to qualify for family reunion as a
   refugee under the rules it would have had to have been shown that the
   Appellant and Sponsor had married before they had left Eritrea. Nowhere
   in the determination is this addressed and there is no suggestion or
   finding that the couple were fleeing persecution from Sudan. A suggestion
   that Sudan could not be considered safe without explaining the dangers or
   why such a finding was made was clearly insufficient.

6. The determination contains a clear error of law in relation to whether
   the Appellant and Sponsor had married before fleeing Eritrea as they had
   married months later in Sudan. Accordingly whatever the state of their
   relationship they could not succeed under the Immigration Rules. In
   setting aside the determination on this basis I make no observation on
   the other issue which will have to be considered as part of any future
   application. As the Appellant cannot meet the requirements of the
   Immigration Rules the appeal must be dismissed.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision.

I re-make the decision in the appeal dismissing the appeal of Yoseif Gebre
Haftu.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 4th July 2014


