

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal nos: oa 08644, 46-13

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At                                            |Decision signed:   31.03.2014|
|on    31.03.2014                              |sent out:                    |
|                                              |02.04.2014                   |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                    perenbanayagam selvanayagam & another
                                                                  appellants
                                     and



                                                                  respondent
Representation:

For the appellants: Ripon Akhter (counsel instructed by Jeya & Co)
For the respondent: Mr D Mills


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge William Miles), sitting at Hatton Cross on 15  January,
    to  dependent relative/article 8 appeals by citizens of Sri Lanka, born
    18 June 1937 (the sponsor's father) and 16 July 1943 (her mother).

 2. The judge did not refer to any of the recent authorities of  the  Court
    of Appeal, the Administrative Court, or this Tribunal  about  cases  of
    this kind: of course there is nothing wrong with that, so  long  as  he
    made it clear that he was following the principles laid down  in  them.
    Those authorities start, in order  of  importance,  with  MF  (Nigeria)
    [2013] EWCA Civ 1192, where the Court of Appeal considered the  meaning
    of 'exceptional circumstances' in paragraphs 399 and 399A of  the  'new
    Rules' (in force from 9 July 2012) made it necessary  for  cases  which
    did not satisfy them to be 'exceptional', applying  expressly  only  to
    deportation cases.  There  had  already  been  Nagre  [2013]  EWHC  720
    (Admin), and Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -  correct  approach)
    Pakistan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC) was to come. However, the parties before
    me did not find it necessary to refer in detail to any decision,  apart
    from MF (Nigeria) itself,  and  to  Shahzad  (Art  8:  legitimate  aim)
    Pakistan [2014] UKUT 85 (IAC).

 3. The relevant part of the judicial head-note in Shahzad  is this:

         (iv)       MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192  held  that  the  new
             immigration rules regarding deportation of a  foreign  criminal
             are  a  complete  code.  This  was  because  of   the   express
             requirement  in  them  at  paragraph  398  to  have  regard  to
             exceptional circumstances and other factors.

         (v) It follows from this that any other rule which has a  similar
             provision will also constitute a complete code;

         (vi)       Where an area of the  rules  does  not  have  such  an
             express mechanism, the approach in R  (Nagre)  v  Secretary  of
             State for the Home Department [2013] EWHC  720  (Admin)  ([29]-
             [31] in particular) and  Gulshan  (Article  8  -  new  Rules  -
             correct approach) [2013] UKUT 640  (IAC)  should  be  followed:
             i.e. after applying the requirements  of  the  rules,  only  if
             there may be arguably good grounds for granting leave to remain
             outside them is it necessary for Article 8 purposes to go on to
             consider  whether  there  are  compelling   circumstances   not
             sufficiently recognised under them.

 4. In plain language, the process to be followed by judges in cases of the
    present kind is this:

          a) first decide whether the application satisfies the requirements
             of the Rules; if so, allow the appeal on  that  basis,  but  if
             not, then

          b) consider whether  "there  may  be  arguably  good  grounds  for
             granting leave to remain outside them";  if  not,  dismiss  the
             appeal, but if so, then

          c) "go on to consider whether there are  compelling  circumstances
             not sufficiently recognised under them"; if  not,  dismiss  the
             appeal, but if so, then

          d) decide it on the result of the conventional article 8 balancing
             exercise.

 5. Miss Akhter sought to argue on the basis of MF  (Nigeria)   that  there
    was no 'exceptionality requirement' involved: this was  based  on  what
    the Court of Appeal said at paragraph 41

       In view of the strictures contained at para 20  of  Huang,  it  would
       have been surprising if  the  Secretary  of  State  had  intended  to
       reintroduce an exceptionality test, thereby flouting  the  Strasbourg
       jurisprudence.   At  first  sight,  the  choice  of  the  phrase  "in
       exceptional circumstances"  might  suggest  that  this  is  what  she
       purported to do.

 6. However the Court went on to refer with approval to what  Sales  J  had
    said in Nagre , and, at paragraph 42, to what he had described as:

       ... a statement in the case law that, in "precarious" cases,  "it  is
       likely to be only in the  most  exceptional  circumstances  that  the
       removal of the non-national family member will constitute a violation
       of art 8".  This has been repeated and adopted by the ECtHR  in  near
       identical terms in many cases.   At paras 41 and 42, he said that  in
       a "precarious" family life case, it is only in "exceptional" or  "the
       most exceptional circumstances"  that  removal  of  the  non-national
       family member will constitute a violation  of  article  8.    In  our
       view, that is not to say that  a  test  of  exceptionality  is  being
       applied.  Rather it is that, in approaching the question  of  whether
       removal is a proportionate interference with an individual's  article
       8 rights, the scales are heavily weighted in  favour  of  deportation
       and something  very  compelling  (which  will  be  "exceptional")  is
       required to outweigh the public interest in removal.

 7. This passage fully  showed  that,  at  least  in  a  deportation  case,
    something 'exceptional' was required, before the case could be  decided
    on a free-standing  balancing  exercise  under  article  8:  there  was
    clearly no difference for the Court of Appeal between 'exceptional' and
    'compelling'. This approach was applied in the other cases referred to,
    and especially  in  Shahzad  ,  relating  to  decisions  not  involving
    deportation. Certainly, as made  clear  in  Shahzad,  consideration  of
    whether the necessary 'exceptional' or 'compelling' features are to  be
    found in a case will itself involve carrying out some kind of article 8
    balancing exercise.

 8. The point is that, unless that  exercise  ends  with  'exceptional'  or
    'compelling' features being found, it will  not  decide  the  case;  so
    judges should not go on to a free-standing article 8  analysis  without
    first being satisfied of that. The judge in the present  case  referred
    to no requirement for 'exceptional' or 'compelling'  features  at  all,
    and went on to say at paragraph 32  that,  after  considering  all  the
    effects on their family here referred to at paragraph 31 "together with
    the ages and medical history  of  each  appellant  I  find,  just   [my
    emphasis], that refusing entry clearance to  them  would  amount  to  a
    disproportionate interference with their right to a family  life  under
    article 8".

 9. Clearly on that conclusion  there  was  no  room  for  any  finding  of
    'exceptional' or 'compelling' circumstances: while I had taken the view
    in the course of the hearing that the decision would  need  to  be  re-
    made, starting with a finding on that point, I am quite  satisfied,  on
    further reflection, that, if the  judge  had  properly  considered  the
    question of 'exceptional' or 'compelling'  circumstances  in  terms  of
    Shahzad, then he would have been bound on his own view of the facts  to
    decide that there were none,  and  so  to  dismiss  these  appeals.  It
    follows that his decision is reversed on that basis.

Home Office appeal
Appellants' appeals dismissed



                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



