
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: oa/08943/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2017                           |On 22 January 2018            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                              mrs nazia ahmadi
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Z Khan, Counsel instructed by Universal
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal  against  a  decision  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Kelly, promulgated on 8  March  2017,  dismissing  the  appeal
    against the respondent's decision, dated 11 May  2015,  to  refuse  the
    entry clearance application of Mrs Nazia  Ahmadi,  the  appellant,  who
    sought to join her spouse, Mr Naqibullah Nayel (the sponsor).

Background

2.   The appellant is a national of Afghanistan.  Her date  of  birth  is  5
    September 1991.  She sought entry clearance to join the  sponsor  under
    the Family Reunion provisions of the  Immigration  Rules,  specifically
    paragraph 353A(ii).  The sponsor was a  person  who  had  been  granted
    refugee status in the United Kingdom on 19 January 2012 and  his  grant
    of status was valid until 18 January 2017. The Entry Clearance  Officer
    refused the application for entry  clearance  on  the  basis  that  the
    marriage postdated the sponsor's grant of refugee status and  that  the
    appellant  did  not  therefore  meet  the  requirements  of   paragraph
    352A(ii).

3.   The respondent  thereafter  considered,  albeit  briefly,  whether  the
    refusal  of  entry  clearance  breached  Article  8  outside   of   the
    Immigration  Rules.  The  respondent  concluded  that  there  were   no
    compelling features of the appellant's case justifying a grant of leave
    under Article 8. The  respondent  noted  that  there  was  no  original
    marriage certificate provided with the application. In considering  the
    decision under Article 8 the respondent accepted that the decision  may
    result in limited interference with the  right  to  family  life  under
    Article 8.  The decision was appealed.

4.   On 1 October 2015 an Entry Clearance Manager upheld the  refusal,  but,
    for the first time, specifically asserted that there was no evidence to
    show that the appellant and sponsor were  in  a  genuine  relationship.
    The appeal was pursued on the basis that the  appellant  satisfied  the
    requirements for entry clearance as a partner under Appendix FM of  the
    Immigration Rules, or, alternatively, that her exclusion  would  amount
    to a disproportionate interference with her right to respect to  family
    life under Article 8.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

5.    At  the  outset  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   hearing   the   legal
    representatives confirmed that the issue in the appeal was whether  the
    appellant had satisfied the requirements of Section ECP of Appendix FM,
    which sets out the eligibility requirements for entry  clearance,  and,
    if not, whether the refusal amounted to a disproportionate interference
    with Article 8. The sponsor gave  evidence  and  the  judge  took  into
    account his mental health issues and made  specific  reference  to  the
    Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of 2010. The judge had before him
    the Nikah Nama and the marriage certificate that was  obtained  by  the
    appellant following the application.

6.   With respect to the marriage  certificate,  the  judge  heard  evidence
    that the appellant had visited the Afghan Consulate  in  Peshawar  with
    the  sponsor's  brother,  who   was   appearing   as   his   designated
    representative, and the appellant's uncle.  The  sponsor's  fingerprint
    was placed on the marriage certificate after it was sent to him and the
    sponsor claimed that there was  no  need  for  the  certificate  to  be
    returned to the Afghan Embassy in Pakistan. There  were  no  statements
    from either the sponsor's brother or the appellant's uncle because  the
    sponsor believed that the marriage certificate was sufficient evidence.
     The sponsor indicated that  no  new  Nikah  Nama  was  sought  as  the
    marriage certificate had been obtained.  The sponsor indicated that  he
    last visited the appellant in February 2016 and claimed that he and the
    appellant  spoke  on  the  phone  nearly  every  day  and  he  produced
    photographs of the appellant and the sponsor together,  including  some
    wedding photographs.

7.   In recording the submissions from the legal representatives, the  judge
    noted that the Presenting Officer, while unable to make any concessions
    as to whether or not the other requirements of Appendix FM relating  to
    eligibility  were  met,  submitted  that  the  real   issue   was   the
    relationship, whether it was genuine and  subsisting  and  whether  the
    appellant and  the  sponsor  were  genuinely  married.  The  Presenting
    Officer  submitted  that  the  marriage  certificate  was  insufficient
    evidence to establish the genuineness or legality of the  relationship,
    noted that the sponsor was not present when  the  marriage  certificate
    was obtained and that his fingerprints were added at a later stage.  It
    was submitted that little weight ought to  be  attached  to  the  money
    remittances and the photographs and the other documentary  evidence  in
    the appellant's bundle as it did  not  prove  the  genuineness  of  the
    marriage.  I pause to note that there did not appear to have  been  any
    particular submissions directed towards the reliability  or  appearance
    of the Nikah Nama.

8.   The judge recorded the submissions from Mr Khan, who appears before  me
    today as he did before the First-tier Tribunal, to the effect  that  no
    issue  had  been  taken  by  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  with   the
    genuineness of the relationship. It was submitted by Mr Khan that there
    was ample evidence that there was a genuine relationship and  reference
    was made to the mobile phone evidence, to money transfer  receipts  and
    to Facebook messages in support.

9.   Having set out the requirements of the Immigration Rules, Appendix  FM,
    in respect of the definition of 'partner' the judge, at  paragraph  19,
    took issue with the Nikah Nama certificate.  The judge gave a number of
    detailed reasons for finding  that  the  document  was  not  authentic.
    These included the number of grammatical  mistakes  on  the  form,  the
    number of misspellings, and several phrases that were said to  make  no
    sense.  The judge was not satisfied that the document  was  genuine  or
    that it could be relied on. The judge adopted  a  similar  approach  in
    respect  of  the  marriage  certificate,  once  again  considering  the
    certificate in detail and noting the fact that the  sponsor  added  his
    fingerprints to it, and that it was not then returned to  Pakistan  for
    registration or further authentication. The  judge  was  not  satisfied
    that this was a  reliable  document  and  concluded  that  it  was  not
    genuine. The judge was not therefore satisfied that the  appellant  and
    the sponsor were  legally  married  and  that  the  appellant  met  the
    definition of 'partner' detailed in Gen.1.2 of Appendix FM.  The  judge
    proceeded to consider whether the appeal  ought  to  be  allowed  under
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules. The judge properly referred to
    the case of Razgar [2004]  UKHL  27  which  established  a  five  point
    approach to assessment of Article 8 claims.

10.  At paragraph 25 the judge noted that the appellant and sponsor met  for
    the first time in April 2014 and  that  they  underwent  a  traditional
    ceremony on 28 April 2014.  The appellant and  the  sponsor  maintained
    that they had lived for the next four weeks as husband and wife  before
    the sponsor returned to the UK on 23 May 2014.  The judge noted a later
    visit by the sponsor to Pakistan to see the appellant from 17  February
    2016 to 17 March 2016.  The judge stated, "If his account is true,  the
    appellant and the sponsor have spent no more  than  two  months  living
    together in the same country as a couple".  The judge  noted  that  the
    appellant  and  sponsor  had  otherwise  maintained   contact   through
    telephone calls and social media messages and concluded that they  were
    not husband and wife.  The judge stated at the  end  of  paragraph  25,
    "even if I were to find that the relationship between them is a genuine
    and subsisting one, I find that it is insufficient to amount to  family
    life for the purposes of Article 8(2)".

11.  The judge then proceeded to consider whether, even if family  life  did
    exist, the refusal constituted  a  disproportionate  interference  with
    that family life. The judge noted the  respondent's  legitimate  public
    interest in maintaining effective  immigration  control  and  that  the
    appellant could not have had a legitimate expectation when she  entered
    into a relationship with the sponsor that she would be allowed to  join
    him in this country.  At paragraph 27 the judge stated:

         "I also note that the sponsor's own immigration status is uncertain
         given that his residence permit expired on 18 January 2017 and  his
         application for settlement has yet to be decided.  Furthermore, the
         sponsor has failed to establish why he could not enjoy family  life
         with the appellant in Pakistan given that the problems that led  to
         his grant of asylum occurred in Afghanistan.   Whilst  I  recognise
         that he has some mental health problems, these have  not  prevented
         him from travelling to Pakistan in 2014 or 2016.   If  the  sponsor
         does not wish to settle in Pakistan on a permanent  basis,  then  I
         find he can continue his relationship with the appellant  by  using
         modern forms of communication and by making visits to  Pakistan  to
         see the appellant when he is able to as he has done in the past."

     The judge therefore dismissed the appeal under Article 8.

The grounds of appeal and the parties submissions

12.  The grounds of appeal contend, inter alia, that the judge  acted  in  a
    procedurally unfair manner by taking issue with  the  presentation  and
    appearance of the Nikah Nama and the marriage certificate when this had
    never previously been raised at any stage. Issue was  also  taken  with
    the failure by the judge to take into account  the  agreement  by  both
    representatives at the outset of the hearing that the appellant met the
    financial  requirements  of  Appendix  FM,  that  there  was   adequate
    accommodation, and that the appellant also  met  the  English  language
    requirements.  The grounds further contend that  the  judge  failed  to
    appreciate that the original marriage certificate had been provided  by
    the appellant.  Permission was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    all the grounds.

13.  By way of submissions at the error of law hearing Mr Khan  adopted  the
    grounds and explained that the reference at paragraph 16  the decision,
    which was to the effect that the respondent ought to have requested the
    original of the Nikah Nama if not satisfied that a copy  was  provided,
    was in fact an alternative submission made  by  him  and  that  he  had
    submitted that the original was in fact provided.

14.  Ms Fijiwala invited me to find that the judge properly  considered  all
    the documents before him and that the judge was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the documents were not genuine. She accepted that  the  judge  did
    not  make  specific  reference  to  the  Immigration   Rules   in   his
    proportionality assessment but invited me to find that  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the relationship could continue  in  Pakistan
    or through periodic visits and modern forms of communication.

Discussion

15.  I am satisfied that the judge has materially erred in  law.  The  basis
    for the First-tier Tribunal's rejection of the reliability of the  copy
    of the Nikah Nama (the judge in fact found that it  was  not  authentic
    and not a genuine document) was premised on  concerns  that  had  never
    been raised either in  the  decision  under  appeal  or  in  the  Entry
    Clearance Manager review, or  indeed  by  the  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer at the actual hearing. A similar concern, albeit  to  a  lesser
    extent, relates to the judge's rejection  of  the  reliability  of  the
    marriage certificate. It is  clear  from  the  determination  that  the
    Presenting Officer did raise issues relating to this document, but  the
    judge's very  detailed  analysis  explored  concerns  never  previously
    ventilated and without giving a sufficient opportunity to  the  parties
    to engage with and respond to those new concerns. In  HA  &  TD  [2010]
    CSIH 28 the Scottish Court of Session indicated (at paragraph 8)  that,
    as an  expert  body,  the  Tribunal  is  entitled  to  reject  evidence
    notwithstanding that the evidence has not been  challenged  before  it.
    Fairness however may require it to  disclose  its  concerns  about  the
    evidence so as to afford the parties an opportunity  to  address  them.
    Had the judge raised his concerns  regarding  the  documents  with  the
    sponsor or the appellant's representatives, an explanation  could  have
    been  provided  or  further  evidence  sought  as  to  the  nature  and
    reliability  of  Nikah  Nama  and  marriage  certificates.  It  is  not
    altogether unusual in this jurisdiction for genuine documents  properly
    issued in another country  to  fail  to  meet  the  exacting  standards
    expected of official documents in the  United  Kingdom,  especially  if
    English is not the native language. I am satisfied that  the  appellant
    has effectively been deprived of a fair hearing. While  another  First-
    tier Judge may ultimately reach the same conclusion, I am not satisfied
    that another judge, having given the appellant an opportunity to engage
    with these concerns, would inevitably find the documents unreliable.

16.  I am satisfied that the determination contains  other  material  errors
    of law. At paragraph 25  the  judge  fails  to  determine  whether  the
    sponsor  does  have  a  relationship  with  the  appellant.  There   is
    consequently  no  material  finding  as  to   the   nature   of   their
    relationship. The judge then indicates that, even if  the  relationship
    was genuine and subsisting, it did not  amount  to  family  life.  With
    considerable respect, this conclusion borders on the irrational. If the
    sponsor and the appellant had been communicating every day (and I  note
    the absence of any finding in respect of this assertion,  which  itself
    amounts to a failure to take into account relevant considerations)  and
    they lived in a religiously conservative society as  husband  and  wife
    for two months, and that they believed themselves  to  be  husband  and
    wife and were only  separated  by  reasons  of  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance, it cannot,  on  any  reasonable  basis,  be  said  that  the
    relationship does not amount to family life. Even if  the  evidence  of
    the legality of the marriage is deficient, it is a relationship akin to
    that between husband and wife.

17.  The judge nevertheless found that even if the relationship was  genuine
    and Article 8 was triggered, the decision was proportionate.  The judge
    was clearly obliged  to  take  into  account  the  public  interest  in
    maintaining immigration control (see Section 117B(i)) and was  entitled
    to note  that  there  was  no  legitimate  expectation  that  when  the
    relationship was commenced the appellant would be entitled to enter the
    United Kingdom. The Judge was also entitled to note that the  sponsor's
    own immigration status was, to some extent, uncertain. The sponsor  had
    however been recognised as a refugee and that status continued pursuant
    to Section 3C of the Immigration Act 1971. While he had made a  further
    application for leave to remain in the same category,  he  remained  at
    all times a person with refugee leave.

18.   While  the  judge  properly  asked  himself  whether   it   would   be
    disproportionate to expect the appellant and sponsor to maintain  their
    relationship outside the United Kingdom he failed to take into  account
    relevant considerations. There was no assessment in the proportionality
    balancing   exercise   of   the   apparent   agreement   between    the
    representatives, made at the outset of the hearing, that all the  other
    requirements of the Immigration Rules, including those relating to  the
    financial and  accommodation  requirements  and  the  English  language
    requirements, had been met. The documents before the judge  included  a
    Department for Works and Pensions letter dated 15 May  2014  indicating
    that the partner received personal independence payments and  this  was
    reflected in the bank account statements, a public  benefit  identified
    in E-ECP.3.3 of Appendix FM.  Neither has the judge taken into  account
    the fact that neither the appellant nor the sponsor  are  nationals  of
    Pakistan. There is no  indication,  certainly  no  evidence,  that  the
    sponsor would be entitled to  enter  Pakistan  given  that  he  is  not
    seeking to join a Pakistan national.  For these reasons I am  satisfied
    that the judge's decision is unsafe and that there are material  errors
    of law. The matter will be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for
    a full de novo hearing, all issues open to be  considered  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Kelly.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision is vitiated by material  errors  of  law.
The case will be remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  determined
in a fresh hearing, before a  judge  other  than  judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal A. Kelly.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
                                        18 January 2018
Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
