
                                    [pic]
IAC-HX-DML-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/08843/2014
                                                               OA/08845/2014
                                                               OA/08850/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 August 2016                         |On 18 January 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                         upper tribunal judge conway

                                   Between

                         Master hb (FIRST APPELLANT)
                        master ab (sECOND APPELLANT)
                          MISS AB (third appellant)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ACCRA

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Solomon
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellants are citizens of Guinea.  They are children born in 2000,
    2010 and 2013.  This case arises out of the ECO's decision made  on  11
    April 2014 to refuse their applications for entry clearance  to  settle
    in the UK.

 2. In the applications it is submitted that the  Sponsor  Mr  MAB  is  the
    father of the First and Third Appellants and the uncle  of  the  Second
    Appellant, and that Mrs SB (wife of the Sponsor) is the mother  of  the
    First and Third Appellants.

 3. The Sponsor has been granted refugee status in the UK.

 4.  The  applications  were  considered  under  paragraph  352D   of   the
    Immigration Rules and refused as follows: (First Appellant)  DNA  tests
    indicated that the child was not related as claimed  to  either  parent
    (paragraph 352D(i)).  (Second Appellant) DNA tests indicated  that  the
    child is most likely not related to the  Sponsor  and  whilst  adoption
    papers had been provided to show that the child  had  been  adopted  in
    Guinea, given the  basis  of  the  relationship  being  disproved,  the
    Respondent was not satisfied  that  the  child  had  been  legitimately
    adopted.  That application also failed  under  paragraph  352D(i).   It
    being noted that the Sponsor left Guinea in 2009 and the child was born
    in 2010 it was  also  refused  under  paragraph  352D(iv).   The  Third
    Appellant was also refused under paragraph 352D(iv).

 5. They appealed.  Following a hearing on 16 December 2015.  Judge of  the
    First-tier Malcolm dismissed  the  appeals  in  respect  of  all  three
    Appellants under the Rules.  She also  dismissed  the  appeals  of  the
    First  and  Second  Appellants  on  Article  8  human  rights  grounds.
    However, she allowed the appeal of the Third Appellant under Article 8.

 6. The First and Second Appellants sought permission to appeal  which  was
    granted on 12 July 2016.

 7. There was no challenge to the decision of the judge in  dismissing  the
    appeals under the Rules.  Issue was taken with the decision to  dismiss
    the appeals of the First and Second Appellants under Article 8.

 8. The reason for that decision by the judge is stated  at  paragraphs  66
    and 67.  Simply, that although  she  noted  the  submission  that  both
    Appellants had "lived as part of the family with the  Sponsor  and  his
    now wife" she could not "overlook the fact that there is no  biological
    relationship of both Appellants with the Sponsor  and/or  his  wife  as
    evidenced by the DNA test" [66].   Also,  that  in  light  of  the  DNA
    evidence she did "not consider that  (she  was)  able  to  accept  that
    family  life  is  established  in  respect  of  the  First  and  Second
    Appellants" [67].

 9. She went on to state  that  although  she  had  taken  account  of  the
    submissions as to the family circumstances she  "did  not  accept  (the
    representative's) submission that there are good  grounds  for  finding
    that there are compelling circumstances looking at the evidence in  the
    round to establish that Article 8 is engaged" (in respect of the  First
    and Second Appellants).

10. Mr Solomon's short point before me was that the judge erred in  law  by
    treating the existence of  a  biological  tie  between  the  two  older
    children and the Sponsor  and  his  wife  as  a  precondition  for  the
    existence of family life and why  she  rejected  the  evidence  of  the
    Sponsor  and  his  wife  and  the  submissions  by  the  representative
    concerning the existence of other forms of family life.

11. I agree with Mr  Solomon.   Family  ties  may  be  established  through
    adoption and fostering as well as through biological ties.  In  Labbink
    v Netherlands (45582/99) [2004]  the  European  Court  said  that  "The
    existence or non-existence of family life for the purposes of Article 8
    was essentially a question of fact depending upon the real existence in
    practice of close personal ties."

12. The judge erred in finding as determinative that biological  ties  were
    necessary and in failing to consider the evidence before her as  to  de
    facto family life.

13. Mr Tufan's point was that even if there was error in  that  respect  it
    was not material as the case, having been dismissed  under  the  Rules,
    there were no  compelling  circumstances  not  sufficiently  recognised
    under the Rules such that it needed to be considered under Article 8.

14. I do not agree.  It  is  clear  that  the  judge  turned  her  mind  to
    compelling circumstances (not least because she found there  were  such
    in respect of the Third Appellant).  It is reasonable to conclude  that
    had she applied herself correctly in her analysis  of  family  life  in
    respect of the older two children she would have gone  on  to  consider
    whether  there  were  factors  existing  which  are  relevant  to   the
    proportionality assessment which are not fully reflected in  the  Rules
    which are designed to cover the generality of cases.

15. I consider that her failure of approach on  the  issue  amounted  to  a
    material error.

16. I set aside the decision in respect of the Article  8  decisions.   The
    decisions under the Immigration Rules stand.

17. Mr Solomon had asked that were I to find material error  I  should  set
    the matter down for resumed hearing to allow for the Sponsor's wife  to
    give evidence which she could not do  at  present  as  she  is  in  the
    advanced stages of pregnancy.

18. I do not think that is the appropriate  course.   This  is  an  out  of
    country appeal and the relevant evidence is that pertaining at date  of
    decision.

19. In considering this  matter  I  satisfied  that  there  are  compelling
    circumstances which require the children's cases to be examined outwith
    the Rules.  Not least because they are children and  (if  found  to  be
    part of the family unit) have siblings who  are  in  the  UK  with  the
    Sponsor and his  wife.   Mrs  SB  has  come  lawfully  to  the  UK  for
    settlement "with a further child of theirs" [statement].  Also, it  was
    indicated that although permission to appeal had been sought in respect
    of the decision allowing the appeal on Article 8 grounds of  the  Third
    Appellant such had not been pursued and indeed entry clearance had been
    granted and that child was now with her family in the UK.

20. I next consider whether there was family life.  In respect of the First
    Appellant the clear indication from the DNA report is that neither  the
    Sponsor nor his wife are the biological parents.  As indicated, whether
    there has been family life is a question of fact.  The  claim  is  that
    they have brought up the oldest child from birth.  The  Sponsor's  oral
    and written evidence was that he had always believed him to be his son,
    that when he was born he named him, that he brought him up, fed him and
    looked after him "during his whole life" [statement].  The  first  time
    that he was aware of any information indicating that he was not his son
    was in the course of these proceedings when the matter  was  raised  by
    the Respondent.

21. His wife's evidence is in similar terms.

22. Applying the civil standard I believe that evidence.  I find it of some
    significance that had they known they were not the parents  they  would
    not have gone to the expense and  trouble  of  getting  their  own  DNA
    report in response to the one got by the Respondent.  I note also  that
    there is no suggestion by  the  Respondent  that  the  details  in  the
    application form were an attempt to deceive. There is a  "Supplementary
    Judgement in Lieu of Birth Certificate" from a court in  Conakry  which
    gives support to their claim to have had responsibility for  the  First
    Appellant since his birth.  On the balance of probabilities I find that
    the Sponsor and his wife despite the lack of biological connection have
    had de facto parental responsibility for the First Appellant  and  that
    such amounted to family life.

23. As for the Second Appellant the claim is that he was adopted  following
    the death of a relative's wife in 2010.  There is  documentation  which
    supports that claim including court judgements  and  a  medical  report
    from a  doctor  at  the  Nutrition  and  Children's  Health  Institute,
    Conakry. I see no reason, and none was suggested, why I cannot rely  on
    the contents of such documents. Criticism is made on one issue  in  the
    documentation, namely, differences in the date of death of  the  Second
    Appellant's mother; the death certificate gives  the  date  as  16  May
    2012, whilst a death declaration states it to be 16  May  2010.   Also,
    criticism is made of a claimed discrepancy between the application form
    where it was said he was the son of a relative of the Sponsor,  but  in
    the grounds of appeal it was said that he is an orphan  raised  by  the
    Sponsor's wife since his birth.

24. On the former, I accept that the  reference  to  the  Second  Appellant
    being born in 2012 is a mistake. As indicated no attack has  been  made
    on the numerous other documentation.

25. On the latter I see no discrepancy.  The application form does not  ask
    for the dates (if applicable) of deceased parents.  Further,  there  is
    documentation on file which supports the claim not only that the Second
    Appellant's mother died in 2010 but that his  father  went  missing  in
    late 2009 following "the sad event that took place on the 28/9/2009  at
    the stadium in Conakry"   [court judgement].

26. That a massacre took place  on  that  date  at  a  stadium  in  Conakry
    attended by political oppositionists is clear from background  material
    which is in the public domain.

27. From the evidence I find that the Second Appellant was brought up  from
    the time of his mother's death in 2010 by Mrs SB and that  family  life
    is shown.

28. I find that the consequences of the refusal of entry to the  First  and
    Second  Appellants potentially engage Article 8 by interfering with the
    State's positive obligations in respect of family reunion.

29. The issue is proportionality.  In that regard  it  counts  against  the
    First and Second Appellants that they do not satisfy the Rules.  Nor do
    s117 public interest factors assist them.   Also the evidence indicates
    that the conditions in which the children are  living  in  Guinea  with
    relatives are adequate.  On the other hand I  consider  that  the  best
    interests of these two children are clearly be with the Sponsor and his
    wife who they regard as their parents.  That they miss  them  is  clear
    from their statements lodged for the First tier hearing.  Indeed,  they
    speak of feelings of abandonment. They  are  still  young,  the  Second
    Appellant especially so. I have  no  doubt  that  they  have  a  strong
    emotional need to reunite with the Sponsor and  his  wife.  Their  best
    interests also must be to be with their siblings  who  include  another
    child who was granted entry clearance at the same time as  the  mother.
    Moreover, as indicated entry clearance was also granted  following  the
    positive decision on human rights in respect of the Third Appellant and
    she is in the UK with  her  parents.   I  can  see  no  basis  in  this
    conjoined appeal to reach a different view in respect of the two  older
    children  as  was  reached  in  respect  of  the  youngest,  the  Third
    Appellant. Family life cannot be taken up in Guinea as the Sponsor  has
    refugee status in the UK.

30. In the particular circumstances of this  appeal  I  conclude  that  the
    factors in favour of the  First  and  Second  Appellants  outweigh  the
    public interest in immigration control.

31. The appeals of the First and Second  Appellant  succeed  on  Article  8
    human rights grounds.  The decision in respect of the  Third  Appellant
    whose appeal was allowed on  Article  8  grounds,  being  unchallenged,
    stands.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal showed error of law.  That  decision
is set aside and remade as follows:

    The appeals are allowed under Article 8.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellants and to the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeals if a fee  has  been  paid  I  have  considered
making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award of  any  fee  which
has been paid for the following reason: the evidence which resulted  in  the
conclusion that there was family life was first raised  at  the  First  tier
Tribunal.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

