
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08578/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2017                         |On 11 July 2017                      |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                               cHAUDHRY TAHIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - ISLAMABAD
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Chaudhry Tahir was born on 30 April 1982 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Pakistan.  He had applied for entry clearance to the  United
    Kingdom for settlement as  the  spouse  of  Aneela  Mushtaq  (hereafter
    referred to as the sponsor).  His application was refused by a decision
    of the Entry Clearance Officer (Islamabad) by a decision dated 20 April
    2015.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Mensah)
    which, in a decision promulgated on 20 June 2016, dismissed the appeal.
     The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I acknowledge that there are, prima facie, problems  arising  from  the
    judge's analysis of the evidence submitted  by  the  appellant  dealing
    with the financial requirements of the Immigration Rules.  It  is  also
    possible that the judge has assessed the evidence as at the wrong  date
    (as at the date of the hearing before her, rather than the date of  the
    application for the Entry Clearance Officer).   However,  I  note  that
    there was no attendance by the sponsor or  any  representative  at  the
    hearing in the Upper Tribunal on 23 May 2017.  I had on file  a  letter
    from the appellant's previous solicitors (Henry  Hyams)  dated  19  May
    2017 which informs the Tribunal to "communicate with the  appellant  in
    future correspondence".  The Tribunal also received on  3  May  2017  a
    witness statement from the sponsor which is signed by her and dated  26
    April 2017.  This statement contains the words,

         "I am no longer in  a  relationship  with  the  appellant  and  the
         relationship has broken down.  I would request the Home Office  and
         the Tribunal make a note of my sponsorship ending and  amend  their
         respective records accordingly.  Under the circumstances I  request
         my documents and evidence provided be returned to my  home  address
         as stated above."

 3. The Tribunal has no reason to believe that this document has  not  been
    submitted by  any  person  other  than  the  sponsor.   Obviously,  the
    statement has been provided after the date of the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision.  I am reminded that Section 12(2) of  the  Tribunals,  Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007 (as amended) provides that  I  may  (but  need
    not) set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  where  that
    decision involves the making of an error  on  a  point  of  law.   This
    appeal has not been withdrawn by the appellant but it has,  in  effect,
    been brought to an end by the fact that the appellant and  the  sponsor
    are no longer in a genuine and subsisting relationship according to the
    evidence provided by the sponsor.  In these unusual circumstances, I do
    not consider it would be appropriate, even if I were to find  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in  law,  to  set  aside  the  decision
    dismissing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 1 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane









TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane


