
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08707/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 July 2012                               |On 1 August 2013             |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PETER LANE


                                   Between

                              michael mcdonald

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, KINGSTON

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Ahmed, Counsel, instructed by Aston Law
Practice
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica, born on 14 November  1975.   The
    First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order, intended to  prohibit  any
    report of the  proceedings from identifying the appellant.   I  see  no
    reason to continue that order.

2.   On 7 November  2011  the  appellant  applied  from  Jamaica  for  entry
    clearance as the spouse of a British citizen  residing  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  On 14 March 2012, the respondent  refused  that  application.
    The reasons for that decision were as follows:

         "You have applied to settle in the UK as the spouse of [CB]. Record
         held in the UK have revealed that  you  have  previously  used  the
         names Baron Johnson born 10/9/76, Henry Donovan  born  17/9/69  and
         John Edwards born 10/5/75.  You first arrived in the UK in 2001  in
         the name of Baron Johnson, were refused entry  and  absconded  from
         temporary admission. You then attempted to enter  the  UK  in  2003
         using a false British passport  in the name of  John  Edwards.  You
         were refused entry and removed back to Jamaica.


         On 15/1/04 you applied for entry clearance  as  the  spouse  of  Ms
         Baptiste, in the name of Michael  McDonald.  This  application  was
         refused and you withdrew your appeal on 16/9/04.


         On 12/6/06 you were encountered by UK police and gave your name  as
         Henry  Donovan. You were interviewed and stated that your real name
         was Baron Johnson. You stated that you had  entered  the  UK  on  a
         passenger ferry and  did  not  obtain  leave  from  an  Immigration
         Officer on arrival. You were served  with  an  IS151A  for  illegal
         entry without leave and  absconded  from  temporary  admission.  On
         15/2/10  you  were  re-encountered  by  UK  police,   detained   by
         Immigration and were removed at public expense.


         I am satisfied that this conduct is consistent with that  described
         in   Entry   Clearance   Guidance   Chapter   26.18    (found    at
         http://www.ukvisas.gov.uk/en/ecg/chapter26#point    eighteen)    as
         having contrived in a significant way to frustrate  the  intentions
         of the Immigration  Rules   because  you  have  used  a  number  of
         identities to obtain entry to the UK, including  a  forged  British
         passport .


         Your application is  therefore  one  that  according  to  Paragraph
         320(11) of the Immigration Rules, should  normally  be  refused.  I
         have considered the circumstances of your application, that you are
         married and state that you are the father of three children in  the
         UK. I note that you have provided no evidence that  you  are  their
         father, as you are not named on their birth certificates.  However,
         on balance I am not satisfied that  your  particular  circumstances
         are of a sufficiently compelling nature to justify my granting your
         application, having regard to the fact that it should  normally  be
         refused.


         Records held in Jamaica  indicate  that  you  were  prosecuted  for
         forgery and uttering forgery on XXXX.  You were fined JMD$50,000 or
         sentenced to 6 months' imprisonment for uttering of forgery.  I  am
         satisfied that this could have carried a custodial sentence of more
         than 12 months if that offence had occurred in the United  Kingdom.
          I have also considered the  compassionate  circumstances  of  your
         application, that you are married and state that you are the father
         of three children in the UK.  I note  that  you  have  provided  no
         evidence that you are their father, as you are not named  on  their
         birth certificates.  However, on balance I am  not  satisfied  that
         your particular circumstances  are  of  a  sufficiently  compelling
         nature for me to exercise the powers of discretion granted to me by
         paragraph 320(18) of the Immigration Rules.


         I  have  therefore  refused  your  application  because  I  am  not
         satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that you  meet  all  of
         the requirements of the relevant Paragraph of  the  United  Kingdom
         Immigration Rules."

  3. The appellant appealed against that decision and on 3 January 2013  his
    appeal was  heard at Birmingham by First-tier Tribunal Judge Broe.  The
    judge heard evidence from Ms CB, as  well  as  considering  documentary
    evidence.  In a determination promulgated on 17 January 2013, the judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal, both under the Immigration Rules  and
    as regards Article 8 of the ECHR.  Permission to  appeal  against  that
    decision was refused by the First-tier  Tribunal  but  granted  by  the
    Upper Tribunal on 15 May 2013.  The main  matter  which  concerned  the
    judge who granted permission was that arguably "the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge  should  have  found  that  the  respondent  had  exercised   his
    discretion unlawfully because he had, understandably  on  the  evidence
    before him, made erroneous findings of fact and  he  should  have  been
    ordered to make the decision  again  on  the  facts  as  found  by  the
    Tribunal."

4.   The judge who granted permission appears to  have  been  referring,  in
    this regard, to DNA evidence, obtained after the decision against which
    the appellant had appealed. This indicated that the appellant  was  the
    biological father of three children born to CB.  Interestingly, in  his
    written application to the respondent, the appellant had stated that he
    "did not have any dependent children" ([6] of the  determination).   It
    was only when interviewed by the Entry Clearance Officer in  2012  that
    he had said he had three children.

5.   Amongst other relevant  information  that  came  to  light  during  the
    interview was that the appellant had obtained a  Jamaican  passport  in
    the name of Byron Johnson in 2002 because, when  he  had  come  to  the
    United Kingdom in 2001 in his correct name, he had been  refused  entry
    and returned to Jamaica.  The appellant used his cousin's birth  papers
    and applied using his own photograph.  On that occasion he  had  stayed
    in the United Kingdom for a year and half before being picked up at the
    airport when he tried to travel to St Lucia. When he returned  in  2006
    he used a British passport in the name of John Edwards.  He then stayed
    for four years with a sponsor, during which time he was twice picked up
    by the police.  When this happened,  he  gave  them  the  name  Donovan
    Henry; but when at the  police  station  he  said  that  he  was  Byron
    Johnson.

6.   At [17] to [22] of the determination,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    recorded the evidence of the sponsor.   She  said  that  she  had  been
    extremely surprised when in 2006  the  appellant  had  arrived  at  her
    house, since she had no idea he was coming. Their eldest child had been
    born in 2003.  She visited the appellant regularly in Jamaica and  said
    that the  children  missed  the  appellant.  The  judge  also  noted  a
    statement from the  sponsor's  mother  and  letters  from  two  of  the
    children.

7.   The judge's findings are set out in [26] to [48] of the  determination.
     At [27] the judge described  the  provisions  contained  in  paragraph
    320(11) of the Immigration Rules, as they were at the date of decision.
    At that time, the provisions made reference to  guidance,  setting  out
    examples of circumstances in which a person would be regarded as having
    contrived in a significant way  to  frustrate  the  intentions  of  the
    Rules.  I note that one such  example  (now  set  out  in  the  current
    version of the rule itself) is "absconding".

8.   At [28] the judge  described  the  provisions  contained  in  paragraph
    320(18), whereby it is stated that, save where an official is satisfied
    that admission would be justified  for  strong  compassionate  reasons,
    conviction in any country including the United Kingdom  of  an  offence
    which, if committed in this country, is  punishable  with  imprisonment
    for a term of 12 months or more or, if  committed  outside  the  United
    Kingdom, would be so punishable if the conduct  had  occurred  in  this
    country, constitutes grounds on which entry clearance or leave to enter
    the United Kingdom "should  normally  be  refused"  (according  to  the
    heading which governs paragraph 320(A) to 22 of the Rules).

9.   At [29] the judge recorded that the respondent "was not satisfied  that
    the appellant was the father of [LB], [RB] or [AB].  The appellant  has
    now provided DNA evidence which I am satisfied  establishes  paternity.
    The respondent concedes that this is the case."

10.  So far as paragraph 320(11) was concerned,  the  judge  made  it  plain
    that he  had  "no  hesitation  in  finding  that  [the  appellant]  has
    contrived in a significant way to frustrate  the  intentions  of  these
    Rules." [31]

11.  The judge set out the appellant's behaviour as follows:

         "30. The appellant has an appalling immigration history.  He  first
             came to this country as a  visitor in  2000  and  was  refused
             entry. He then returned using a false identity and overstayed.
             Since then he has  repeatedly  and  dishonestly  breached  the
             Immigration Rules. He absconded from temporary  admission  and
             went to ground. He failed to comply with reporting  conditions
             and when coming into contact with the police twice gave  false
             identities.  He has used  two  false  passports  and  made  no
             attempt to regularise his situation in this country.  He  made
             no effort to leave the country and I have no doubt would still
             be here had he managed to avoid contact with the  authorities.
             Even when making this application he chose not to 'come clean'
             and  instead  concealed  his  convictions  for   offences   of
             dishonesty. He has not at any time, apart  possibly  from  the
             2004 settlement  application,  acted  in  good  faith  in  his
             dealings with the authorities in this country."

12.  At [32] the judge recorded  as  a  matter  of  "no  dispute",  that  in
    February 2012 the appellant had been convicted in Jamaica of uttering a
    forged instrument and obtaining a false passport   by  using  a  forged
    document.  For these offences he had been fined  a  total  of  $80,000,
    with an alternative of six months' imprisonment (with  hard  labour  as
    regards the first offence).

13.  At [33]  the  judge  recorded,  unarguably  correctly,  that  paragraph
    320(18) was of potential relevance, where a person was convicted of  an
    offence which, if committed in the United Kingdom, was punishable  with
    imprisonment of a term of  twelve  months  or  more.   Recognising  the
    discretionary nature of paragraph 320(18), however, the judge noted  at
    [34] that the appellant's case to have discretion exercised differently
    turned on his Article 8 rights and the provisions of section 55 of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009.

14.  At  [36]  the  judge  noted  the  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's
    children  and  at  [37]  he  confirmed  that  he  had  given   "careful
    consideration" to that evidence.   In this regard, the judge noted that
    the Supreme Court Judge in ZH (Tanzania) [2011] UKSC 4  confirmed  that
    the best interests of children must be a primary  consideration  in  an
    Article 8 proportionality exercise. This  meant  that  those  interests
    should be considered first "although they could be  outweighed  by  the
    cumulative effect of other considerations".  The best  interests  of  a
    child, broadly mean the wellbeing of the child.  The  children  are  of
    course innocent of all wrongdoing."

15.  Having then set out the terms  of  section  55,  the  judge  noted  the
    requirement deriving  from  Beoku-Betts  v  SSHD  [2008]  UKHL  39,  to
    consider the human rights of all those  who  may  be  affected  by  the
    decision under appeal.

16.  At [42] to  [44]  the  judge  made  detailed  findings  concerning  the
    positions of the three children, together with another  child  of  CB's
    from a  previous  relationship,  including  the  extent  to  which  the
    children had lived with the appellant and their mother.   The  findings
    also included that the children and CB had maintained contact since the
    appellant's removal and that they had visited him in Jamaica.

17.  This drew the conclusion at [45] that the decision under  appeal  would
    amount to an interference with the right to enjoy family life and that,
    accordingly, proportionality was the key issue.  At [46]  to  [48]  the
    judge concluded as follows:

         "46.  I find the  appellant's  appalling  immigration  history  and
             disregard of the law to be  a significant factor.  This is not
             a case where an overstayer has voluntarily left the country in
             order to legitimatise himself by making a  proper  application
             for  leave  to  enter.  The  appellant  in  this  case   hehas
             deliberately, dishonesty and repeatedly contrived to frustrate
             the Immigration Rules. He left the country only  when  removed
             after absconding and lying low for four years.


         47.  The family life that is currently  enjoyed  can  continue..  I
             accept that the children would like the appellant to  be  with
             them and that is preferably for them, like all children, to be
             with both parents.  I do  however  find  the  decision  to  be
             proportionate to the need  to  maintain  immigration  control.
             Whilst I have regarded the best interests of the children as a
             primary consideration I am  not  persuaded  that  they  should
             outweigh the cumulative effect of the  other  factors  in  the
             case or the need for the state to control its borders.


         48.  Therefore on the totality of the evidence before  me,  I  find
             that the appellant has not discharged the burden of proof  and
             the reasons given by the respondent do  justify  the  refusal.
             Therefore the respondent's decision is in accordance with  the
             law and the applicable Immigration  Rules.   I  have  made  an
             anonymity order because of the involvement of the children."
Discussion

18.  So far as concerns the matter raised in the Upper Tribunal's  grant  of
    permission, I find that there is no  legitimate  basis  for  concluding
    that the determination of the First-tier Tribunal Judge should  be  set
    aside and a decision re-made to allow the appellant's  appeal,  to  the
    extent that the Entry Clearance Officer should be compelled to  make  a
    decision on the present application, based on the DNA evidence.   Given
    the way in which the  appellant  chose  to  tell  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer about the children (see above), it is  entirely  understandable
    why the respondent's decision is as set out in the decision notice.  In
    any event, I agree with Mr Wilding that, having regard to the judgments
    of the Court of Appeal in AJ (India)  [2011]  EWCA  Civ  1191,  it  was
    perfectly proper for the First-tier Judge to engage with the  evidence,
    including that relating to  the  children,  which  had  not  been   put
    forward by the appellant to the Entry Clearance Officer,  and  for  the
    judge to make findings by reference to that evidence, so far as it bore
    on the Immigration Rules and Article 8 of the ECHR.

19.  It is,  accordingly,  to  those  findings  that  I  now  turn.   It  is
    perfectly apparent from the determination that the  judge  made  proper
    and sustainable findings in respect  of  the  question  as  to  whether
    discretion under paragraph 320(11) and (18) of  the  Immigration  Rules
    should be exercised differently.  Plainly, the judge concluded that  it
    should not.  He was  fully  entitled  to  that  view.  The  appellant's
    immigration  history   had   undoubtedly   been   appalling.   In   the
    circumstances of the present case, it was appropriate for the  judge to
    approach  the  issue  of  whether  discretion   should   be   exercised
    differently under the Immigration Rules,  by  considering  whether,  on
    Article 8 grounds, exclusion of the appellant from the  United  Kingdom
    would be a disproportionate interference with his rights  or  those  of
    others (in particular, the children).  For the appellant, Mr Ahmed  has
    not pointed to any factor which might be said  to  compel  a  different
    conclusion under the Rules which is not also a  factor  falling  to  be
    taken into account as part of the Article 8 exercise.

20.  Thus, I find that the First-tier Judge was fully entitled  to  conclude
    that the public interest in  excluding  the  appellant  outweighed  the
    interference with his and/or others' rights, such that the appeal  fell
    to be dismissed under the  Rules.   So  far  as  paragraph  320(18)  is
    specifically concerned, Mr  Ahmed  drew  my  attention  to  the  recent
    determination in F (Paragraph 320(18); type of leave) [2013] UKUT 00309
    (IAC).  In that case, the Upper Tribunal drew  attention  to  the  fact
    that paragraph 320(18)  does  not  apply  at  all  where  the  official
    concerned is satisfied that admission would  be  justified  for  strong
    compassionate reasons.  On the facts of the present case, however, I do
    not consider that this takes the appellant's case anywhere. Neither the
    respondent nor (more particularly) the judge considered that there were
    such strong compassionate reasons for admission. As a result, the judge
    at [28] was correct to observe that  the  paragraph  320(18)  "provides
    that an application should normally be  refused".   That  is  what  the
    heading above paragraph 320(8) says.  It cannot be  properly  contended
    that [28] of the determination contains an incorrect self-direction, to
    the effect that,  where  no  such  reasons  exist,  the  discretion  in
    paragraph 320(18) must be applied against an applicant.

21.  Insofar as Mr Ahmed might be said, at the hearing, to  have  maintained
    an earlier submission, to the effect that  there  is  conflict  between
    paragraphs 320(1) to (7D)  and  paragraph  320(11),  I  agree  with  Mr
    Wilding that that submission is misconceived for the simple reason that
    paragraph  320(1)  etc  is  mandatory;  whereas  paragraph  320(11)  is
    discretionary.   The same is true of paragraph 320(18).

22. Mr Ahmed also sought to pray in aid PS  (Paragraph  320(11)  discretion:
    care needed) [2010] UKUT  00440  (IAC).  However  as  I  have  observed
    earlier, unlike that case, one of the factors set out in  the  relevant
    guidance  was  undoubtedly  present  in  the  present   case:   namely,
    absconding for some four years, whilst the appellant was in the  United
    Kingdom.

23.   Mr Ahmed appeared to assert that the appellant should have been  given
    credit for not attempting to thwart removal, by  making  an  Article  8
    human rights claim before he was most recently removed from the  United
    Kingdom; and that he should also find favour because he had seen fit to
    permit himself to be removed. This submission is devoid  of  merit.  It
    amounts to saying that a person should be  rewarded  for  not  behaving
    even more badly than he has.

24.  Finally, it is quite wrong to say that the interests  of  the  children
    in the present case compelled the grant of entry clearance, despite the
    appellant's dreadful criminal record and, in  particular,  his  compete
    disregard  for  the  laws  of  the  United  Kingdom  and  of   Jamaica,
    prohibiting  the  use  of  false  documentation  for  the  purposes  of
    international travel and other matters. On the evidence, the judge  was
    fully entitled to find that  the  children's  best  interests,  whether
    alone or in combination with other factors, did not outweigh the public
    interest in maintaining exclusion of the appellant.

25.    Mr  Ahmed  asked  rhetorically  how  long  it  might  be  before  the
    appellant could expect to be allowed to re-enter  the  United  Kingdom.
    An answer to that question is, however, unnecessary for the purposes of
    the present proceedings.

Decision

26.  The making of the decision by the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  The  appellant's  appeal  is
    dismissed.


                               Signed                                  Date




                               Upper Tribunal Judge Peter Lane

