
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA089142015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th April 2017                            |On 5th May 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS

                                   Between

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     HN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss A Fijiwala
For the Respondent:    No appearance and no representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Entry  Clearance  Officer,  with  permission  appeals  against  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Lloyd)   who,   in   a
    determination promulgated on 21st October 2016 allowed the Respondent's
    appeal on human rights grounds.  The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make
    an anonymity direction  however,  as  the  Respondent  is  a  minor,  I
    consider that she requires anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper
    Tribunal.

    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2.  Whilst  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  is  the  Appellant  in   these
    proceedings and HN is the Respondent, I intend to refer to the  parties
    as they were before the First-tier Tribunal for sake of convenience.

 3. Before the Upper Tribunal, the Entry Clearance Officer was  represented
    by Miss Fijiwala (Senior Presenting Officer).  There was no  appearance
    or representation on behalf of HN.  However, there was a  letter  dated
    29th March 2017 stating that neither the Sponsor (HN's mother) nor  the
    legal representatives acting for the Appellant would be able to  attend
    the hearing due to financial circumstances.  However,  they  enclose  a
    copy of the bundle that was before the First-tier Tribunal and  also  a
    Rule 24 response.  I  confirm  that  I  have  considered  the  Rule  24
    response dated 29th March 2017 and the bundle that was before the First-
    tier Tribunal.

 4. I have heard submissions from Miss Fijiwala, who brings the  appeal  on
    behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer and those submissions are set out
    in my Record of Proceedings.

 5. The Appellant is a national of Uganda and was born on 17th October 1999
    and was 15 years of age at the time of the  date  of  the  Respondent's
    decision to refuse her application for entry clearance which  was  made
    on  4th  May  2015.   The  Sponsor  is  the  Appellant's  mother.   The
    background to the appeal is set out in the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at paragraphs [5] to [10] of that determination.  The  Sponsor
    was previously married in Uganda and there were three children by  that
    previous marriage of which the Appellant is the youngest.  The  Sponsor
    entered the United Kingdom in 2005 after meeting the  man  who  was  to
    become her husband while she was in the  UK  on  a  visit  visa.   They
    subsequently married on 9th July 2005 and she later went on to  acquire
    indefinite leave to remain and British citizenship.  At  the  time  she
    left Uganda, the Appellant was approximately 6 years of age.

 6. Applications were made by the Appellant in  2007  and  2008  for  entry
    clearance to join her mother in the UK but,  on  both  occasions  those
    applications were refused on the basis that there was no evidence  from
    the Appellant's natural father  that  he  consented  to  the  Appellant
    coming to  the  United  Kingdom  or  that  he  did  not  have  parental
    responsibility.

 7. In a witness statement filed by the Sponsor, it was stated that her ex-
    husband had been abusive in the relationship and that when she had left
    Uganda she had left her children in the care of their grandmother.  The
    circumstances of the Appellant's elder siblings are that they  are  now
    both over the age of 18 and are living independently.

 8. On 25th February 2015 the Appellant applied for entry clearance to join
    her mother in the UK.  The  basis  of  the  application  was  that  the
    Appellant  attended  boarding  school  and  remained  living  with  her
    grandmother out of term time.  The Sponsor asserted that  she  remained
    the person who exercised sole responsibility for her daughter and  that
    she had also sent financial remittances to Uganda to cover  her  school
    fees and maintenance.  It was further  asserted  at  the  time  of  the
    application that the Appellant's grandmother was elderly and unwell and
    had to be admitted to hospital and could not care for the Appellant.

 9. The decision of the Entry Clearance Officer which was made on  4th  May
    2015 set out the following reasons for refusing the application:-

         "You wish to join your mother in the UK.   I  note  that  your  two
         previous applications made in 2007 and 2008 were  refused.   It  is
         unclear why your mother has waited a further seven years in  making
         this application.

         I note that your mother went to the  UK  in  2005  and  since  then
         obtained British citizenship.  You have been placed in the care  of
         your maternal grandmother and during the period of separation  your
         mother has only visited you once (2013) in the last ten years.

         It is stated that your father has  no  involvement  in  your  life,
         although our  records  show  that  you  had  previously  maintained
         contact with him up to 2005.  It is unclear what contact if any you
         have had with him since then.  The fact of the matter is  that  you
         have remained and have been cared for by your grandmother  for  the
         past ten years.  You are financially supported by your mother,  you
         have a carer and you are living in a stable environment.  You  have
         other siblings in Uganda who you have contact with.   You  have  no
         medical condition that requires treatment in the UK.   In  view  of
         this, I am therefore not  satisfied  that  there  are  serious  and
         compelling family or other considerations which make  exclusion  of
         you  undesirable  as  required  under  paragraph  297(f)   of   the
         Immigration Rules.

         I have also considered whether the particular circumstances set out
         in your application  constitute  exceptional  circumstances  which,
         consistent with the right to respect for family life  contained  in
         Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights,  warrant
         consideration by the  Secretary  of  State  of  a  grant  of  entry
         clearance to come to the United Kingdom outside the requirements of
         the  Immigration  Rules.   I  have  decided  they  do  not.    Your
         application for entry clearance to come to the  United  Kingdom  is
         therefore refused.

         I  have  therefore  refused  your  application  because  I  am  not
         satisfied on the balance of probability that you meet  all  of  the
         requirements of  the  relevant  paragraph  of  the  United  Kingdom
         Immigration Rules."

    The Appellant sought to appeal that decision and Grounds of Appeal were
    issued on 1st June 2015.  In those grounds, the Appellant set out  that
    the Entry Clearance Officer had made errors of fact,  relating  to  the
    number of visits that had been made to Uganda in  the  last  ten  years
    [paragraph 7] and that the Appellant, having  previously  been  refused
    entry clearance twice for similar  reasons  did  not  attempt  to  make
    another application for seven  years  because  it  was  felt  that  the
    previous two refusals had  led  to  disappointment.   Furthermore,  the
    Appellant's grandmother was able to care for the applicant at that time
    but that was no longer the case.  The  Grounds  of  Appeal  enclosed  a
    statement of the  Appellant's  Sponsor  stating  that  the  Appellant's
    grandmother was elderly and suffered from high blood pressure  and  was
    often admitted to hospital.  It was also asserted that the  Appellant's
    mother had sole parental responsibility for the Appellant's  upbringing
    and  thus  there  was  "no  need  to  bring  serious   and   compelling
    circumstances into the equation [see paragraph 4 of the  grounds].   In
    the alternative, if there  were  compelling  circumstances,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer should have considered  the  best  interests  of  the
    Appellant and an evaluation of her welfare.

10. On 29th October 2015 the Entry Clearance  Manager  conducted  a  review
    having considered the  documents  that  had  been  submitted  with  the
    Grounds of Appeal which included the statement of the Sponsor.  In that
    review, the Entry Clearance Manager gave reasons as to why he  was  not
    satisfied that sole responsibility had been established.   In  relation
    to the grandmother's ill-health, the Entry Clearance  Manager's  review
    considered that the claim  had  not  been  supported  by  the  evidence
    provided and  that  there  had  been  no  explanation  as  to  why  the
    Appellant's siblings, who continue to live in Uganda could  not  assist
    with her care.  Therefore in addition, he was not satisfied that  there
    were compelling family or other considerations which made her exclusion
    undesirable.  Thus, he was satisfied after undertaking a review of  the
    original application and the Grounds of Appeal  that  the  decision  to
    refuse the Appellant entry clearance should be maintained.

11. The appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 14th September  2016.
    The judge heard evidence from the Sponsor and in addition had a  bundle
    of documents, which have also been placed before the Upper Tribunal.

12.  The reasons and findings of fact are set out  at  paragraphs  [14]  to
    [30].  The judge dealt with the  principal  ground  of  refusal  namely
    whether the Sponsor had been exercising  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant at paragraphs [14] to [27].  In this regard, the  judge  gave
    consideration  to  the  decision  of  TD  (Paragraph  297(i)(e)   "sole
    responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 0049 and Mundeba (Section 55 of the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 and paragraph  297(i)(f))
    [2013] UKUT 88.

13. The judge's findings of fact can be summarised as follows:-

      1. There was no dispute that the Appellant is the Sponsor's  child  or
         that the Appellant was living with her grandmother.

      2. The judge accepted that the Sponsor had made visits  to  Uganda  in
         2007,  2008,  2009,  2013  and  2014.   The  judge   rejected   the
         Respondent's case that there had only been one visit.

      3. The judge found that the Sponsor had continued to  send  money  for
         the Appellant's education and maintenance [paragraph 15].

      4. In respect of the Appellant's natural father, the judge  considered
         the evidence of the Sponsor (both written and oral) and  the  judge
         found that the Appellant's father had relinquished all interest  in
         and responsibility for the Appellant [see paragraphs 16 to 18].

      5. As to the Appellant's elder siblings, they were found by the  judge
         to be too old now to be considered under the provisions  for  entry
         clearance based on sole responsibility.  The judge found that there
         was no real factual dispute and that the Appellant's elder  brother
         was working and living independently and that her sister  was  also
         at university and that while she  continued  to  receive  financial
         support arrangements would need to  be  made  for  her  during  the
         university holidays, she was nonetheless increasingly independent.

      6. The judge also found that there had been no assertion made that the
         brother  or  sister  had  ever  exercised  responsibility  for  the
         Appellant.

      7. The judge rejected at paragraph [20] the  Sponsor's  evidence  that
         the separation was something that had been imposed  upon  them  and
         was "unfair and cruel".  The judge found that  the  current  family
         situation arose out of choice and that the Sponsor decided to marry
         and relocate to the UK to take up family life there [see  paragraph
         20].  The Sponsor and Mr Riley had now had a  child  of  their  own
         born in 2009 who was a British citizen.

      8. There is no factual dispute that the Appellant had been in the day-
         to-day care of her grandmother since the Sponsor left for the UK in
         2005.

14. The judge went on to consider the evidence when reaching  a  conclusion
    on the issue of whether or not the Sponsor  had  been  exercising  sole
    responsibility for the Appellant.  At paragraph [22], the  judge  found
    that the Sponsor had left Uganda over ten years ago to  set  up  a  new
    life in the UK.  She accepted, as set out earlier that she had  visited
    Uganda on several occasions although there were several years when  she
    did not so visit.  The judge also accepted that the Sponsor  maintained
    a keen interest in her children's lives and wellbeing and that she  had
    sent money to support their education.  However, the judge  found  that
    there was:-

         "No evidence that persuades me that  she  was  the  sole  point  of
         contact for the school, which  is  surprising  given  that  it  was
         boarding school and that there would generally therefore have  been
         a reduced need to be on hand, for example,  to  ensure  attendance.
         By this I mean that it is likely to be easier to be the first point
         of contact with school that is boarding and to maintain and  manage
         the relationship for another country than it would be if the school
         arrangements were day attendance only.  There is also  no  evidence
         to demonstrate that she was making decisions about  health  issues,
         although that might also have been  because  no  particular  health
         issues arose during that time."

     At paragraph [23], the judge found that whilst the Appellant  had  been
    at boarding school, she was nonetheless in the care of her  grandmother
    for over ten years requiring her to live with her whenever she was  not
    at school and therefore the  judge  inferred  that  "It  would  be  the
    grandmother that would have to be available for the Appellant if  there
    were any problems during the school term."  The  Judge  also  found  at
    paragraph [23] that whilst it was the Sponsor's contention that because
    the grandmother's health was failing, that she was unable  to  continue
    her role, the judge found that this "by inference shows that  the  role
    that  she  was  required  to  undertake  was  active  and  real."   The
    conclusions were set out at paragraphs [24] to [27].  Those  paragraphs
    read as follows:-

         "[24]    In those circumstances, whilst the possibility exists  for
                there to be a day-to-day carer for the child  who  does  not
                acquire any parental responsibility for  the  child,  whilst
                being directed by a parent  in  the  UK  who  retained  sole
                responsibility, I find that this was unlikely to  have  been
                the case  in  this  case.   The  length  of  time  that  the
                grandmother was the responsible person  in  Uganda  for  the
                Sponsor's children, that there were years when  the  Sponsor
                did not visit, and the absence of, for example, evidence  in
                respect of the  Sponsor's  influence  over  the  Appellant's
                school and education issues,  leads  me  to  find  that  the
                Sponsor has not had sole responsibility since she  moved  to
                the UK.

         [25] However, the situation regarding that changed at the  time  of
                the grandmother's death on 28th June 2016, which  of  course
                was prior to the ECM  review.   Much  of  the  time  of  the
                hearing was spent on questions  concerning  the  Appellant's
                relatives in  Uganda  and  on  arrangements  for  her  older
                sister, particularly when on  leave  from  university.   The
                implication  of  all  this   being   that   whatever   those
                arrangements were,  the  same  could  be  arranged  for  the
                Appellant.

         [26] The Sponsor does not claim that there are no  other  relatives
                in Uganda however, there  is  no  evidence  before  me  that
                suggested any of  these  other  relatives  have  ever  taken
                direct responsibility for the Appellant in any way.  In  any
                case, the question before me is one of  sole  responsibility
                assessed according to the helpful guidelines  in  the  above
                case law.  It is a factual question.  It is not  a  question
                of the reasonableness or otherwise of whether the  Appellant
                could be looked after by someone else.

         [27] Having considered the totality of all of  this  I  found  that
                since 28th June 2016 the Sponsor had sole responsibility for
                the Appellant  and  accordingly,  paragraph  297(e)  of  the
                Immigration Rules is satisfied."

15. At paragraph [28] of the determination, the  judge  made  reference  to
    paragraph  297(f)  in  respect  of  whether  there  were  "serious  and
    compelling family or other considerations which make exclusion  of  the
    child undesirable".  The judge observed that that sub-paragraph (f)  is
    an alternative provision that would not need to be considered if (e) is
    met.  The judge therefore found that having allowed  the  appeal  under
    paragraph 297(e) there was no need to make any findings on (f).

16. At paragraph [29], the judge observed that the Entry Clearance  Officer
    had not raised any grounds for refusal in respect of paragraphs 297(iv)
    and (v) relating to accommodation and maintenance.

17. At paragraph [30] the judge said this:-

         "Of course, the matter is brought to me under the new appeal regime
         with  the  only  available  ground  being  that  the  decision  was
         incompatible with the Human Rights Act 1998.  I spent  time  up  to
         now considering the Immigration Rules, but I find that  in  respect
         of the situation of a parent and child,  that  Article  8  ECHR  is
         clearly engaged.  I have carefully considered the tests set out  in
         R  v  SSHD  ex  parte  Razgar  [2004]  UKHL  27.   With  regard  to
         proportionality in particular, I find  that  satisfying  the  Rules
         regarding parents/child reunification is a lens through  which  the
         proportionality assessment in favour of the Appellant  weighs  very
         heavily,  and  indeed  I  find  that  the  overall  proportionality
         assessment weighs in the Appellant's favour."

     Thus the judge allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.

18. The Entry Clearance Officer sought permission  to  appeal  and  on  1st
    March 2017 First-tier Tribunal Judge Dineen granted permission.

19. Miss Fijiwala on behalf of the Entry Clearance Officer relied upon  the
    Grounds of Appeal.

20. She submitted that the judge erred in law  in  a  number  of  respects.
    First of all that at paragraph [24], the judge found that  the  Sponsor
    did not have sole  responsibility  since  she  moved  to  the  UK.   At
    paragraph  [25],  the  judge  found  that  the  Sponsor  had  had  sole
    responsibility since 28th  June  2016  (the  Appellant's  grandmother's
    death).  It was submitted that the judge had erred  in  law  by  taking
    into account post-decision evidence and that the relevant  date  in  an
    entry clearance case was the date of decision by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.  She also observed that the judge appeared to place weight  on
    the Entry Clearance Manager's review at paragraph  [25]  in  which  she
    suggested that the grandmother's death had taken place prior to the ECM
    review when the ECM review in fact took place  on  29th  October  2015.
    Miss Fijiwala submitted that the judge could  only  take  into  account
    evidence appertaining at the time of the decision as set out in Section
    85A(2) and reaffirmed in the case of the SSHD v SS (Congo)  and  Others
    [2015] EWCA Civ 387 at paragraph 58.  She therefore submitted that  the
    Rule could not be met.

21. As to the judge allowing  the  appeal  on  human  rights  grounds,  she
    submitted that was an error of law and that the judge had proceeded  on
    the basis that appeal rights were limited by what the judge referred to
    as  the  "new  appeal  regime"  (see  paragraph  [30]).   However   the
    application was made on 16th March 2015 and whilst decided in May 2015,
    the new appeal regime did not apply.  She further submitted that in any
    event Article 8 would fall to be assessed in light of the circumstances
    as at the date  of  decision  (see  AS  (Somalia)).   Consequently  she
    submitted  that  the  decision  to  refuse  entry  clearance  was   not
    disproportionate because at the date of the  decision  the  Immigration
    Rules were not  met  and  that  there  was  no  finding  of  compelling
    circumstances.  Thus she submitted it would be open to the Appellant to
    make a fresh application.

22. As to the Rule 24 response, Miss Fijiwala submitted  that  the  medical
    evidence relied upon  by  the  Appellant,  was  post-decision  evidence
    contrary to what was set out in the Rule 24 response and that there was
    no reference to it being relevant or  to  affecting  the  grandmother's
    ability to care.  The judge's findings make it plain that she was  able
    to care for her child until her death.  Thus she submitted the decision
    should be set aside and upon remaking should be dismissed.

23. As I  have  set  out  earlier  in  this  determination,  there  was  no
    appearance or representation on behalf of the Appellant.  However  what
    was sent for this Tribunal to consider was a  Rule  24  response  along
    with the original bundle of documentation.  In the Rule 24 response the
    following is submitted:-

      1) The judge did not err in law by allowing the appeal and considering
         the fact that the  Appellant's  grandmother  had  died  whilst  the
         appeal was outstanding.  Whilst the Respondent  argues  that  post-
         decision evidence should not  have  been  considered  and  a  fresh
         application should have been made if the death of  the  grandmother
         was to be considered, this is not "new evidence"  or  a  change  in
         circumstances because the situation at the date of the  application
         was that the grandmother was very ill and unable to  care  for  the
         Appellant and therefore her death did not change this.

      2) This issue was not raised at the hearing,  denying  the  judge  the
         opportunity to "justify his decision to allow the so called 'change
         of circumstances'  to  be  considered  and  for  the  issue  to  be
         discussed in detail".

      3) Whilst it is argued that a fresh application should be  made,  such
         application would yield the same results as the appeal because  the
         Sponsor does have sole responsibility for her  daughter  and  meets
         the requirements of the Rules.  The Appellant was 15 at the date of
         the application and she will be 18 in October this year.  This  has
         been a very long process and asking that a fresh application should
         be made the Respondent was seeking to keep the child away from  her
         mother for an even longer and difficult position in Uganda  without
         a suitable carer.  The grounds go on to  state  "this  is  a  cruel
         tactic by the Respondent to ensure the Appellant becomes too old to
         qualify for entry clearance in this category".   The  grounds  make
         reference to the high application fees with  making  such  a  fresh
         application.

      4) As to the test of proportionality, the grounds  state  that  having
         found the Sponsor did indeed have sole responsibility there was  no
         need for the judge to go further and  consider  proportionality  as
         the Immigration Rules had been met.

Discussion

24. I have had regard to the submissions made by  Miss  Fijiwala  and  also
    those set out in the Rule 24 response which I have  considered  in  the
    light of the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   Having
    done so, I have reached the conclusion that the judge erred in law in a
    number of respects and that the decision should be ser aside.  I  shall
    set out my reasons for reaching that conclusion.

25. The first error of law that the judge made was at paragraph  [30]  when
    the judge set out that the case fell to be considered  under  the  "new
    appeal regime".  Whilst this was an application that was made  on  25th
    February 2015 and the decision was made on 4th May 2015, in the  light
    of the legislation and the  transitional  provisions  set  out  in  the
    Immigration Act 2014 (Commencement Number 4  Transitional  and  Savings
    Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015 and  the  amendments  coming  into
    force on 6th April 2015 set out in  Article  9(c)(ii)  the  application
    fell to be considered under the old Rules and legislation.  I can  find
    no reference in the determination to the judge having been referred  to
    either of the parties to the transitional provisions  that  applied  at
    that time.  However as to the materiality of the error, it is necessary
    to consider the overall determination of the judge.

26. The judge was required to consider the relevant paragraphs of paragraph
    297.  It reads as  follows:-

         "Requirements for indefinite leave to enter the United  Kingdom  as
         the child of a parent, parents or a relative present and settled or
         being admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom

         297.     The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
             leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child  of  a  parent,
             parents or a relative present and settled  or  being  admitted
             for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:

             (i)  is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a  parent,
                  parents  or  a  relative   in   one   of   the   following
                  circumstances:

                  ... ...

                  (e)  one parent is  present  and  settled  in  the  United
                      Kingdom or being admitted on the  same  occasion  for
                      settlement and has had sole  responsibility  for  the
                      child's upbringing; or

                  (f)  one parent or a relative is present  and  settled  in
                      the United Kingdom or  being  admitted  on  the  same
                      occasion for settlement and  there  are  serious  and
                      compelling family or other considerations which  make
                      exclusion  of  the  child  undesirable  and  suitable
                      arrangements have been made for the child's care; and



             (ii) is under the age of 18; and

             (iii)    is not leading an independent life, is unmarried  and
                  is not a civil partner, and has not formed an  independent
                  family unit  and

             (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately by the  parent,
                  parents or relative the child is seeking to  join  without
                  recourse  to  public  funds  in  accommodation  which  the
                  parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to  join,
                  own or occupy exclusively; and

             (v)  can, and will, be maintained adequately  by  the  parent,
                  parents or relative the child is seeking to join,  without
                  recourse to public funds and ...".

27. The judge was required therefore to consider in particular, as set  out
    in the refusal decision of the Entry Clearance Manager on  review,  the
    issue of sole  responsibility  which  the  judge  referred  to  as  the
    "principal Ground of Appeal" (see paragraph [14]).

28. There is no criticism made by either party  as  to  the  self-direction
    made by the judge at  [14]  where  the  judge  made  reference  to  the
    decision of TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e) "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006]
    UKAIT 00049.

29.  With regard to the "sole responsibility" test, paragraph 52 of  TD  is
    of relevance.  There among other  things  it  is  emphasised  that  the
    question of who has responsibility for a child's upbringing and whether
    that is sole is a factual matter to be decided on all the evidence  and
    the term "responsibility" is a practical one  which  requires  in  each
    case  looking  at  the  question  of  who   in   fact   is   exercising
    responsibility for the child.  It  may  be  undertaken  by  individuals
    other than a child's  parents  and  may  be  shared  between  different
    individuals but even if there  is  only  one  parent  involved  in  the
    child's upbringing that parent may not have sole responsibility.   Day-
    to-day responsibility or decision making for the  child's  welfare  may
    necessarily be shared with others such as relatives or friends  because
    of the geographical separation between the parent and a child but  that
    does not prevent the  parent  having  sole  responsibility  within  the
    meaning of the Rules.  The test is not whether anyone else has  day-to-
    day responsibility but whether the parent has  continuing  control  and
    direction of the child's upbringing, including making all the important
    decisions in the child's life and if not responsibility is  shared  and
    therefore not sole.

30. The judge set out the findings of fact at paragraphs [15]-[27]  of  the
    determination as I have summarised earlier.  At [24] after weighing up
    the evidence, the judge reached the conclusion that the Sponsor did not
    have sole responsibility for the Appellant since she moved to  the  UK.
    The judge concluded as follows:-

         "24.     In those circumstances, whilst the possibility exists  for
             there to be a day-to-day carer for  the  child  who  does  not
             acquire any parental  responsibility  for  the  child,  whilst
             being directed  by  a  parent  in  the  UK  who  retains  sole
             responsibility, I find that this is unlikely to have been  the
             case in this case.  The length of time  that  the  grandmother
             was a responsible person in Uganda for the Sponsor's children,
             that there were years when the Sponsor did not visit, and  the
             absence of, for example, evidence in respect of the  Sponsor's
             influence over the Appellant's school  and  education  issues,
             leads  me  to  find  that  the  Sponsor  has  not   had   sole
             responsibility since she moved to the UK."

31. However at [25] the judge went on to state:-

         "25.     However, the situation regarding that change at  the  time
             of the grandmother's death on 28th June 2016, which of  course
             was prior to the ECM review.  Much of the time of the  hearing
             was spent on questions concerning the Appellant's relatives in
             Uganda and on arrangements for her older sister,  particularly
             when on leave from university.  The implication  of  all  this
             being that whatever those arrangements were, the same could be
             arranged for the Appellant.

         26.  The Sponsor does not claim that there are no  other  relatives
             in Uganda  however,  there  is  no  evidence  before  me  that
             suggested any of these other relatives have ever taken  direct
             responsibility for the Appellant in any way.  In any case, the
             question before me is  one  of  sole  responsibility  assessed
             according to the helpful guidelines in the above case law.  It
             is  a  factual  question.   It  is  not  a  question  of   the
             reasonableness or otherwise of whether the Appellant could  be
             looked after by someone else.

         27.  Having considered the totality of all  of  this  I  find  that
             since 28th June 2016 the Sponsor had sole  responsibility  for
             the  Appellant  and  accordingly,  paragraph  297(e)  of   the
             Immigration Rules is satisfied."

32. As Miss Fijiwala submits, the findings at [24 and  25]  make  it  plain
    that the judge did not find that she had  sole  responsibility  at  the
    date of decision nor until a year  later  on  28th  June  2016.   Those
    findings of the judge are not challenged by either party and  there  is
    no cross-appeal on behalf of the Appellant.   The  submission  made  by
    Miss Fijiwala as set out in the grounds, is that the error made by  the
    judge at [27] is that the judge erroneously  took  into  account  post-
    decision evidence and that the  relevant  date  was  the  date  of  the
    decision, that is 4th May 2015.

33. The provisions of Section 85A of the 2002 Act  (before  the  amendment)
    provided as follows:-

         "On an appeal under  Section  82(1),  82(2)  or  83A(2)  against  a
         decision the Tribunal may consider evidence about any matter  which
         it considers relevant to the substance of the  decision,  including
         evidence which concerns a matter arising  after  the  date  of  the
         decision."

    However Section 85(5) provides that  the  Rule  in  Section  85(4)  was
    subject to the exceptions in Section 85A.  Section 85A(2) read:

         "Exception 1 is that in relation to an appeal under  Section  82(1)
         against an immigration decision of  a  kind  specified  in  Section
         82(2)(b) or (c) the Tribunal may consider  only  the  circumstances
         appertaining at the date of the decision."

    Section 82(2)(b) refers to "refusal of entry clearance."  Therefore the
    decision in  the  present  case,  being  a  decision  to  refuse  entry
    clearance, fell within Section 85A(2) and contrary to the general Rule,
    the  Tribunal  was  entitled  only  to   consider   the   circumstances
    appertaining at the date of decision appealed against.  As set  out  by
    Miss Fijiwala the same also applies to the Article 8 assessment (see AS
    (Somalia) v the SSHD [2009] UKHL 32, [2009] 1 WLR 1385.

34. The Rule 24 response on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  submits  that  the
    evidence of the grandmother's death was not "new evidence"  or  "change
    in circumstances" because the situation at the date of the  application
    was that the grandmother was very  ill  and  unable  to  care  for  the
    Appellant.

35. I have considered this submission in the light of the judge's  findings
    (which are not challenged) and the medical  evidence  provided  in  the
    bundle.  The judge's findings do not  expressly  consider  the  medical
    evidence provided but it is plain from the findings made by  the  judge
    as to the issue of sole responsibility, that the judge found  that  the
    Appellant's Sponsor did not have sole responsibility  until  28th  June
    2016, over a year after the decision was made.  It  follows  from  that
    finding that contrary to the case advanced on behalf of the  Appellant,
    that she had taken over responsibility from the grandmother because  of
    her ill-health which had prompted the application in the  first  place,
    had not been accepted by the judge.  If it had  been  accepted  by  the
    judge, the judge would have found that the Appellant's Sponsor had sole
    responsibility for the Appellant at the date of decision and thereafter
    before 28th June 2016.   This  is  supported  by  the  ECM  review  who
    considered that the claim made that due to the grandmother's ill-health
    she could no longer care for the Appellant had not  been  supported  by
    the evidence that had been provided.  Consequently the judge's findings
    as to the effect of the grandmother's ill-health before 28th June  2016
    did not demonstrate that any ill-health that she was suffering rendered
    her unable  to  care  for  the  Appellant  or  to  discharge  any  sole
    responsibility that she had for her.

36.  Whilst I would accept that Section 85 makes reference to the Tribunal
    only considering circumstances "appertaining at the date  of  decision"
    and that there may be evidence that casts light  on  the  circumstances
    appertaining at the date of decision,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    medical evidence falls into that category.  If it had done, as  I  have
    set out in the preceding paragraph, the judge's finding would have been
    that the grandmother's ill-health was  such  that  she  was  unable  to
    discharge sole responsibility before 28th June 2016.  Furthermore,  the
    medical evidence that was provided in the bundle  that  was  dated  May
    2015 did not demonstrate that the  grandmother's  ill-health  was  such
    that she was not capable of  discharging  those  duties.   The  witness
    statement filed by the Sponsor provided general comments [see paragraph
    17] which made reference to problems with sleeping, heart  and  kidney,
    shortness of breath and high blood pressure.  The document at  page  32
    was a  handwritten  document  which  gave  no  details  of  the  person
    compiling  or  writing  it  or  in  what  capacity,  it   referred   to
    "hepatomegaly" which has not been explained  in  any  of  the  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal or before the Upper Tribunal  but  which
    it is believed refers to an enlarged liver.  There is also at  page  33
    an echocardiogrephy report which refers to "DCM".  Again none  of  that
    has been explained although "DCM" is known as "dilated  cardiomyopathy"
    which relates to the Appellant's grandmother having  a  heart  problem.
    However none of that evidence which was before the First-tier  Tribunal
    demonstrated  that  the  Appellant's  grandmother  was   incapable   of
    discharging responsibility or the  sole  responsibility  that  she  had
    before that date or  was  unable  to  continue  to  give  care  to  the
    Appellant which was a finding the judge  made  on  the  evidence.   The
    judge's finding is clear that it was only since the date of  28th  June
    that the Sponsor  had  sole  responsibility  and  therefore  from  that
    finding it must be inferred that the  grandmother,  despite  any  other
    medical problems that she had, was still continuing to  care  and  look
    after the applicant and thus have sole responsibility.

37. The submission  made  in  the  Rule  24  response  does  not  give  any
    explanation relating to that or explains  how  the  evidence  one  year
    later  demonstrates  that  it  casts  light  on  what  was   reasonably
    foreseeable at the date of decision (see Section 85  of  the  2002  Act
    before the amendments).  A person may have  a  range  of  ailments  but
    there has to be an evidential link between the condition  and  in  this
    case the circumstance which is the cause of the  death  in  June  2016.
    There was no evidence at the time of the decision which suggested  that
    she had abdominal cancer or that she was being treated for this or that
    her life expectancy had been shortened.  None of the evidence  provided
    in 2015 supported that and therefore  the  evidence  provided  in  2016
    could not reasonably be described as evidence which shed light  on  the
    circumstances appertaining at the date of decision.  Importantly  there
    was no evidence as at the date of decision or beyond  until  June  2016
    that the Appellant's grandmother was unable to care for  the  Appellant
    and that she continued to discharge her responsibility as she had  done
    for the previous ten year period.

38. It is also right to observe that the judge was purporting  to  consider
    the ECM review as the operative date but the judge was  mistaken  about
    that date.  At paragraph [35] the judge recorded that the grandmother's
    death on 28th June 2016 was  prior  to  the  ECM  review  but  as  Miss
    Fijiwala submitted the Entry Clearance Manager's review was dated  29th
    October 2015 and therefore the date of death was significantly later in
    2016.

39. Consequently the judge's decision at [27] that she  had  met  paragraph
    297(e) of the Immigration Rules and on the same basis that there was  a
    breach of Article 8 of the ECHR [see paragraph 30] cannot be maintained
    in the light of the above.  I therefore set aside the decision.

40. As to remaking the decision, no further submissions have been  made  in
    the Rule 24 response.  The directions sent to the parties  with  notice
    of today's hearing made it clear that if the Upper Tribunal decided  to
    set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  it  would  proceed
    forthwith to remake the decision.  Nothing  further  is  offered.   The
    parties have not attended before the Tribunal.

41. I have therefore considered the material that was before the First-tier
    Tribunal as set out  in  the  bundle  which  accompanied  the  Rule  24
    response on behalf of the Appellant.  In the light of the  matters  set
    out  above  and  the  unchallenged  findings  of  fact  made  that  the
    Appellant's  Sponsor  at  the  date  of  decision  did  not  have  sole
    responsibility and that the Appellant cannot demonstrate that  she  met
    the requirements of paragraph  297(e).   As  to  paragraph  297(f)  the
    Respondent relies on the matters that were  set  out  in  the  decision
    letter, noting that the Appellant had remained being cared for  by  her
    grandmother who had sole responsibility, that she was being financially
    supported by her mother and living in  a  stable  environment  and  had
    contact with her other siblings and that she had no  medical  condition
    that required any treatment.

42. Whilst the judge made no specific findings as to paragraph 297(f),  the
    findings made in the determination overall are relevant to this  issue.
    The findings which I have summarised earlier demonstrate that the judge
    was satisfied that she was well cared for in a stable environment  that
    had continued for a  sustained  period  of  ten  years,  that  she  had
    continuing contact with her  elder  siblings,  that  she  continued  to
    receive financial assistance from her mother in the UK and that she was
    not subject to any  medical  problems  and  that  her  grandmother  had
    responsibility in dealings with  the  school.   Those  findings  remain
    unchallenged by the Appellant.

43. The skeleton argument in the original  bundle  made  reference  to  the
    decision of Mundeba (Section 55 and  paragraph  297(i)(f))  DRC  [2013]
    UKUT 88.  In that decision the Upper Tribunal held that "serious" meant
    that there needs to be more than the party simply desiring a  state  of
    affairs to obtain ." "Compelling" in the context of paragraph 297(i)(f)
    indicates considerations that are persuasive and powerful.  It  sets  a
    high threshold and it excludes cases where, without more, it is  simply
    the wish of the parties to be together, however natural  that  ambition
    may be.  Family considerations require an  evaluation  of  the  child's
    welfare including emotional needs "other considerations" come into play
    where there are other aspects of a child's life that  are  serious  and
    compelling, for example where an applicant is  living  in  unacceptable
    social or  economic  environment.   "Serious"  read  with  "compelling"
    together indicate that the family or other  considerations  render  the
    exclusion of the child from the United Kingdom undesirable.  The  focus
    needs to be on the circumstances of the child in the light  of  his  or
    her age, social background  and  other  history  and  will  involve  an
    inquiry as to whether there is evidence  of  neglect  or  abuse,  unmet
    needs that should be catered for, stable arrangements for  the  child's
    physical care.  The assessment involves consideration as to whether the
    combination of circumstance is sufficiently serious and  compelling  to
    require admission.  (See paragraphs 34 to 37 of Mundeba).

44. The exercise of the duty by an Entry Clearance Officer  to  assess  the
    application under the Immigration Rules as to whether there are  family
    and other considerations that make the child's  exclusion  undesirable,
    involve an assessment of what the child's welfare  and  best  interests
    require.  It is common ground that that is a primary consideration.

45. When applying those factors to the unchallenged findings of  fact  that
    were  made  by  the  judge,  the  Appellant's  circumstances   do   not
    demonstrate that there are any "serious or compelling" family or  other
    considerations that would  make  the  Appellant's  exclusion  from  the
    United Kingdom undesirable.  It could  be  said  that  a  child's  best
    interests are to be brought up by her natural parent (rather  than  her
    grandmother) this would still  have  to  be  considered  alongside  the
    evidence and the findings made that there was no  evidence  of  neglect
    but evidence of a stable arrangement for her care which had endured for
    a significant part of A's life from the age of 6 and she  continued  to
    have contact with her other elder siblings and that no unmet needs were
    advanced from the evidence.   There  was  no  evidence  either  of  any
    neglect.   This  is  an  evaluation  of  those  findings  and  do   not
    demonstrate considerations  that  are  "powerful  or  persuasive"  (see
    Mundeba).  The Appellant at the relevant time was being looked after by
    her family members and her needs  were  being  met  and  therefore  the
    evidence does not demonstrate that the Appellant could  meet  paragraph
    297(f) of the Immigration Rules.

46. As to Article 8 outside of the Rules, I have had regard to the decision
    of SS (Congo) and whether there are  any  compelling  circumstances  to
    consider the case outside of the Rules.  In the light of  the  findings
    made and the evidence that I have referred to,  there  is  no  evidence
    upon which can be properly said to amount to  compelling  circumstances
    to give consideration outside of the Rules.  I  do  not  consider  that
    there have been any matters advanced on behalf of the  Appellant  which
    might  be  capable  of  amounting  to  compelling  circumstances   when
    considering the evidence as at the date  of  decision.   There  are  no
    circumstances which are advanced on behalf of the Appellant  that  have
    not  already  been  considered  under  the   Immigration   Rules   when
    considering Article 8 outside of the Rules.  The  Appellant  could  not
    meet the Rules and given the nature and scope of the Rules, there could
    not be any compelling circumstances which would enable her  to  succeed
    outside of the Rules when all the relevant compelling circumstances (if
    any) would necessarily have been considered in the context  of  whether
    the Appellant could satisfy 297(e) or bring herself within 297(i)(f).

47. Nonetheless If I were to consider the claim outside  of  the  Rules  on
    Article 8 grounds  and whether the refusal grant entry clearance  would
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences for  the  applicant  and  as
    such that the refusal would not be proportionate under Article 8,  that
    assessment would have to be made  in the light of the factual  findings
    of fact that were made by the Judge and those I have set  out  relating
    to Paragraph 297(f) and in accordance with the best  interests  of  the
    child concerned which are a  primary  consideration  (  see  Zoumbas  V
    Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2013]  UKSC  74  and  in
    accordance with the duty set out in S.55 of  the  Borders,  Citizenship
    and Immigration Act 2009). Those findings are in summary that it  could
    be said that a child's best interests are  to  be  brought  up  by  her
    natural parent (rather than her grandmother) however this  would  still
    have to be considered alongside the evidence and the findings made that
    there was no evidence of neglect or  unmet  needs  but  evidence  of  a
    stable arrangement for her care which had  endured  for  a  significant
    part of A's life from the age of 6. She received  financial  assistance
    from her mother and regular visits had taken place and she continued to
    have contact with her other elder siblings with whom she enjoyed family
    life and that no unmet  needs  were  advanced  from  the  evidence.  No
    further evidence has been provided to demonstrate that  those  findings
    are undermined. In applying paragraph 5A of the 2002 Act [introduced by
    Section 19 of the Immigration Act 2014] and Section 117A or B  ("public
    interest considerations") the maintenance of immigration control is  in
    the public interest as declared in section 117B(3).  As  to  the  other
    considerations, there does not seem to be a dispute that the  Appellant
    can speak English and that she herself is not  financially  independent
    although the finding of the judge was that  her  mother  could  support
    her.   Those are in essence neutral factors and do  not  by  themselves
    demonstrate that a grant of leave to enter should be made.  But  having
    taken into account the factual findings of the judge and those  matters
    set out above in the proportionality balance, I can find no grounds for
    concluding that the decision of the Entry Clearance Officer amounted to
    a disproportionate interference  with  the  Article  8  rights  of  the
    Appellant.

48. I therefore dismiss the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on human
    rights grounds.

49. As the Rule 24 response recognises, it will be open to the Appellant to
    make a fresh application  before  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer.   The
    findings of fact made by the judge relating  to  the  circumstances  in
    2016 and that since that date the Sponsor has had  sole  responsibility
    and that the Appellant's father has no ongoing  relationship  with  his
    daughter, no doubt will form the evidential basis upon  which  any  new
    decision is made.

50. However for the reason given, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge erred in law and therefore I  set  that  aside.   The  appeal  is
    remade as follows.  The appeal is dismissed under the Immigration Rules
    and on human rights grounds.






Signed                              Date 2/5/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
