
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08642/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 27th May 2016                      |On 15th July 2016                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                         MISS ASHEMA LATOYA HOLNESS
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Hawkin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Jamaica born on 9th February  1997.   The
    Appellant applied for entry clearance to join her  mother  in  the  UK.
    Her application was considered under paragraph 297 of  the  Immigration
    Rules and was refused by the Entry Clearance Officer on 10th June 2014.



 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Aujla sitting at Taylor House on 2nd September 2015.   In
    a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  22nd  September  2015   the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed both under the Immigration  Rules  and
    on human rights grounds.

 3. On 22nd October Grounds of Appeal were lodged to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In quite lengthy Grounds of Appeal nine reasons were set out as to  why
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had erred in  law.   On  1st  April  2016
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal P J M Hollingworth granted  permission
    to appeal.  Judge Hollingworth  noted  that  at  paragraph  29  of  the
    decision the judge had referred to the Appellant's  grandmother  having
    been solely responsible for her upbringing since  the  age  of  3.   He
    notes that Judge Aujla continues by stating that taking that fact  into
    account in order to  establish  that  the  Sponsor  had  become  solely
    responsible for the Appellant's upbringing she had to do much more than
    show that she had maintained contact with  the  Appellant  and  provide
    financial support.  Judge Hollingworth considered that it was  arguable
    that the judge had found as  a  fact  the  conclusion  determining  the
    outcome of the appeal without providing an analysis of all the  factors
    relevant to sole responsibility  being  exercised  by  the  Appellant's
    grandmother or the Sponsor before reaching a conclusion as to the scope
    of the exercise of sole responsibility and by whom.  He considered that
    in such circumstances an arguable error of law may have arisen and that
    the judge had proceeded to analyse factors relevant to the question  of
    the exercise of sole responsibility and by whom subsequent  to  finding
    as a fact that the Appellant's grandmother had been solely  responsible
    for the Appellant's upbringing since the age of 3.

 4. On 5th May 2016 the Secretary of State  responded  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response highlights the issue in the
    appeal, namely whether the Sponsor  has  sole  responsibility  for  the
    Appellant.  It points out the Appellant was aged 19 at the time of  the
    Rule 24 reply but at the material time accepts she was 17.  It  further
    notes that the Sponsor voluntarily left the Appellant in  Jamaica  when
    she was 3 years old.  It contends that the First-tier Tribunal Judge is
    detailed and comprehensive and that the judge considered  the  evidence
    and concluded by giving sufficient reasons that he  does  not  find  it
    credible that the Appellant's grandmother who has been taking  care  of
    her since the age of 3 no longer can for health  reasons,  as  claimed.
    It contends that the judge directed himself properly to  the  ratio  of
    the relevant case of  TD  Yemen  and  concluded  by  giving  sufficient
    reasons that the requirements of paragraph  297(e)  of  the  Rules  are
    satisfied.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel Mr Hawkin.  Mr Hawkin has  had  previous  involvement  in  this
    matter in that he  is  the  author  of  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Wilding.

The Relevant Law and Authorities

 6. The relevant Immigration Rule is Rule 297(e), namely:
         "297.    The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite
                leave to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a  parent,
                parents or a relative present and settled or being  admitted
                for settlement in the United Kingdom are that he:
                (i)    is seeking leave to enter  to  accompany  or  join  a
                    parent, parents or a relative in one  of  the  following
                    circumstances:
                    (e)    one parent is present and settled in  the  United
                        Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion  for
                        settlement and has had sole responsibility for  the
                        child's upbringing".

 7. The guiding case law is to be found in the authority of  TD  (Paragraph
    297(i)(e): "sole responsibility") Yemen  [2006]  00049.   The  relevant
    head note for that authority states:

         "'Sole responsibility' is a factual matter to be decided  upon  all
         the evidence.  Where one parent is  not  involved  in  the  child's
         upbringing  because  he  (or  she)  has  abandoned   or   abdicated
         responsibility, the issue may arise between  the  remaining  parent
         and others who have day-to-day care of the child abroad.  The  test
         is whether the parent has continuing control and direction over the
         child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in
         the child's life. However, where both parents  are  involved  in  a
         child's upbringing, it will be exceptional that one  of  them  will
         have 'sole responsibility'".

Submissions/Discussion

 8. Mr Hawkin adopts his Grounds of Appeal as his starting point.   I  have
    read the Grounds of Appeal.  He takes me to paragraph 29 of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision emphasising that this is  the  basis  of
    the grant of permission.  He submits that that paragraph is unclear and
    confusing and that in  referring  to  the  Appellant's  grandmother  as
    having been "solely responsible for her upbringing since the age of  3"
    the judge was effectively presuming the very issue which, in accordance
    with TD Yemen, he had to carefully weigh up and evaluate.   He  submits
    that the judge did  not  give  any  proper  reason  for  rejecting  the
    Sponsor's evidence that she chose the Appellant's school and  that  the
    language of paragraph 29 demonstrates the judge  has  not  applied  the
    principles of TD itself.

 9. He states that it was wrong of the judge to state at paragraph 27  that
    the Sponsor "abandoned the Appellant" and that her intention  had  been
    for the Appellant to join her in the UK much sooner  and  that  several
    unsuccessful attempts were made prior to the current  application.   He
    points out that the Sponsor started sending money  from  the  time  she
    arrived in the UK and has continued to make all the major decisions  in
    her life.  He emphasises that there have been visits by the Sponsor  to
    see the Appellant in 2008, 2010, 2011 and  2014.   Further  he  submits
    that the judge has significantly underestimated the  medical  evidence.
    Having asked me to give due  and  further  full  consideration  to  his
    Grounds of Appeal, Mr Hawkin asks me to find material errors of law  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  and  to  set  aside  the
    decision and remit the matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing.

10. In response, Mr Wilding relies on the Rule 24 response and the decision
    in TD Yemen, in particular referring me to paragraphs  49  and  52(ix).
    Against that basis he indicates it is necessary to  consider  what  the
    judge did.  He submits that the determination  is  carefully  prepared,
    and that from paragraph 21 onwards the judge has considered  the  facts
    and that at paragraphs 25 to 28 the judge  has  set  out  his  findings
    including the evidence before him that the Sponsor in effect  abandoned
    the Appellant at the age of 3 and left her  in  the  care  of  her  own
    mother.  He submits that it is clear that the judge has made a  finding
    that the responsibility of the Appellant  was  undoubtedly  shared  and
    takes me to the extract from paragraph 29 which states:

         "However the Appellant's grandmother had  sole  responsibility  for
         her upbringing since the age of 3.  Taking that fact into  account,
         in  order  to  establish  that  the  Sponsor  had   become   solely
         responsible for the Appellant's upbringing, she had to do much more
         than show that she had maintained contact with  the  Appellant  and
         provide financial support".

11. Mr Wilding submits that the judge has consequently grasped the  central
    issue  and  has  addressed  it.   Whilst  accepting  that  there  is  a
    typographical error with regard to the amount of financial support,  he
    submits that the judge fully understands what was meant  and  that  the
    issue  has  been  properly  considered  and  that  in  any  event   the
    typographical error is not material.  He emphasises that the job of the
    Upper Tribunal is not to replace the first  decision  but  to  consider
    whether there are material errors of  law  in  the  First-tier  Judge's
    analysis.  He submits that there  are  none  and  that  the  judge  has
    signposted how he got to his reasons and that the judge has  been  very
    careful to note that the Appellant is a  child  and  all  the  evidence
    relates to when she was a child.  He submits that the grounds based  on
    sole responsibility must therefore fail.

12. In addition he points out that the judge has at paragraph 31 gone on to
    consider paragraph 297(i)(f) and made findings that he was entitled to,
    that the Appellant did not satisfy the requirements of  that  Rule  and
    that he has made significant findings at the date of  decision  on  the
    circumstances  relating  to  the  Sponsor's  health,   and   that   the
    submissions of the Appellant's legal representatives amount to  nothing
    more than disagreement.  Further he considers that the judge has  given
    due and full consideration to Article 8 and has carefully reasoned  his
    analysis, and that  having  made  a  finding  that  there  is  no  sole
    responsibility the judge has quite properly still looked at  Article  8
    but that it is a hopeless submission on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  to
    contend that a claim under Article 8 "saves the day".  He asked  me  to
    dismiss the appeal.

13. Mr Hawkin in brief response also takes me back to TD in  particular  to
    paragraph 10 and that it is inappropriate as a result of  the  analysis
    of that paragraph which accepts that a parent who is settled in the  UK
    may retain sole responsibility for a child where the day-to-day care or
    responsibility for that child is necessarily undertaken by  a  relative
    abroad to have built  the  judge's  finding  at  paragraph  29  of  his
    decision on the basis of matters considered within paragraph 27.

The Law

14.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

15. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings

16. The challenges  in  this  case  predominantly  centre  on  the  judge's
    approach to TD Yemen.  However this is a judge  who  has  set  out  his
    decision in considerable  detail  and  in  a  very  sensible  and  well
    constructed manner.  Having recited the documentary and oral  testimony
    that he had heard in considerable detail including the  submissions  of
    the  legal  representatives,  he  has  gone  on  to  make  findings  of
    credibility and fact.  He has looked thoroughly at the guidance  to  be
    given within TD Yemen setting that out and has made a finding which  he
    was perfectly entitled to having heard  the  evidence  as  to  how  the
    Appellant came to be in the care of her grandmother.  He has identified
    the exact issue that needs to be considered, accepted that there was  a
    financial responsibility for the Appellant on the  Sponsor,  and  noted
    that there has been contact between the Appellant and the Sponsor.   He
    has  accepted  that  the  evidence   shows   the   Sponsor   has   some
    responsibility for  the  Appellant's  upbringing.   He  has  considered
    thoroughly the position therefore within TD, in particular whether a UK
    based parent has, in practice, allowed the parental responsibility  for
    a child to be shared with a carer abroad and considered the appropriate
    test, namely not whether anyone else has day-to-day responsibility  but
    whether the parent has continuing control and direction of the  child's
    upbringing including making all the important decisions in the  child's
    life and the fact that if not, responsibility  is  shared  and  so  not
    sole.

17. This is the approach that the judge has undertaken.   His  decision  is
    detailed and  comprehensive.   There  are  a  couple  of  typographical
    errors.  They are conceded by the Secretary of  State.   They  are  not
    material to the outcome of the decision.  Valiant as the submissions of
    Mr Hawkin are, when looked at in detail they amount to little more than
    disagreement with the findings of the judge.  The  judge  has  properly
    addressed the approach in TD and has  reached  findings  which  he  was
    entitled to.  I emphasise that I am only  considering  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law.  I am not rehearing this matter.

18. Having found that  there  was  shared  responsibility  the  judge  then
    thereafter quite properly went on to  briefly  consider  whether  there
    were serious and compelling family or other considerations to make  the
    Appellant's exclusion from the UK undesirable and made findings that he
    was entitled to.  Thereafter having given due consideration to  Article
    8, the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in SS (Congo) [2015]  EWCA
    Civ 386, and due consideration to Section 55 of the 2009 Act, the judge
    concluded that the appeal under Article 8 was  also  dismissed.   Again
    the judge has followed a thorough and logical approach and his findings
    disclose no material error of  law.   Whilst  I  acknowledge  that  the
    decision will therefore be disappointing to the Appellant  and  to  her
    Sponsor, I am satisfied that the judge in this matter has made findings
    that he was entitled to, that he has properly  analysed  the  law,  and
    that in a carefully  constructed  decision  it  discloses  no  material
    errors of law.  In such circumstances the appeal is dismissed  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the Appellant's appeal is  dismissed  and  the  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 15 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date 15 July 2016


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
