
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal Number: OA/08469/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |     Decision and Reasons          |
|On 6th June 2017                  |Promulgated                On 19th |
|                                  |June 2017                          |


                                   Before


                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                   MISS CHLOE KUNASHE CHRISTABELLE MUTASA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                     ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - PRETORIA

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:            Mr J Acharya, instructed by Acharyas
Solicitors
For the Respondent:         Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on 12 December 1998 and she
    appealed against the entry clearance officer's refusal made on 17 March
    2015 to grant her entry clearance as a person seeking leave to enter or
    remain in the United Kingdom in order to join or remain with  a  parent
    who has been granted asylum in the United Kingdom under paragraph  352D
    of HC 395.

 2. In a decision promulgated  on  2  September  2016  by  the   First-tier
    Tribunal  the  appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed   both   under   the
    immigration rules and in relation to Article 8.

 3. The appellant made an application for permission  to  appeal  asserting
    the judge had not adequately considered the appellant's best  interests
    and as a starting point the appellant's best interests were  served  by
    being with her father. It was submitted that the decision of the  judge
    had not adequately considered whether it be the best interests  of  the
    appellant in being reunited with her father.

 4. Permission to appeal was initially refused but then  granted  by  upper
    Tribunal Judge Finch who stated as follows:-

    "it is not arguable that the appellant was entitled to leave under  the
    immigration  rules  but  when  considering  her   right   outside   the
    immigration rules, it was necessary to treat her best  interests  as  a
    primary consideration and this exercise had simply not been undertaken.
    It is  accepted  that  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 does not directly refer to a duty to safeguard and
    promote the welfare of a child who is not in  the  United  Kingdom  but
    guidance states that "UK border  agency  staff  working  overseas  must
    adhere to the spirit of the duty". This approach was recently confirmed
    in R (on the application of MM (Lebanon) v the Secretary of  State  for
    the Home Department [2017] UKSC10".

 5. At the hearing before me both representatives  agreed  that  there  was
    indeed an error of law in the decision which was material and that  the
    judge had not considered the best interests of the  child  as  she  was
    when she made the application.  There were no findings in  relation  to
    the best interests of the child and Mr Kotas and Mr Acharya also argued
    that the matter should be remitted  to  the  first  Tier  Tribunal  for
    findings in relation to the appellant's best interests.

 6. It is clear that the judge in relation to Article 8 made no findings at
    all as to the child's best interests and although T (s.55 BCIA  2009  -
    entry clearance) Jamaica [2011] UKUT 00483(IAC) confirms that

    (i) Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
    does not apply to children who are outside the United Kingdom.

    There, however, remains reference to the 'spirit of statutory guidance'


    (ii) Where there are reasons to believe that a child's welfare  may  be
    jeopardised by exclusion from the United Kingdom, the considerations of
    Article  8  ECHR,  the  "exclusion  undesirable"  provisions   of   the
    Immigration Rules and the extra statutory guidance to  Entry  Clearance
    Officers to apply the spirit  of  the  statutory  guidance  in  certain
    circumstances should all be taken into account  by  the  ECO  at  first
    instance and the judge on appeal.

 7. Thus although the section 55 duty does not  apply  to  entry  clearance
    applications, it is clear that the guidance gives explicit  instruction
    that the best interests of the child  must  be  considered.  A  similar
    approach was taken in R (on the application of MM (Lebanon).  The judge
    did not address the issue  of  best  interests  and  made  no  holistic
    findings thereon. As a result I  find that there is a material error of
    law.

 8. To that end I made enquiries of the representatives as to  whether  the
    transitional provisions attached to applications under Paragraph  352 D
    of the Immigration Rules in order to determine the  relevant  date  for
    determination of the Article 8 assessment, the date of hearing  or  the
    date of decision.

 9. The applicant was born on 12 December 1998. At the date of the decision
    by the entry clearance officer and at the date of  the  hearing  before
    the first Tier Tribunal, the appellant was under the age of 18; by  the
    date of the hearing before me and any further hearing she would  indeed
    be an adult. I appreciate that there is no bright line but this will be
    relevant to the assessment and to  the  strength  of  the  family  ties
    between the appellant  and  her  father.   It  would  appear  that  the
    application  and  appeal  falls  within  Article  9(1)   (d)   of   the
    Commencement  Order  substituted  by  Article  8  (Part  3)    of   The
    Immigration  Act  2014  (Commencement  No  4  Transitional  and  Saving
    Provisions and Amendment) Order 2015.  In effect the relevant date  for
    consideration of the Article 8 claim is the date of decision.

10. The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside  the
    decision in respect of the Article 8 assessment only  and  pursuant  to
    Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and Enforcement Act 2007  (TCE
    2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of  the  findings  to  be
    made the matter should be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  under
    section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to  7.2  (b)  of  the
    Presidential Practice Statement.




Signed           Helen Rimington             Date 16th June   2017





Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington







