


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      OA/08446/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                         |Decision Promulgated         |
|On: 17th January 2017                         |On: 18th January 2017        |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                             Madiha Mohsin Mufti
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And


                     Entry Clearance Officer, Islamabad
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr R. Ahmed, Counsel instructed by Juris Solicitors
For the Respondent:           Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting
                       Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan born on the 14th October  1984.
    She appeals with permission[1] the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge NMK Lawrence) dated  8th  August  2016  to  dismiss  her  appeal
    against a decision  to  refuse  to  grant  her  entry  clearance  under
    Appendix FM as the spouse of a person present and settled in the United
    Kingdom.


 2. The sole matter in issue before the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  whether
    Appellant and her sponsor Mr Mohsin Mufti were validly married. The ECO
    had noted that Mr Mufti had previously been married, and  that  he  had
    submitted  a  Pakistani  divorce  certificate  dated  10th  June  2011.
    Although this talaq-nama had pre-dated the marriage to the Appellant by
    some three years, the ECO was not satisfied that is showed the marriage
    to have lawfully dissolved:

         "your sponsor is required to submit a United Kingdom issued  Decree
         Absolute as he sponsored his first spouse entry into the UK".

    Although it is not spelled out, presumably the ECO was  here  concerned
    that the first Mrs Mufti was still living in the United  Kingdom.  This
    raised a question about whether she could be divorced in  Pakistan,  as
    well as the spectre of possible polygamy.


 3. In dismissing the appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  took  an  entirely
    different tack. At paragraphs 2 and 9 the determination records that Mr
    Mufti's first wife was a British citizen. It goes on to assert that  he
    obtained  entry  to  the  United  Kingdom,  and  subsequently   British
    nationality, by virtue of that marriage.  As  a  result,  the  Tribunal
    reasons, the dissolution of that marriage had to be  validly  conducted
    in the country of domicile of the parties, before the marriage  to  the
    Appellant took place in August 2014. Since both parties appeared to  be
    British, and there was no English divorce until Uxbridge  Family  Court
    became involved in December 2015, this was not the case. The appeal was
    thereby dismissed.




    The Appeal


 4. Mr Ahmed's point on appeal is a simple one. The Tribunal  got  the  law
    wrong because it got the facts wrong. Mr Mufti's first wife was  not  a
    British national at all. She was a Pakistani national who  married  him
    in  accordance  with  the  laws  of  Pakistan  (a  nikah  followed   by
    registration with the Union Council  under  the  terms  of  the  Muslim
    Family Law Ordinance 1961) in 2007. At the time he was  a  work  permit
    holder and he sponsored an application for her to come and see  him  in
    the United Kingdom.   She subsequently returned  to  Pakistan  and  was
    resident there when Mr Mufti declared talaq in 2011. That is  confirmed
    by  the  divorce  certificate  issued  by  the  Government  of   Khyber
    Pukhtunkhwa. It gives her address at the time of the divorce as  Nishar
    Abad, Peshawar.  The certificate gives the date on  which  conciliation
    was deemed to have failed, and the date that the divorce  was  granted,
    as the 10th June 2011.  Mr Ahmed places reliance on the  terms  of  the
    Family Law Act 1986,  section  46,  which  deals  with  recognition  of
    foreign divorces:


         "Grounds for recognition.
         (1) The validity of an overseas divorce, annulment or legal
         separation obtained by means of proceedings shall be recognised if-

         (a) the divorce, annulment or legal separation is effective under
         the law of the country in which it was obtained; and

         (b) at the relevant date either party to the marriage-

         (i) was habitually resident in the country in which the divorce,
         annulment or legal separation was obtained; or

         (ii) was domiciled in that country; or

         (iii) was a national of that country.



 5. Mr Ahmed  submitted  that  the  divorce  evidenced  by  the  talaq-nama
    certificate issued by the Khyber Pukhtunkhwa government demonstrated:


           a) That it was a divorce obtained by  means  of  proceedings.  I
              accept that analysis. It is not a bare talaq. It is a divorce
              properly registered in accordance with the MFLO 1961;


           b) It is effective under the law in the country in which  it  is
              obtained;

           c) At the relevant date (10th June 2011) Mr Mufti's  first  wife
              was habitually resident in Pakistan;

           d) She was arguably then domiciled there, and in any event

           e) She was certainly a national of that country.


 6. For the Respondent Mr Kotas  conceded  that  under  either  alternative
    (habitual residence or nationality/domicile) in s46, that  divorce  was
    recognised by the United Kingdom. It follows that the error as  to  the
    facts was material and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must  be
    set aside.




    The Re-Made Decision


 7. Given what is said above it is perhaps not  necessary  to  revisit  the
    ECO's reasoning in any great detail, since it is evident  that  he  too
    approached the matter under the misapprehension that Mr  Mufti's  first
    wife had remained living in the United Kingdom.   In  view  of  s.46(b)
    (iii) it would seem that the reasoning was misplaced.   In any event  I
    am satisfied, having had regard to the talaq-nam,a that she was at  the
    date of divorce living in Peshawar (it would appear with  her  father).
    For the reasons already elaborated, that means  that  the  divorce  was
    valid as far as United Kingdom law was concerned. It  follows  that  Mr
    Mufti was free to marry the Appellant on the  23rd  August  2014.  That
    being the only matter in issue the appeal is allowed.



    Decisions


 8. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside.


 9. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows:


    "The appeal is allowed under the immigration rules"


10. There is no order for anonymity.









                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                  17th
                                January 2017
                           -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on the 28th
November 2016

