
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-VP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08836/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th November, 2016                        |On 8th February  2017         |
|signed and sent to                            |                              |
|Promulgation on 7th                           |                              |
|February, 2017                                |                              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                               mr sharyar ali
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent




Representation:


For the Appellant:     Mr Rashid Ahmed, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr McVitie, a Home Office Presenting Officer





                            DECISION AND REASONS




1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan, born  on  3rd  February,  1988.
    He entered the United Kingdom with valid  leave  until  30th  November,
    2013.  On 28th November, 2013, the appellant submitted application  for
    further leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General) Student  Migrant  and  in
    support of the application provided  an  English  language  certificate
    awarded by TOEIC.  The application was granted with leave  valid  until
    16th July, 2015.

2.   On 27th November,  2014,  the  applicant,  together  with  his  British
    spouse, moved to the Republic of Ireland.

3.   On 2nd February, 2015, the appellant received a Notice  of  Immigration
    Decision  dated  26th  January,  2015,  in  which  the  appellant   was
    specifically considered to be a person who sought leave  to  enter  the
    United Kingdom by deception and on the basis of information provided by
    ETS, the Secretary of State for the Home Department was satisfied  that
    there is substantial evidence to  conclude  that  the  certificate  was
    fraudulently obtained.  The appellant was granted a right of appeal out
    of country under Section 82(1) after he had left the United Kingdom.

4.   The appellant had exercised his right to file an out of country  appeal
    on 9th  February,  2015,  against  the  immigration  decision  of  26th
    January, 2015, and this appeal came for hearing before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on  17th  December,  2015.   His  appeal  was  dismissed.  The
    appellant sought leave to appeal and suggested that the high evidential
    burden had not been discharged by  the  Secretary  of  State.   At  the
    hearing before me Mr Ahmed sought to rely on the decisions of the Upper
    Tribunal in SM and Qadir v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
    (ETS - evidence - burden of proof) [2016] UKUT 229 (IAC) and in MA (ETS
    - TOEIC testing) [2016] UKUT 405 (IAC).  Unfortunately, he did not have
    copies of either cases for me.  I adjourned  in  order  that  he  could
    obtain them.  On resuming the hearing Mr Ahmed handed  those  cases  to
    me.  He told me that he accepted that these cases  were  decided  after
    the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal in this appeal.  He told  me
    that he had  sought  to  persuade  the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    evidential burden had not been satisfied.   He  now  accepted,  in  the
    light of these decisions that the evidential burden has been satisfied.
     I asked him to clarify his submission  and  tell  me  whether  he  now
    accepted that there was in fact no error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  He told me that there was no error of law but the
    appellant now wished to call for a transcript  of  the  record  of  the
    speaking test.  I pointed out to Counsel that  I  could  not  interfere
    with the decision, unless he could establish that there was an error of
    law in it.  He told me that he accepted that there was none.

5.   Mr McVitie agreed that there was no error of law in the  determination.
     Since both representatives were in agreement that the determination of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge D N Harris contained no material error of law
    I uphold his decision.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

No anonymity direction is made.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
A Judge of the Upper Tribunal

