
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/08354/2013
     OA/08358/2013
     OA/08362/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court               |Determination Promulgated  |
|On 14th August 2014                             |On 9th September 2014      |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS



                                   Between

                            (1) MRS LEE PHENG LIM
                              (2) JIAN WEI KIAM
                           (3) ROWAN JIAN HAN KIAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER, MANILA

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr N Wray (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards (HOPO)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Stott, promulgated on 9th April  2014,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 8th April 2014.  In the determination, the judge  allowed
    the appeals of Mrs Lee Pheng Lim, aged 49 years, Jian Wei Kiam, aged 15
    years, and Rowan Jian Han Kiam, aged 13 years.  The  Respondent,  Entry
    Clearance Officer, applied for, and was granted, permission  to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are a mother and her two children.  All are citizens  of
    Malaysia.  They made applications under paragraphs 18  and  19  of  the
    Immigration Rules to enter the UK on  the  basis  of  their  status  as
    returning residents, and by a decision dated 25th February 2013,  their
    applications were turned down on the basis that they  had  been  living
    out of the United Kingdom for more than two years, and in any event had
    only lived in the UK since 1999, and then relocated back to Malaysia in
    2006.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants' claim is that they are dependent upon the head  of  the
    household, Mr Kiam Nim Hon, who is the husband of the  First  Appellant
    and the father of the Second and Third Appellants.  He entered  the  UK
    in 1999.  He settled here.  In 2004, all three Appellants,  along  with
    Mr Hon, were granted indefinite leave to remain.  In 2007, however,  Mr
    Hon obtained employment as a financial controller,  working  in  Qatar,
    for the Qater Investment Authority, and he went to  live  in  Qatar  in
    that year.  Before he left, the three Appellants had  all  returned  to
    Malaysia in 2006, due to Mr Hon's relocation.   Their  grandmother  was
    most unwell in that country.   The  three  Appellants  have  sought  to
    retain their residence status in the UK by returning as often  as  they
    could.  They have returned to the UK in 2008, in  2009,  and  in  2012.
    However, they have only done so for a weekly or fortnightly basis.   Mr
    Hon, however, has returned every year  since  2007.   He  has  recently
    started returning twice a year.  The third child, Kiam  Jian  Shen,  is
    studying at King's College London for a medical degree since 2012.   He
    is not one of the Appellants.  The three Appellants now wish to  return
    to the UK to continue their residency.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge had  regard  to  the  evidence  before  him.   He  noted  the
    Respondent's concerns that all three Appellants  left  the  country  in
    2006 due to the First Appellant's  husband  relocating  to  Qatar,  and
    although the youngest child had been born in the  UK,  no  attempt  was
    made to register her as a British citizen.  This was because  Malaysian
    law forbids the adoption of two nationalities.   The  three  Appellants
    had only lived in the UK for a period of seven years before the  return
    to Malaysia and they have now spent longer in Malaysia than  they  have
    in the UK.  It was accepted that Kiam,  the  First  Appellant's  eldest
    child is now studying medicine at King's College, London and  has  been
    in this country  since  2012.   However,  they  were  not  entitled  to
    residence status.

 5. The judge also considered the case for the Appellants.  He  noted  that
    Mr Hon and the three Appellants have visited  the  UK  regularly  since
    they left in 2006.  They did so deliberately to  maintain  their  links
    with this country.  Mr Hon has a house in Norwich  and  also  owns  two
    apartments in London.   The  Second  and  Third  Appellants  have  been
    accepted at a private school in Norwich.   Mr  Hon  is  a  highly  paid
    financial controller earning in the region of 500,000  US  dollars  per
    annum.  When the First Appellant's mother fell ill with cancer in  2009
    the three Appellants were unable to visit from  Malaysia  between  2009
    and 2012, and then the First Appellant's mother died in 2011.

 6. The judge's findings were that, although the Appellants had been out of
    the UK since 2006, they had made short visits in 2008, 2009  and  2012.
    It is accepted that Mr Hon owned properties in Norwich and  in  London.
    The appeal was allowed for two reasons.  First, the judge accepted that
    the illness of the First Appellant's mother, who suffered from  cancer,
    which eventually led to her death in 2011, was the reason "why there is
    a gap in the visits made between 2009 and 2012 by the three  Appellants
    although Mr Hon continued his visits" (para 15).  Second,  Mr  Hon  had
    purchased properties in  this  country  "which  is  indicative  of  his
    intention to return to live here in due course.  To this end  I  accept
    also that he has been endeavouring to maintain his status by making his
    trips as too have the three  Appellants"  (para  16).   The  appeal  is
    allowed.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge erred in law because he
    exercised discretion and paragraphs 18 and 19  do  not  allow  for  the
    exercise of discretion.  Once it was  clear  that  the  Appellants  had
    ceased to live in the UK from 2006 onwards there was no discretion  but
    to follow the Rules and to reject the appeals.

 8. On 25th April 2014, permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that
    the judge failed to demonstrate why it was appropriate or competent  to
    go on to consider the  Appellants'  intentions,  when  they  could  not
    comply with the Immigration Rules.

Submissions

 9. At the hearing before me, Mr  Richards,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Respondent Entry Clearance Officer, relied upon the Grounds of  Appeal.
    He submitted that the judge had accepted at paragraph 14 that  none  of
    the three Appellants had lived in the UK for most of  their  lives  and
    therefore could not avail themselves of paragraph 19 of the Immigration
    Rules.  He was wrong to have allowed the appeal on the basis of what is
    said at paragraph 18, namely, that "it has  always  been  the  parties'
    intention to return to this country and to  this  end  they  have  been
    maintaining as best as they can links with the country making  periodic
    visits."

10. For his part, Mr Wray, appearing on behalf of the Appellants, submitted
    that the judge was correct  in  allowing  the  appeal  because  of  the
    guidance with respect to paragraphs 18 and 19 of  HC  395  set  out  at
    "returning residents:  SET  09"  (published  25th  August  2011)  which
    contains at paragraph 5 "exception to the two year Rule for  those  who
    have strong ties to the UK."  These  contain  seven  specific  sets  of
    considerations to which regard may be had with a view  to  establishing
    that the two year  Rule  had  exceptions  to  it  under  the  returning
    resident provisions of the Immigration Rules.  For example,  the  first
    one was "the length of the original residence in the UK"  and  Mr  Wray
    submitted that Mr Hon had been in the UK from  1989  to  2007.   During
    this time in 2004 he had acquired ILR in this country.   Second,  there
    was the consideration of "the time the applicant has been  outside  the
    UK" and the Appellants had been out of the UK since 2007, for a  period
    of some seven years.  Third, there is a consideration, "the reason  for
    the delay beyond the two years - was it through their own  wish  or  no
    fault of their own (for example, having to care for a sick  or  elderly
    relative)?"  Mr Wray submitted that there was evidence that  the  judge
    had accepted that the care of the sick relative was the reason why  the
    principal Appellant could not return with the children to the  UK.   In
    the same way, the last consideration was "do they have a home in the UK
    and, if admitted, would they remain and live there?" and it  was  clear
    that Mr Hon had a home since 2004 in Norwich which was still  available
    to him, together with two apartments in London.

11. For his part, Mr Richards submitted that even if this guidance applied,
    the fact was that Judge Stott did not have any regard to this guidance.
     Indeed, the Grounds of Appeal, and  the  skeleton  argument,  make  no
    reference to them at all.  This is the  first  time  that  Counsel,  Mr
    Wray, has turned up with a copy of this guidance and placed reliance on
    it.  Therefore, the judge had wrongly used his discretion to allow  the
    appeal.   The  guidance  played  no  part  in  the  judge's   decision.
    Therefore, there was an error of law.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the decision of  the  judge  did  not  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA  [2007]
    such that I should set aside the decision and  re-make  the  decision).
    It is true that the judge makes no reference to the guidance.  This  is
    no fault of the judge.  There were no submissions before the judge with
    respect to the guidance.  Indeed, as Mr Richards correctly points  out,
    there was no reference to the guidance whatsoever even in  the  Grounds
    of Appeal to this Tribunal.

13. Nevertheless, the question before this Tribunal is whether, such  error
    as the judge has made, is a "material" error, and in  that  regard,  it
    cannot be an irrelevant consideration that the Rules at  paragraphs  18
    and 19 have to be read in the context of the  guidance  that  has  been
    issued with respect to them.

14. This guidance makes it clear at paragraph 7 which refers  to  "SET  9.5
    exception to the two year Rule for those who have strong  ties  to  the
    UK" that exceptions do exist.  The question then is whether the  judge,
    in  giving  his   reasons,   had   regard,   whether   advertently   or
    inadvertently, to these exceptions.

15. A careful analysis of the determination shows that he did.   First,  in
    allowing the appeal (at para 15), the judge states that, "I am prepared
    to accept however the  evidence  that  has  been  given  regarding  the
    illness of the First Appellant's mother namely that she  suffered  from
    cancer and eventually died in 2011 ..."  Second, the judge also  states
    (at para 16) that, "I also take account of the fact  that  Mr  Hon  has
    purchased properties  in  this  country  which  is  indicative  of  his
    intention to return to live here in due course ....," which  the  judge
    finds that Mr Hon did do,  "endeavouring  to  maintain  his  status  by
    making his trips as too have the three Appellants" (para 16).

16. These are considerations that directly go to the guidance at SET 905 of
    the guidance.  Another judge may have decided the  matter  differently.
    However, this judge, who heard the evidence before  him,  came  to  the
    conclusion that he did, and he was entitled to so do, on the  basis  of
    the evidence that was before him.  Accordingly, there is  no  error  of
    law.

Decision

17. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

18. No anonymity order is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 8th September 2014

