
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08764/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Sheldon Court             |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 20 June 2014                               |On 27 June 2014              |
|Prepared 20 June 2014                         |                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                               MR SANDER MARKU
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Hussain of Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of Albania, date of birth 12  February  1977,
    appealed against the Notice of Immigration  Decision,  dated  11  March
    2013, whereby he had applied for entry clearance  as  a  partner  under
    Appendix FM of the Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as  amended)  and  was
    refused because he did not meet the relevant requirements  EC-P.1.1.(c)
    and ECP.1.1.(d).  In the circumstances the refusal was  with  reference
    to paragraph E-ECP.3.1. of the Rules.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision and the matter came before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge J D L Edwards (the judge) who on  6  February
    2014 dismissed the appeal.  Permission  to  appeal  that  decision  was
    given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer on 24 February 2014.

 3.  Whilst  there  may  be  general  criticisms  of  the  layout  of   the
    determination the fact of the matter was that the  judge  assessed  the
    best interests of the Appellant's two  children,  born  June  2010  and
    December 2011 respectively who were British nationals and their  mother
    was a British national as well.

 4.  The judge assessed the implications of the exclusion of the  Appellant
    because it  was  accepted  that  he  could  not  meet  the  maintenance
    requirements under the Immigration Rules and therefore fell outside  of
    the Rules.  The judge therefore proceeded on  the  basis  of  it  being
    accepted that  the  Appellant  could  not  meet,  for  these  purposes,
    paragraph 276ADE of the Rules or succeed under Appendix FM.

 5. The judge therefore addressed the circumstances outside  of  the  Rules
    under old Article 8 considerations and properly set  out  the  relevant
    approach to be addressed, the submissions made, and made findings  upon
    the evidence as was provided.  It is  plain  that  the  impact  of  the
    Appellant's exclusion in terms of  its  effects  on  the  children  was
    addressed but it is plain that the judge  did  not  find  the  evidence
    sufficient or in a reliable form  so  as  to  be  able  to  follow  the
    argument that the best interests of the child lay  with  the  Appellant
    being allowed to enter the United Kingdom.

 6.   The judge did not go behind the general proposition  as  demonstrated
    by the case of ZH (Tanzania) [2011] IKSC 4 that the best  interests  of
    the children was a primary consideration.  The principal criticism made
    is that the judge did not follow the approach identified  in  MK  (best
    interests of child) India [2011] UKUT 475 and had  failed  to  consider
    their  interests  first  before  other  matters:  Rather  than  working
    backwards to their best interests by way of other adverse findings made
    particularly in relation to maintenance and the financial impact of the
    Appellant presence, as at the date of  the  Respondent's  decision,  on
    their family and its best interests.

 7. I agree that the judge presented his conclusions in  that  way  but  it
    seems to me that the substance of  the  decision  was  to  address  the
    children's best interests in the evaluation of the  proportionality  of
    the Respondent's decision. I find the case of Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 of
    assistance because ultimately what is not pinpointed in the grounds  is
    any material evidence which had been omitted or which demonstrated  any
    procedural unfairness or  a  lack  of  consideration  of  the  relevant
    evidence pertinent to matters to be taken into account.

 8.  Accordingly the determination discloses that sufficient  and  adequate
    reasons were given and that the issue of the children's best  interests
    was properly addressed.

 9.  Issue was taken with the  fact  that  the  judge  failed  to  properly
    address the fact that the two children were British  nationals.   I  do
    not find that a sustainable criticism because first, there was no issue
    of the children being removed or expected to  be  removed  to  Albania.
    Secondly, the judge in his reasons does not engage with  that  kind  of
    argument. Thirdly, the judge was doing  the  best  he  could  with  the
    information  provided  bearing  in  mind  the  relevant  date  was  the
    Respondent's decision, namely 11 March 2013.

10.  At that stage it  is  fair  to  say  that  the  Appellant's  financial
    circumstances remained much in the air and there was no evidence of job
    offers or employment in the United Kingdom at that time.   Further,  it
    is plain that unfortunately the circumstances of the children's mother,
    the  Sponsor,  did  not  show  any  likely  change  in  her   financial
    circumstances  in  contemplation  at  the  date  of  the   Respondent's
    decision.  For these reasons I find the judge made no material error of
    law.

11.   The original Tribunal decision stands.



DECISION

12. The appeal is dismissed.

ANONYMITY ORDER

Bearing in mind the existence of children but the fact  that  they  are  not
named or otherwise clearly identified no request was made apparently to  the
original judge to make an anonymity order and nothing was raised  before  me
today on that issue.  In the circumstances I do not find that  an  anonymity
order is necessary.

Signed                                  Date 24 June 2014


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey


