
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08639/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre    |Determination & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 15th March 2017                       |On 5th May 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                    [K W]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                  Entry Clearance Officer - ukvs sheffield

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sarwar (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen (HOPO)


                         DETETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge James promulgated on  21st  June  2016  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on 8th June 2016.  In the determination, the judge dismissed
    the appeal of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant  subsequently
    applied for, and  was  granted,  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

 2. This is a short form judgment and the relevant facts in the documentary
    material are set out in the judgment under appeal.

 3. The facts are set out in the judgment of IJ  James,  as  is  the  legal
    framework.

 4. I allow the appeal.

 5. At the hearing before me on 15th March 2017 a number of criticisms were
    raised.  These are based upon the Grounds  of  Appeal  of  Mr  Pipe  of
    Counsel, dated 4th July 2016, who represented the Appellant  before  IJ
    James, following which permission to appeal was granted in this  matter
    by the First-tier Tribunal  on  21st  October  2016.   What  was  being
    asserted was that the judge had accepted that  the  Appellant's  mother
    had abdicated responsibility for the  Appellant  in  Jamaica,  but  the
    judge then went on  to  find  that  the  Sponsor  did  not  have  "sole
    responsibility", and this conclusion was not open to the judge  because
    what the judge required was corroboration of this matter, and this  was
    unnecessary under the law.

 6. Second, the judge failed  to  consider  the  "best  interests"  of  the
    Appellant child in his assessment  of  Article  8.   Third,  the  judge
    failed to consider the "positive obligation" imposed by  Article  8  to
    promote family life.  This being so, the judge's assessment of  Article
    8 was inadequate.

 7. Finally, at paragraph 17 the judge specifically  noted  a  court  order
    giving custody of the Appellant child to the sponsoring father  in  the
    UK, and whilst the judge recognised (at paragraph 18)  that  the  "best
    interest" of the Appellant child had to be taken into account,  nowhere
    in the determination does the judge make  a  formal  assessment  as  to
    where those best interests actually lie.

 8. On 31st October 2016, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Respondent
    Secretary of State stating that the judge had considered  the  evidence
    and carefully applied the ratio in TD (Yemen) [2006] UKAIT 00049 and it
    was open to the judge on the  facts  presented  to  conclude  that  the
    Sponsor did not have "sole  responsibility"  for  the  Appellant.   The
    Sponsor had not met the Appellant until 2008.  As far as Article  8  is
    concerned the ratio of SS (Congo) sets a high threshold  for  leave  to
    enter cases (see paragraph 27 of that case).  Moreover, the case  of  T
    (Jamaica) [2011] UKUT 483 states in the headnote (i) that  "Section  55
    of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 does not apply  to
    children who are outside the United Kingdom".  For all  these  reasons,
    the judge was right to have concluded as she did.

 9. The submissions before me on behalf  of  the  Appellant  have  been  as
    follows.  First, the judge erred in requiring  corroboration  from  the
    Appellant's aunt and/or in consideration of the lack of clarity in  the
    account that was imparted to the judge (see paragraphs 22 and 24 of the
    determination).  Given that the Respondent had not fielded a Presenting
    Officer on the day of the hearing, the judge had raised matters of  her
    own initiative.  The well-known authority in MNM (Surendran Guidelines)
    (Kenya) [2000] UKIAT 00005 established that it is not the  function  of
    the judge to expand upon the refusal letter and nor is it his  function
    to raise matters which are not raised in the refusal  letter.   If  the
    judge was to conclude, as the judge did in  the  event  conclude,  that
    corroboration was needed from the aunt, then it was  not  insignificant
    that this matter had not been raised in the refusal letter itself.

10. Third, given that the court order gave "full custody"  (see  bundle  at
    page 79) to the Sponsor the finding that the Sponsor did not have "sole
    responsibility" was  perverse.   Equally  so  was  the  suggestion  (at
    paragraph 21) that, the Sponsor has told me he has had regular  contact
    with the Appellant ... I see no records to establish this"  given  that
    there was evidence of contact of telephone cards being  used,  and  the
    evidence before the judge was that the Sponsor spoke with the Appellant
    child "every day" via WhatsApp, and would speak with her  by  telephone
    calls every evening when she came home from school (see paragraph 12 of
    the determination).

11. Fourth, as far as the "best interests" of the child was concerned there
    is no reference at all in the determination to  an  appraisal  of  this
    (see paragraph 27).  Moreover, the conclusion that Section  55  of  the
    BCIA 2009 does not expressly apply to  entry  clearance  decisions  was
    erroneous because what the case of T (Jamaica) established was that the
    spirit of Section 55 should be taken into account.

12. Fifth, the judge failed to consider the positive obligation to  promote
    family life.  Indeed, the determination on Article 8 is couched on  the
    basis of maintaining the status quo (see  paragraph  27),  because  the
    judge concludes that "in this case the decision  will  have  no  impact
    upon the Appellant's family and/or private life which will continue  in
    the same manner ..." (see paragraph 27  of  the  determination).   This
    approach is flawed in the light of Mostafa [2015] UKUT 112 at paragraph
    16 and the Supreme Court judgment in Quila [2011] UKSC 45 at  paragraph
    40.

13. Finally, there were inadequate findings made  with  respect  to  family
    life because there is only a short paragraph dealing with Article 8 and
    the "Razgar process" is not followed.  This was particularly  important
    given the evidence of the aunt's intended departure  to  Canada,  which
    was only on hold pending the proper resolution of the welfare situation
    of the Appellant child (see paragraph 12 of the determination).

Submissions

14. At the hearing  before  me  on  15th  March  2017,  the  Appellant  was
    represented by Mr Sarwar of Counsel.  He submitted that this was a case
    where  the  judge  had  accepted  that   the   mother   had   abdicated
    responsibility for the Appellant.  However, in coming to the conclusion
    that the sponsoring father did not have "sole responsibility"  for  the
    Appellant, the judge was requiring there to be corroboration, and  this
    was not a requirement under the Immigration Rules.

15. If anything, the judge ought to have regard to the fact that there  was
    a court order granting full custody to the father.  However, in  coming
    to the conclusion  that  the  sponsoring  father  did  not  have  "sole
    responsibility" for the Appellant, the judge was requiring there to  be
    a corroboration, and this was not a requirement under  the  Immigration
    Rules.  If anything, the judge ought to have regard to  the  fact  that
    there was a court order granting full custody to the father.

16. Moreover, even  though  the  sponsoring  father  may  not  have  had  a
    significant involvement with his child, the  Appellant,  when  she  was
    born, he did return back to Jamaica in 2008 and had seen the  Appellant
    during the two months that he was there, and thereafter there was clear
    evidence of his involvement with the child.   This  was  important,  as
    there is no rule to the effect that "sole responsibility" must  stretch
    back all the way to the time of  the  child's  birth,  and  it  can  be
    acquired at any point in the life of the child,  provided  that  it  is
    meaningful and substantial, and in this case, not only had  the  mother
    abdicated responsibility, but there had been a  court  order,  and  the
    aunt was now awaiting resolution of the situation before  she  went  to
    live in Canada.  In the circumstances,  the  "best  interests"  of  the
    Appellant child were only being provided for through the context of her
    father with her.

17. For her part, Ms Pettersen submitted that the judge  did  consider  all
    the evidence presented and applied the ratio in TD (Yemen) [2006] UKIAT
    00049.  The judge properly concluded that the sponsoring father did not
    have "sole responsibility" for the  Appellant.   He  had  not  met  the
    Appellant until 2008.   He  had  only  returned  back  on  two  further
    occasions when he travelled to Jamaica.  There was no statement at  the
    time from  the  Appellant's  aunt  with  whom  the  Appellant  was  now
    purportedly living.

18. In reply, Mr Sarwar submitted that I should make a finding of an  error
    of law and then remake the decision because all the  evidence  was  now
    before this Tribunal, and in particular at paragraphs 22 to 24  of  the
    determination, it was being said that there was no  evidence  from  the
    aunt, but the aunt had now provided an updated statement (see page 8 of
    the bundle)  where  she  entirely  corroborates  the  position  of  the
    sponsoring father, and indicates that the mother had  indeed  abdicated
    responsibility, and it was the sponsoring father who now  looked  after
    the Appellant child to intents and purposes.

Error of Law

19. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by the judge did involve
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.  First, the  judge  had  evidence
    that the mother had abdicated responsibility.  There was also  evidence
    that full custody had been given  by  way  of  a  court  order  to  the
    sponsoring father.  It was an error of  law  to  require  there  to  be
    corroboration of the situation  as  this  is  not  required  under  the
    Immigration Rules.

20. Moreover, it is an error to not recognise  that  "sole  responsibility"
    can arise at any time after the birth of a  child,  and  in  this  case
    began to emerge after the Sponsor returned back to Jamaica in 2008, and
    there was subsequently a  court  order  granting  him  custody  of  the
    Appellant child.  The  judge  also  applied  too  high  a  standard  in
    concluding (at paragraph 21) that, "the Sponsor had told me he has  had
    regular contact with the Appellant .... I see no records  to  establish
    this", given that there were calling cards, and the judgment in  Goudey
    [2012] UKUT 00041 makes it clear that such evidence will  suffice,  and
    does in this case suffice, given the other matters that fell favourably
    on the side of the Appellant in this case.

Remaking the Decision

21. I have remade the decision on the basis of the findings of the original
    judge, the evidence before her, and the submissions that I  have  heard
    today.   I am allowing this appeal for the following reasons.

22. First, there are the matters that I have set out above.

23. Second, there is the aunt's statement now at  page  8  of  the  updated
    bundle (the bundle being dated 27th February 2017 with a  supplementary
    witness statement from the Appellant's father).

24. Third, in T (Jamaica) [2011] UKUT 483, it was established that even  in
    an entry clearance case the principles  of  "best  interests"  must  be
    borne in mind.  In JO (Nigeria) [2014] UKUT 00517, it  was  established
    that in entry clearance cases regard must be had to the  age  and  care
    arrangements of the child and  the  decision  maker  must  be  properly
    informed of the position of the  child.   This  involves  conducting  a
    scrupulous analysis and it is a prerequisite of identifying the child's
    best interests  and  then  balancing  them  with  the  other  essential
    considerations.  This is a  duty  upon  the  decision  maker  which  is
    intensely fact-sensitive and contextual in its essence.

25. Fourth, such an analysis leads one directly into Article 8 because  "it
    is difficult to contemplate a scenario where  a  Section  55  duty  was
    material to an immigration decision and indicated a certain outcome but
    Article 8 did not (see paragraph 29  of  T  (Jamaica)).   Moreover,  in
    Mundeba it was established that the focus in Section 55 cases is on the
    circumstances of the child in the light of her age,  social  background
    and developmental history.  It requires an enquiry into  whether  there
    is (a) evidence of neglect or abuse; (b) there  are  unmet  needs  that
    should be catered for; and (c) whether there  are  stable  arrangements
    for the child's physical care.

26. In all these respects (barring the absence of evidence of  abuse),  the
    indications are that the best interests of this particular child lie in
    her being reunited with her father in the UK because he can  cater  for
    her unmet needs and provide her with a stable arrangement.

27. Finally, the test of "sole responsibility" is satisfied  in  favour  of
    the Appellant because there is the inability of relatives in Jamaica to
    care for the Appellant and  to  maintain  and  accommodate  her.   This
    evidence cannot be plausibly contradicted.  The starting point  of  the
    evidence is always the narrative presented by the Appellant, unless  it
    can be properly rejected, and it cannot be so rejected on the  evidence
    before this Tribunal today.  It is clear that  the  Appellant's  mother
    has abandoned her.  The aunt is  on  the  verge  of  so  doing  and  is
    awaiting emigration to Canada.   There  can  never  be  absolute  "sole
    responsibility".  It is a relative matter.

28. In the present circumstances, however, her natural father is  a  person
    who had  exercised  practical  care  and  day-to-day  support  for  the
    Appellant and is able to continue doing so in a far  better  manner  if
    the Appellant were to be reunited with him in the UK.

29. On the totality of the evidence before me, I find  that  the  Appellant
    has discharged the burden  of  proof  and  the  reasons  given  by  the
    Respondent do not justify the refusal.

Notice of Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed.

31. No anonymity order is made.;



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 3rd May 2017

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  whole  fee
award which has been paid or may be payable.


Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 3rd May 2017

