
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08439/2014
                                                               OA/05573/2014
                                                               OA/05564/2014

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Taylor House                        |      Decision & Reasons       |
|                                             |Promulgated                    |
|On 18 December 2015                          |      On 4 January 2016        |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEaRANCE OFFICER (Nairobi)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    1) N
                                    2) I
                                    3)  L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    None


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Majid ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 17 June 2015, in which
    he allowed  the  appellants'  appeals  against  the  refusal  of  entry
    clearance as the adopted children  of  the  sponsor,  who  has  refugee
    status in the UK.


 2. For ease of  reference  and  continuity,  throughout  this  decision  I
    maintain the descriptions of the parties as appellant  and  respondent,
    as set out in the FTTJ's decision, although it is the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer who pursues this appeal.

 3. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  but,  given
    that the appellants were minors at the date of decision,  an  anonymity
    order is appropriate.

Background

 4. The sponsor is the adoptive mother of the appellants  who  applied  for
    entry clearance to join her in the UK.  The respondent  considered  the
    applications  under  paragraph  352D  of  the  Immigration  Rules.   He
    identified anomalies in the  birth  certificates  and  adoption  papers
    produced by the appellants in support of their applications. He was not
    satisfied  that  the  appellants  had   been   lawfully   adopted   or,
    alternatively, that de facto adoptions had taken place. Furthermore, he
    noted that adoptions in Uganda were not "recognised under  UK  law"  at
    the date of decision (albeit they had been previously).


 5. The appeal in the First-tier Tribunal was pursued on the  grounds  that
    the decision was in breach of the Immigration Rules and  on  Article  8
    grounds. The FTTJ allowed the appeal on the grounds that the appellants
    "come within the law and can  benefit  from  the  relevant  Immigration
    Rules, as amended" (paragraph 27).  I assume, from this,  that  it  was
    allowed under the Immigration Rules.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted in the following terms:

         "The  judge,  who  made  no  direct  reference  to   the   relevant
         Immigration Rules or to the reasons given  by  the  respondent  for
         refusing entry clearance, arguably failed to make  findings  as  to
         whether any of the appellants was adopted by the  sponsor,  whether
         any such  adoption  was  official  or  de  facto  and  whether  the
         appellants met the other requirements of the Rules which  were  put
         in issue; and arguably failed to  give  adequate  reasons  for  his
         findings and conclusion."

 7. Thus the matter comes before me.

The Hearing


 8. On the morning of the hearing before me, the sponsor had telephoned the
    Tribunal to advise that she was unwell and would be  unable  to  attend
    the hearing.


 9. Whilst the sponsor had not requested an adjournment of  the  hearing  I
    considered, of  my  own  motion,  whether  to  adjourn  it.  I  invited
    submissions from Ms Everett on behalf of the Secretary  of  State.  She
    noted that the appellants had no legal representation, that  there  was
    no indication that, if the matter were adjourned, the sponsor would  be
    able to attend on another occasion and that she would  be  making  oral
    submissions to the effect that the matter should be remitted to the FTT
    for rehearing. She submitted it was in the interests of justice for the
    hearing to go ahead.  I bore in mind the sponsor had not  requested  an
    adjournment  of  the  hearing,  the  lack  of  representation  for  the
    appellants and the absence of information as  to  whether  the  sponsor
    would attend an adjourned hearing. I considered that there  was  little
    to be gained from adjourning the hearing. It was in  the  interests  of
    justice for it to proceed.

Submissions

10. Ms Everett submitted the FTTJ had failed to give sufficient reasons  as
    to why the appellants fulfilled the criteria in the  Immigration  Rules
    or on Article 8 grounds (it not being clear on which ground the  appeal
    had been allowed). The respondent had raised credibility issues in  his
    decision yet these had not been  addressed.  Those  credibility  issues
    went  to  the  heart  of  the  relationship  between  the  sponsor  and
    appellants. The FTTJ had failed to make a finding as to the  nature  of
    their relationship: whilst it  was  implicit  that  he  had  found  the
    sponsor was an adoptive parent, he had not identified whether this  was
    a lawful adoption or a de facto one.

11. Ms Everett described the decision as "woefully inadequate"  considering
    the importance of the issue for the parties concerned and the fact that
    it involved children moving from one country to another.

Discussion and Findings

12. The FTTJ's decision contains a number of errors of law material to  the
    outcome of the appeals.  Nowhere in the decision does he refer  to  the
    paragraphs of the Immigration Rules taken into account in reaching  his
    decision. This absence, in combination with the lack of  reasoning  for
    his findings renders the decision unsustainable. He has  not  addressed
    at all any of the respondent's concerns about the  reliability  of  the
    documentary evidence  submitted  in  support  of  the  claim  that  the
    appellants had been officially  adopted  by  the  sponsor.   These  are
    issues which go to the heart of the appeals.  Furthermore, even if  the
    FTTJ had decided these were de facto adoptions,  rather  than  official
    adoptions (and it is not clear from  the  decision  that  this  is  the
    case), there is no reasoning to support such a  finding.   Thus  it  is
    unclear on what basis the FTTJ has reached his decision  to  allow  the
    appeals.  Whilst it could  be  inferred  from  paragraph  27  that  the
    appeals were allowed under  the  Immigration  Rules,  even  taking  the
    decision as a whole, it is not possible to identify the FTTJ's findings
    as regards the nature of the adoption and why the appellants fulfil the
    criteria in the relevant paragraph of the Rules.


13. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  a
    material error of law  in  that  the  assessment  of  the  evidence  is
    inadequate and there is insufficient  reasoning.  The  FTTJ's  decision
    must be set aside in its entirety.  Ms Everett submitted that,  in  the
    event of such a finding, it  was  appropriate  for  the  appeal  to  be
    decided afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.  I agree with her.

Decision

14. The making of the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  a
    material error on a point of law.


15. The decision of the FTTJ is set aside.

16. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with
    afresh, pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunal  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v),  before  any  judge
    aside from FTTJ Majid.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
      Dated: 18 December 2015




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Fee Award
The FTTJ made a fee award but, given that the decision has been  set  aside,
the fee award is set aside also.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dated: 18 December 2015



