

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)               Appeal number: OA/08864/2013



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London            |Determination Promulgated |
|On 9 October 2014                       |On 10 October 2014        |
|                                        |                          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                        Appellant
                                     and

                           NAGESWARY SHANMUGARAJAH

                                                     Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms C Bayati, instructed by S Satha & Co Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whilst this is an appeal by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  (ECO),  for
    convenience I will refer to the parties in the  determination  as  they
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal

 2. The appellant is a national of Canada.  She  is  the  mother  of  Anuja
    Ranjan, a  British  national  and  the  sponsor  in  this  appeal.  The
    appellant applied for entry clearance as the Adult  Dependant  Relative
    of the sponsor under paragraph EC-DR of Appendix FM of the Statement of
    Changes in Immigration Rules, HC 395 (the Immigration Rules). The Entry
    Clearance Officer (ECO) refused the  application  under  EC-DR.1.1  (d)
    with reference to E-ECDR.2.4 and 2.5 of Appendix FM. Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Cohen allowed the appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State  now
    appeals with permission to this Tribunal.

 3. The relevant provision of Appendix FM for the purposes of  this  appeal
    are as follows;

 "E-ECDR.2.4. The applicant ... must as a result of age, illness or
 disability require long-term personal care to perform everyday tasks.


 E-ECDR.2.5. The applicant ... must be unable, even with the practical and
 financial help of the sponsor, to obtain the required level of care in the
 country where they are living, because-
       (a) it is not available and there is no person in that country who
       can reasonably provide it; or
       (b) it is not affordable."

 4. The Judge found on the basis of the medical evidence and the statements
    that  the  appellant  'suffers  from  conditions  preventing  her  from
    performing everyday tasks'  and that she therefore  met  the  Rules  in
    relation to his matter. The grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  do
    not take issue with this finding. I note that in  making  this  finding
    the Judge said that the appellant is 81 years old whereas in  fact  she
    was at that time 71 years old. However, as I have said this finding was
    not challenged and in  any  event  I  note  that  the  Judge  gave  the
    appellant's correct date of birth at the outset  of  the  determination
    and it is clear that the Judge attached weight to the medical  evidence
    and the statements rather than the  appellant's  age  in  reaching  his
    conclusion that the appellant requires long-term personal  care.  I  am
    therefore satisfied that this was not a material error.

 5. At the hearing before me Mr Whitwell submitted that the  Judge  made  a
    number of other factual errors. He firstly submitted that the Judge had
    wrongly recorded the name of the Home Office representative,  appearing
    to name the presenting officer who appeared at the previously adjourned
    hearing instead of counsel who appeared at the resumed hearing. However
    I note that the Judge did refer to the representative by  name  in  the
    decision itself at paragraph 8. Mr Whitwell  also  submitted  the  Home
    Office record of proceedings which indicated that  counsel  had  cross-
    examined the sponsor whereas the Judge noted that there was  no  cross-
    examination [7]. Ms Bayati, who had represented the  appellant  at  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing said that the sponsor adopted her statement
    in oral evidence and that there was only one question asked  in  cross-
    examination which related to how the sponsor's sister would be able  to
    travel to the sponsor's house to care for the  appellant.  The  sponsor
    said that her sister would take the train. Whilst the Judge did make an
    error in relation to this I do not think that it was significant as the
    Judge found that the sponsor and her sister were able to  provide  care
    to the appellant. Mr Whitwell further pointed to paragraph 11 where the
    Judge used the word 'eight'  instead  of  'age'.  This  is  an  obvious
    dictation or typing mistake and it is clear from the sentence  what  is
    meant. These mistakes were not relied upon in the grounds of appeal. In
    any event for the reasons set out above I am satisfied  that  they  are
    not significant or material either separately or cumulatively.

 6. The Judge also found that the appellant's daughter and  son  in  Canada
    could not provide the care required and that the costs  of  appropriate
    healthcare there were 'prohibitive'. The Judge  therefore  allowed  the
    appeal being satisfied as to paragraphs E-ECDR 2.4 and 2.5.

 7. In the grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal the ECO  challenged  the
    findings made in relation to E-ECDR 2.5. It is  acknowledged  that  the
    daughter's husband had been injured in an industrial accident ten years
    previously and it is contended that the Judge  failed  to  address  the
    respondent's contention that there had been no change in the daughter's
    circumstances. The respondent contends  that  the  daughter  in  Canada
    could provide gratuitous care or could provide  financially  for  care.
    Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the Judge  may  have
    erred in failing to deal with  the  lack  of  change  in  the  Canadian
    daughter's circumstances.

 8. Ms Bayati relied on  her  Rule  24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge was  that  the  appellant
    had resided with her daughter in Canada since arriving there  in  1996.
    The appellant's case is that she helped and supported her daughter.  In
    2003 the appellant's son-in-law  suffered  a  serious  injury  at  work
    leaving him partially disabled and unable to work since which time  the
    appellant's daughter has acted as his carer as well  as  looking  after
    her children. She submitted that the evidence before the Judge was  not
    that the Canadian daughter's circumstances had  changed  but  that  the
    needs of the appellant herself had changed. Her health has deteriorated
    to such an extent that the daughter can no longer provide the care  her
    mother needs and her son-in-law has become resentful of  the  time  his
    wife has to spend looking after the appellant. She submitted  that  the
    Judge has given sufficient reasoning for reaching  the  conclusions  he
    did.

 9. It is clear from the statements and evidence before the Judge that  the
    case was made that the appellant, who used  to  help  and  support  her
    daughter, has herself over the last two  to  three  years  increasingly
    required support and care. The Canadian daughter's  statement  explains
    how her mother's increasing needs has led to her  husband's  increasing
    resentment. According to the sponsor's statement she has been providing
    financial support to her mother since her brother-in-law's accident  in
    2003.  This  evidence  is  set  out  at  paragraph  4  of  the  Judge's
    determination.

10. The Judge accepted that  the  appellant's  condition  has  deteriorated
    recently and that the level of care she requires has increased.  It  is
    clear from reading paragraphs 10 to 16  that  the  Judge  accepted  the
    evidence that the daughter in Canada could no longer provide the  level
    of care required given her own  circumstances.  He  accepted  that  the
    appellant's son in Canada  could  not  provide  the  required  care  or
    financial support. The Judge also clearly found that the  cost  of  the
    required care in Canada was not affordable to the sponsor,  the  person
    who has supported the appellant since 2003. These findings were open to
    him on the evidence. It is upon these findings that the  Judge  decided
    that the appellant had demonstrated that she met  the  requirements  of
    the Rules.

11. I am satisfied that the Judge reached a decision open  to  him  on  the
    evidence before him and that he made no material error of law.

Conclusions:

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Signed
                                  Date: 9 October 2014



A Grimes

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal























