

                                    [pic]



The Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)             Appeal number: OA/08736/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Promulgated Determination   |
|On January 6, 2015                   |On January 19, 2015         |
|                                     |                            |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                        MISS PATRICIA ERETORU UPHILL
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Walker (Home Office Presenting Officer)
For the Respondent:    Ms Glass, Counsel, instructed by Fletcher Dervish
      and Co Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Whereas the original respondent is the appealing party, I shall, in the
    interests of convenience and consistency, replicate the nomenclature of
    the decision at first instance.

 2. The appellant, born May 6, 1956 from Nigeria.  She  applied  for  entry
    clearance as the partner of a British citizen under Appendix FM of  the
    Immigration Rules. The respondent refused the application on  March  3,
    2013.

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  under  section  82(1)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  on  April  4,  2013.  The  respondent
    reviewed the  original  decision  on  July  12,  2013  but  upheld  the
    decision. The matter came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Andonian (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") on April 4,  2014  and
    in a decision promulgated on May 6, 2014  she  allowed  the  appeal  on
    article 8 grounds but dismissed the appeal under the Immigration Rules.



 4. The respondent lodged grounds of appeal on May 15, 2014 and on June  9,
    2014 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Cruthers  gave  permission  to
    appeal finding there were arguable grounds that the FtTJ had erred  not
    following the approach set out in Gulshan [2013] UKUT 640 (IAC).

 5. On July 31, 2014 grounds of resistance were lodged  with  the  Tribunal
    when the matter came before Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Harris.  He
    adjourned the case and gave directions. The appellant's solicitors  did
    not meet that deadline but at their request the deadline for compliance
    was extended until August  18,  2014  and  on  August  20,  2014  Upper
    tribunal Judge Lane gave directions  for  the  future  conduct  of  the
    appeal.  That deadline was also not met  and  the  matter  came  before
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Parkes on October 23,  2014.  He  adjourned
    the appeal because counsel was unable to attend. The matter came before
    me on November 28, 2014 and having made enquiries  I  ascertained  that
    neither the solicitors nor the sponsor claimed  to  have  received  the
    adjournment notice. Reluctantly  I  adjourned  the  appeal  and  issued
    directions that the appellant's counsel has complied with.

    PRELIMINARY ISSUES

 6. I clarified with Ms Glass that no application to appeal had  ever  been
    made either to me or the Tribunal. I reminded her of EG and NG (UT rule
    17, withdrawal; rule 24; scope) [2013] UKUT 143 (IAC) and in particular
    the contents of paragraph [46] which makes it  clear  that  a  Rule  24
    response (such as the document filed on July 31, 2014) does not  create
    a right of appeal. She agreed and accepted that no  grounds  of  appeal
    had ever been lodged and the parties agreed to  concentrate  solely  on
    the respondent's grounds of appeal.

 7. I invited Mr Walker to address me on his grounds of appeal.  Mr  Walker
    agreed that paragraphs [7] to [9] of the  determination  set  out  what
    could be said to be "exceptional circumstances".  He  agreed  that  the
    FtTJ had considered the evidence and found that there were grounds that
    he later described as exceptional.

 8.  Whilst  not   conceding   the   FtTJ   had   identified   "exceptional
    circumstances" he had no further submissions he wished to make on  that
    issue.

 9. I thereafter asked him to consider the second part of  his  grounds  of
    appeal namely had the FtTJ "given reasons for why the refusal of  entry
    clearance would result in unjustifiably harsh consequences".

10. Mr Walker acknowledged the appellant  would  never  succeed  under  the
    Rules and he had looked at the consequences for  the  parties  and  had
    followed the test set out in Razgar [2204]  UKHL  00027.  He  concluded
    that keeping them apart would have consequences of such gravity  as  to
    potentially  engage  article  8  and  that  the  interference  was  not
    necessary. He  had  taken  into  account  all  of  the  facts  and  the
    importance of immigration control.

11. I did not require submissions from Ms Glass as I  was  satisfied  there
    was no error in law.

    ERROR OF LAW ASSESSMENT

12. The appellant's appeal had been  allowed  under  article  8  ECHR.  The
    respondent appealed on the grounds that Gulshan had not  been  complied
    with but I am satisfied the approach to Gulshan has been  confirmed  in
    the recent cases of two recent  decisions  of  Ganesablan,  R  (on  the
    application of) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 2712 (Admin) and Aliyu & Anor, R (on
    the application of) v SSHD [2014] EWHC 3919 (Admin).

13. I am satisfied that the FtTJ identified  exceptional  circumstances  in
    paragraphs [7] and [8] of her determination.

14. The issue was whether she considered whether refusal of entry clearance
    would result in  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences.  Article  8  is  a
    discretionary ground of appeal and in  considering  whether  there  has
    been an error in law I must not replace what my decision may have  been
    unless I find the FtTJ materially erred.

15. Whilst I may not have reached the same conclusion as the FtTJ I  accept
    she has given her reasons for allowing this appeal  and  why  she  felt
    refusing entry would be unjustifiably harsh.

16. Mr Walker was unable to argue that the FtTJ had not given  reasons  and
    in the circumstances I dismiss the appeal.

17. On a separate issue I was unable to  deal  with  the  purported  cross-
    appeal. I do not actually think there is any merit to  the  grounds  of
    appeal because  the  sponsor  was  not  receiving  one  of  the  exempt
    payments. Employment Support Allowance (ESA) is paid when a  person  is
    not fit for work but it does not appear in  the  exempted  benefits  in
    Section E-ECP 3.3 of Appendix FM. I therefore find  no  merit  to  this
    purported ground of appeal.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not disclose  an  error  in
    law. I uphold the original decision.

19. Under Rule 14(1) The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as
    amended)  an  appellant  can  be  granted  anonymity  throughout  these
    proceedings, unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise. No
    order was made in the First-tier and I see  no  reason  to  amend  that
    decision.

Signed:                                 Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
TO THE RESPONDENT

I revoke the earlier fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed:                                     Dated:




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
