
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/08405/2013
                                                               OA/08404/2013

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 14th November 2014                  |On 2nd December 2014                |
|                                       |                                    |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE R C CAMPBELL

                                   Between

                            Miss Farkhunda Azizi
                              Miss Husna Azizi
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms G Loughran (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.    The  appellants'  appeals  against  decisions  to  refuse  them  entry
    clearance to enable them to join their father  in  the  United  Kingdom
    were dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge A J Parker ("the judge") in
    a determination promulgated on  13th  May  2014.   The  appellants  are
    citizens of Afghanistan.  Their application  was  made  from  Pakistan,
    where they have lived since 2001.  Their mother also appealed against a
    similar adverse decision but, sadly, she has since passed away.

2.   Before the First-tier Tribunal, it  was  conceded  on  the  appellants'
    behalves that they could not meet the requirements of the  rules.   The
    Entry Clearance Officer ("the ECO")  had  found  that  the  appellants'
    sponsor, their father, could not show that he had  the  minimum  income
    required of �24,800 per annum.   He  was  unable  to  produce  a  self-
    assessment tax return or bank statements showing that the  requirements
    of the rules in Appendix FM-SE were met.  It was also conceded that the
    appellants could not  show  that  the  requirements  of  the  rules  in
    Appendix FM and 276ADE were met, in relation to family life and private
    life.

3.   The judge took into account findings made in an earlier  appeal,  heard
    in August 2011, as a starting point.  The  appellants'  father  visited
    them every year from 2002 and began full-time employment in 2010.   The
    judge noted the claim made by the appellants' sponsor  that  he  cannot
    live in Pakistan as he is not allowed to do  so  and  when  he  travels
    there he is issued with visas which are valid for  45  days.   He  also
    took into account a submission made by the appellants' Counsel that the
    financial requirements of the rules would have been met the year before
    the applications (they were made in December  2012)  and  in  the  year
    following the decision to refuse entry clearance, in early March  2013.
    It was submitted on the appellants' behalves that their appeals  should
    be allowed under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention.   The  judge
    found that section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
    2009 ("the 2009 Act") did not apply in out of country applications but,
    even if it did apply, it would not help the  appellants.   He  made  an
    assessment in the Article 8 context, having found that the requirements
    of the rules  were  not  met,  and  concluded  that  refusal  of  entry
    clearance was a proportionate response.  The appeals were dismissed.

4.   An application for permission to appeal was  dismissed  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and then renewed.  On 1st October 2014, an Upper Tribunal
    Judge granted permission, finding that it  was  arguable,  inter  alia,
    that the judge may have failed to assess  the  best  interests  of  the
    minor appellant and may have erred in his conclusions.

Submissions on Error of Law

5.   Ms Loughran adopted the grounds  in  support  of  the  application  for
    permission to appeal and the skeleton argument which  had  been  before
    the First-tier Tribunal.  The first ground concerned section 55 of  the
    2009 Act.  The judge failed to consider the best interests of the minor
    appellant  and  declined  to  properly  consider  relevant  submissions
    following his error that the section 55 duty did not apply to  children
    abroad.  Ms Loughran said that this was a clear error which appeared at
    paragraph 18 of the determination.  The judge noted  that  one  of  the
    appellants was 16 years of  age.   Although  he  went  on  to  make  an
    assessment "even if (the duty) did" apply, the case of  Mundeba  [2013]
    UKUT 00088 showed that the best interests of children abroad do need to
    be assessed.  The judge made no mention of this case and plainly got it
    wrong.  He then went on to consider "MN" but must have meant  here  the
    decision in MM (Lebanon), regarding financial requirements.  There  was
    a material  error  here  where  the  judge  found  that  the  financial
    thresholds were apparently more relevant than the best interests of the
    minor appellant.  He clearly did not treat her interests as  a  primary
    consideration.

6.   The second ground concerned family life in Pakistan.  The  judge  erred
    in this context at paragraphs 13, 14 and 18 of the  determination.   It
    was  irrational  to  require  evidence  that  a  British  citizen,  the
    appellants' father, could not live in Pakistan.   The  sponsor  had  no
    links to that country.  There was evidence  before  the  Tribunal  that
    showed an absence  of  immigration  status  in  Pakistan  so  that  the
    appellants remained there illegally.  The judge failed to  give  proper
    weight to this evidence in finding, at paragraph  14,  that  there  was
    nothing to show that the sponsor and family members could not  continue
    to reside in Pakistan.  The judge  applied  the  wrong  test.   As  the
    appellants had spent many years in Pakistan, he  appeared  to  draw  an
    inference that they could continue to do  so.   At  paragraph  18,  the
    judge ignored the evidence that the children could not live with  their
    father in Pakistan without remaining  there  illegally.   Their  father
    gave evidence that he had suffered difficulties in Pakistan, having  to
    pay bribes and having  been  detained  and  having  had  difficulty  in
    obtaining visas.  This was all material evidence regarding  whether  he
    could return to live with his daughters.  The third ground was similar,
    but in relation to Afghanistan.  The judge found that the  sponsor  had
    exceptional leave to remain and so there was no reason why he could not
    return to Afghanistan, as he was not a refugee.  However, the case  was
    argued on Article 8 grounds and there was no need to meet an Article  3
    or a Refugee Convention threshold.  The judge  misdirected  himself  in
    law and there was no proper consideration of proportionality.

7.   The fourth ground concerned Gulshan.  The  judge  made  a  misdirection
    here and it was not clear whether he properly considered the Article  8
    case outside the rules.  He appeared to get  the  Gulshan  test  wrong,
    referring to "undue hardship", rather  than  whether  the  consequences
    flowing from the adverse decisions would be "unjustifiably harsh".   Ms
    Loughran submitted that there was a difference  between  the  two.   He
    failed to  take  into  account  the  sponsor's  inability  to  live  in
    Afghanistan or Pakistan and appeared to  look  only  at  Article  3  in
    assessing whether the sponsor could join  his  daughters.   Insofar  as
    Gulshan proposed an intermediate test or threshold, it was  clear  that
    the judge failed to apply it properly.  The proportionality  assessment
    was contained in paragraphs 20 to 22 of the determination but here, the
    judge failed to refer to the appellants, mentioning instead  only  "the
    appellant" in paragraph 21.  At paragraph  22,  the  judge  found  that
    refusal of entry clearance would cause "no more than mere  hardship  or
    obstacle" but there were three appellants to consider and the  youngest
    appeared not to feature in the assessment.  There was  also  no  proper
    consideration of the sponsor's financial circumstances, in the  Article
    8 context.  At  paragraph  14,  the  judge  appeared  to  consider  the
    "choices" made by the family in their immigration history but this  was
    not consistent with the Razgar approach.   Although  findings  of  fact
    were made before paragraph 21, there was no proper  assessment  of  the
    proportionality of the adverse decisions and the judge failed to attach
    weight to the decision in MM.  Ms Loughran also relied on ground 5,  as
    it appeared in the original application.  The judge failed to record in
    the determination that the sponsor is a British citizen, who could  not
    and  should  not  be  expected  to  leave  the  United   Kingdom.    He
    misunderstood the submissions made  on  the  appellants'  behalves  and
    failed to attach appropriate weight to the evidence.

8.   Mr Wilding said that the Secretary of State's  stance  was  that  there
    was no material error of law.  Notwithstanding use  of  "appellant"  in
    the singular, for example in paragraph 21 of the determination, it  was
    clear that all three appellants were considered at all material  times,
    paragraphs 8, 9  and  12  showing  that  the  judge  engaged  with  the
    circumstances of all of them.  So far as section 55 of the 2009 Act was
    concerned, the judge was not wholly inaccurate in  his  statement  that
    the duty did not apply to children abroad but, in any event, he went on
    to find, rationally, that it did not assist the appellants.

9.   It was accepted that the requirements of the rules were not met and  so
    the appellants' case was advanced on an Article 8 basis in the light of
    that.  The relevant findings  made  by  the  judge  were  contained  in
    paragraph 12 onwards.  The children had been  living  in  Pakistan  for
    fifteen years and received regular visits from their father.  The judge
    considered all the salient features of the case and there  was  nothing
    material missing from his assessment.  Contrary to the submissions made
    on the appellants' behalves, paragraph 19 was clearly a summary at  the
    end of the overall assessment.  Nor did the judge err in  finding  that
    the sponsor could continue to return to Pakistan and  reside  with  his
    daughters, should he wish to do so.  On this, the decision of the Court
    of Appeal in VW and AB, or more precisely AB, was  directly  on  point.
    The judge took this into account as a relevant factor.  The ECO did not
    suggest in refusing entry clearance that the only remedy available  was
    for the sponsor to visit his children in Pakistan.

10.   The  judge  had  in  mind  all  the  evidence,  made  plain  that  the
    requirements of the rules were not met and took the financial  position
    into account in  his  assessment.   He  was  entitled  to  observe,  at
    paragraph 18, that a further application might be made.

11.   When  properly  considered,  the  detailed  submissions  made  on  the
    appellants' behalves simply reargued the case.  It was  said  that  the
    sponsor should not have to visit the family in Pakistan  and  that  the
    inability to meet the requirements of the rules was  not  determinative
    and was no bar to success under Article 8.  It was, however, clear from
    the  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MM  that  the  financial
    requirements of the scheme were lawful.  In essence,  the  judge  found
    that the status quo could  continue,  pending  a  further  application.
    There was no immediate  reason  why  the  sponsor  could  not  live  in
    Pakistan  or  Afghanistan  and  his  apparent  ability  to   meet   the
    requirements of the rules now would mean that any period of  separation
    would be relatively short.  The judge did  not  overlook  any  material
    factors.

12.  The apparent reliance on Gulshan was  a  red  herring.   Even  assuming
    that there is no intermediate test or threshold, the  judgment  of  the
    Court of Appeal in Haleemuddin showed that the rules formed part of the
    Article 8 assessment.  In most cases, the rules would cater for Article
    8 considerations.  Read overall, it was clear that paragraph 19 of  the
    determination was simply part of the reasoning process and not a  brief
    dismissal of the section 55 duty.  The  best  interests  of  the  minor
    appellant were clearly considered and taken into account.

13.  Nor did the judge err in  relation  to  the  difficulties  the  sponsor
    might face in returning to Pakistan.  The proper test  was  not  simply
    whether he was able to return to that  country.   The  judge  concluded
    that the need to maintain immigration control was an important part  of
    the assessment in this context and, again, paragraph  22  followed  his
    earlier findings.  Overall, there was no material error of law.

14.  In a brief response, Ms Loughran said that the best  interests  of  the
    minor  appellant  were  a  primary  consideration  and   not   properly
    considered at any point.  The proper test was not  simply  whether  the
    appellants were living in Pakistan.  There was no basis  for  inferring
    what the best interests of the minor appellant were and a  judge  might
    infer that they were served by the grant of entry clearance  to  enable
    her to join her father here.  It was plain that other findings might be
    made, including  a  finding  that  the  minor  appellant  was  in  dire
    circumstances.  There was simply  insufficient  to  show  that  a  best
    interests assessment was made by the judge.

15.  So far  as  VW  and  AB  was  concerned,  it  was  not  argued  on  the
    appellants' behalves that it could never be appropriate for a person to
    return to  a  country  without  status.   Here,  there  was  no  proper
    consideration of that aspect, amounting to an error of law.  The  judge
    made no clear finding that the status quo  could  continue.   The  only
    consideration of the  sponsor's  financial  circumstances  appeared  in
    paragraph 18 and was limited to consideration of an  application  under
    the rules.  In limiting his assessment to whether it was  possible  for
    the sponsor to return to Pakistan or Afghanistan and whether  he  might
    be at real risk there, the judge erred as this was not properly part of
    the Article 8 assessment.  There was no  consideration  of  whether  it
    would be proportionate for the family to live in another country.

Conclusion on Error of Law

16.  It is clear from the determination that  the  judge's  findings  appear
    from paragraph 12 onwards and, as Mr Wilding submitted,  paragraphs  18
    to 22 represent the culmination of his assessment.  So far as the first
    ground relied upon is concerned, the judge's finding that  the  section
    55 duty does not apply in out of country applications might,  at  first
    sight, give the appearance of an error, in the light of T  [2011]  UKUT
    00483 and Mundeba [2013] UKUT 00088.  However, he went on to find  that
    the duty would "not assist" in the case and, again, it  is  clear  that
    the first part of paragraph 19 builds upon his  earlier  findings.   He
    had the family's circumstances clearly in mind, including  the  fifteen
    years or so the appellants  have  lived  in  Pakistan.   He  took  into
    account the regular visits made  by  the  appellants'  father  and  the
    financial support he provided, which he  was  entitled  to  find  would
    continue.  It is also clear, as Mr Wilding submitted,  that  the  judge
    did weigh in the balance as a relevant factor the absence of  leave  or
    status in Pakistan and the difficulties that  the  appellants'  sponsor
    has suffered in the past.  This was  also  a  factor  in  AB  (Somalia)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 5.  Overall, I conclude that  the  judge  did  properly
    assess the best interests of  the  minor  appellant,  as  part  of  his
    overall assessment of the family's circumstances and that  he  did  not
    err materially in this regard.  A sensible reading of the determination
    shows that underlying his conclusion that section  55  did  not  assist
    were his findings that the requirements of the rules were not  met  and
    that the relationships between the family members which  had  continued
    for many years could be  maintained  in  the  future,  allowing  for  a
    further application for entry clearance in the light of  the  sponsor's
    improved circumstances.  I  do  not  accept  the  submission  that  the
    judge's consideration of "MN" in the High Court shows that he failed to
    properly take into account section 55 of the 2009 Act.

17.  Nor did the judge err, as contended in the second ground,  in  relation
    to family life in Pakistan.  He clearly took into account the sponsor's
    evidence regarding an absence of status, the  short-term  visas  relied
    upon during  the  regular  visits,  his  British  citizenship  and  the
    difficulties faced in 2012 (for example).  He was entitled to  draw  an
    inference from the evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  the
    particular arrangements in place could continue in the future,  in  the
    light of refusal of  entry  clearance.   The  observation  he  made  at
    paragraph 22 that the adverse decisions would cause no more  than  mere
    hardship or obstacle was open to  him  in  the  light  of  the  settled
    arrangements in place since 2001, notwithstanding the precariousness of
    the immigration status of the appellants  in  Pakistan.   Similarly,  I
    conclude that ground 3  is  not  made  out,  in  relation  to  life  in
    Afghanistan.  The grant of exceptional leave to remain to  the  sponsor
    is not a formal barrier to return to the country of his nationality and
    the judge was entitled to take  into  account,  in  this  context,  the
    savings amassed by him.

18.  I agree with Mr Wilding that ground 4, regarding an apparent  error  in
    relation to Gulshan, is a red herring.  Contrary to what appears in the
    written grounds in support of the application for permission to appeal,
    the determination reveals that the judge made an assessment  under  the
    rules and outside them, as paragraphs 20 to 22 show.   It  may  now  be
    doubted that there is an intermediate threshold  before  an  Article  8
    assessment outside the rules is required, in the light of MM and Others
    [2014] EWCA Civ 985 (at paragraph 135 of the judgment  in  particular).
    In any event, it is clear that the judge took his earlier  findings  of
    fact, regarding  the  family  arrangements  currently  in  place,  into
    account in his  Article  8  assessment.   There  is  no  merit  in  the
    suggestion that any intermediate threshold has not been applied.

19.  Although more precision  would  have  been  welcome  in  the  last  few
    paragraphs of the determination, the use by the judge of  the  singular
    "the appellant" in those paragraphs does not obscure his reasoning,  so
    as to give rise to material error.  In the same ground, it is contended
    that the judge failed to attach weight to MM  but  the  author  of  the
    grounds had in mind here the judgment of the High Court.  The Court  of
    Appeal's judgment  appeared  about  a  month  after  the  grounds  were
    prepared and the financial requirements of the rules were found  to  be
    lawful.  It is clear from the determination that the judge gave  weight
    to the failure to meet those requirements, as he was entitled to.

20.  Ground 5 is also not made out.  Contrary to what appears  at  paragraph
    32, the judge did record and take into account  the  sponsor's  British
    nationality (see paragraph 13).  It  is  contended  in  rather  general
    terms that the judge overlooked case law relating  to  Afghanistan  and
    misunderstood  the  submissions  made  on  the  appellants'   behalves.
    However, a careful reading of the determination shows  that  the  judge
    did have all the salient features of the case in mind and  he  referred
    to the skeleton argument and submissions made by Counsel in making  his
    findings and reaching his conclusions.

21.  I conclude that no material  error  of  law  has  been  shown  and  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

22.  The appellants' sponsor said  at  the  end  of  the  hearing  that  the
    dismissal of the appeals had caused  him  sadness.   He  mentioned  his
    wife's (the appellants' mother's) sudden death.  I have no  doubt  that
    my conclusion that the decision made by the First-tier  Tribunal  shall
    stand will come as a disappointment.  However, it is apparent from  the
    case put to the judge that the appellants' father's  circumstances  are
    now improved and robust and so  there  is  nothing  to  show  any  real
    impediment to  a  further  application  which  has  real  prospects  of
    success.  The evidence before the judge suggested that their father may
    not have been well served by advisors in the past but he appears now to
    be in good hands and much of the preparatory  work  can  be  undertaken
    without delay.

DECISION

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of  law
and shall stand.






Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge R C Campbell

