

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal No:
OA/08988/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House                                        Determination
Promulgated
On 1 September 2014                                On 9 September 2014


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL DIGNEY

                                   Between

                                 JUNJIE LIN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - BEIJING

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the respondent: Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the appellant:  Mr Lam


                               DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant, a citizen of China, born on 5 January 1997, applied for
      settlement to join his mother. The application  was  considered  under
      paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules.   The application was  refused
      because the respondent was not satisfied that  the  sponsor  had  sole
      responsibility for her son. The appeal was dismissed because the First-
      tier judge reached the same conclusion on sole responsibility.


   2. The first ground of appeal states that the judge's conclusion that  he
      could  not  be  satisfied  that  the   appellant's   father   had   no
      responsibility for the  appellant  was  perverse.  The  second  ground
      states that adequate reasons were not given for  the  conclusion  that
      the appellant's mother did not have sole responsibility for  her  son.
      It is then said that  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant  is  self-
      sufficient in China with other family members is based on  speculation
      rather than evidence and the conclusion is at odds with  paragraph  16
      [it is actually paragraph 15] of the determination,  where  the  judge
      accepts that the sponsor has transferred  money to the  appellant.  It
      is finally said  that  the  decision  on  article  8  is  inadequately
      explained.


   3.   Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Judge  Cruthers.     After
      summarising the grounds he concluded:

             Given, amongst other things, the history  of  the  appellant's
             mother, I suspect that in the last  analysis  it  is  unlikely
             that  the  appellant  will   be   able   to   establish   sole
             responsibility  here.  However,  it  is  arguable   that   the
             appellant and  the  sponsor  are  entitled  to  a  less  brief
             treatment of such case as the appellant does have  as  regards
             sole responsibility.  Overall,  there  is  sufficient  in  the
             grounds to make a grant of permission appropriate.


             As already intimated, the appellant  and  sponsor  should  not
             take this grant of  permission  as  any  indication  that  the
             appeal will ultimately succeed.

   4. This is a case  where  various  relations  and  acquaintances  of  the
      appellant were interviewed by or on behalf of the respondent in  China
      and their evidence was before the trial judge.  There  are  interviews
      with  two  uncles,  the  appellant's  sister  and  someone  from   the
      appellant' school. The appellant was also interviewed.


   5. The first ground states that the judge was wrong to conclude  that  he
      could not rule out that the appellant's father  had  some  involvement
      with the appellant. In the light of the interviews I have to  conclude
      that the judge's conclusion was so strongly against the weight of  the
      evidence that it must amount to a factual error. However, it seems  to
      me that even if this is an error of law, it is not material.  That  is
      because, on the facts of this case, the absence or  otherwise  of  the
      father is irrelevant to whether the mother  had  sole  responsibility.
      There is nothing in any of the interviews that suggest that the mother
      had any responsibility  for  the  appellant  other  than  occasionally
      sending money. The responsibility  appears  to  have  been  shared  at
      various times between the grandparents, one  of  the  uncles  and  the
      sister. The appellant says in his statement that his mother  made  the
      major decisions in his life, and the  mother  says  the  same  in  her
      statement. She also  said  at  the  hearing  that  she  made  all  the
      decisions for her son.  Unfortunately these are  mere  statements  and
      the evidence of the relations in China gives no  factual  support  for
      these statements. It is for the appellant to prove that his mother had
      sole responsibility for him and there is no evidence to  that  effect.
      The judge was certainly entitled to reach the decision he did on  this
      point and I find it difficult to see how he  could  have  reached  any
      other conclusion on the evidence before him. It follows that there  is
      no error of law in the judge's conclusion that the appellant's  mother
      did not  have  sole  responsibility  for  him.  The  evidence,  points
      overwhelmingly to the appellant's various relations  in  China  having
      responsibility at various times.


   6. I am not sure what the relevance of the third ground is and Mr Lam did
      not refer to it at the hearing. The evidence does in  fact  show  that
      the appellant is now self-sufficient in China, in the sense that he is
      living on his own with no day to day help. It  is  accepted  that  his
      mother sends money but the judge was  describing  the  life  that  the
      appellant was leading, which it must be admitted does not appear to be
      a very happy one, living as he does on his own. The third ground  does
      not identify any error either of law or fact.

   7. It is finally said that article 8  is  not  properly  treated.  Having
      concluded that the appellant could not succeed under the  rules  there
      would have had to be something compelling before an  article  8  claim
      could be successful and there is nothing of that sort. Mr Lam did  not
      in fact mention article 8 in his submissions.


   8.  It follows that the original judge made no error of law. The original
      decision stands.

The appeal is dismissed


Designated Judge Digney
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                           2 September 2014



