

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: OA 08632-12

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|At    Field House                             |Decision signed:   25.10.2013|
|on                                            |sent out:   30.10.2013       |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN

Between:
                                 OLADUNJOYE
                                                                   appellant
                                     and



                                                                  respondent

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       This appellant was granted permission to appeal the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal as follows:

    1. The individual points  on  which  the  decision  of  the  judge  who
          permission in the First-tier Tribunal  are  seriously  challenged
          both concern the hearing judge's findings at paragraphs 20 -  24.
          The order of events put forward or  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
          appellant is as follows:

          14  January      2006   sponsor marries first husband (H1)
       November     H1 arrives in UK
          19  January      2007   appellant issued with UK visa  as  cousin
                                      of sponsor
              February            appellant arrives in UK
       March        appellant and sponsor form relationship: appellant  goes
                           on to overstay his visa
       February     2008   appellant arrives back in UK  but  refused  leave
to enter
          2         March  2012   appellant refused visa to join sponsor as
                                      her husband
          4   June  2013   appellant marries sponsor


       2. The judge did not believe  the  account  the  appellant  and  the
          sponsor had given of their history, and so dismissed the  appeal.
          The specific points on which the judge's findings are  challenged
          (as opposed to the appellant's case simply being re-asserted) are
          these:


             a) the sponsor married H1 in January, not  June  2006  (as  the
                judge said at paragraph 5); and
             b) the judge was wrong  to  say,  at  paragraph  23  that  "The
                Sponsor has sponsored two different husbands within a  short
                period of time", when she did not sponsor the  appellant  as
                her husband till 2012.

       3. I do not think anything turns on (a): as for (b), the appellant's
          case is that he came over in 2007 as the  sponsor's  cousin,  and
          only formed a relationship with her afterwards.  It  did  not  of
          course follow that this version had to be believed, and  the  two
          of them have a good deal of explaining to do. If  the  judge  had
          found  that  what  the  sponsor  did  in  2007  was   in   effect
          deliberately to call a second husband for herself,  only  a  year
          after marrying the first, then  she  would  have  been  entitled,
          giving proper reasons, to say  so,  and  to  draw  the  necessary
          conclusions.

       4. However, I do not think the judge confronted this issue directly,
          as she needed to. Unless there is an objection  within  the  time
          set out in the attached letter, there will  be  a  fresh  hearing
          before another first-tier judge.

    That decision was sent to the parties on 14  July,  with  copies  of  a
    notice requiring a response by 28 July. There has been  none  from  the
    Home Office, and the appellant's solicitors have written to consent; so
    I shall make the order as I said.

    Appeal allowed
    Fresh hearing at Taylor House, not before Judge Rabin

                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)



