
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08613/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 2 February 2017                   |On 6 February 2017                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                Dogucan Aytas
                        [No anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                    The Entry Clearance Officer Istanbul
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr M Aslam
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Dogucan Aytas, date of birth 5.4.97,  is  a  citizen  of
    Turkey.

 2. This is his appeal against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Connor promulgated 8.8.16, dismissing his appeal against  the  decision
    of  the  Entry  Clearance  Officer,  dated  20.4.15,  to   refuse   his
    application for entry clearance as the  dependant  of  a  Turkish  ECAA
    businessperson (his mother), pursuant to  paragraph  35  of  the  HC509
    Immigration Rules.

 3. The Judge heard the appeal on 13.6.16.

 4. First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth granted permission to appeal  on
    29.12.16.

 5. Thus the matter came before me on 2.2.17 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 6. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision of Judge Connor should be set aside.

 7. The application was refused because the Entry Clearance Officer was not
    satisfied that the sponsoring mother had sole  responsibility  for  the
    appellant. Concern was expressed about the limited contact between  the
    sponsor and the appellant since she relocated to the UK in  2005,  when
    the appellant was 8 years of age.

 8.  However,  at  the  heart  of  the  appeal  lies  an  argument  on  the
    interpretation and scope of paragraph 35 of HC509, and the 'standstill'
    effect of the Ankara Agreement.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge set out the relevant passage at  [49]  of
    the decision, to the effect that the spouse and children under 18 of  a
    person permitted entry to the UK as a self-employed  person  should  be
    given leave to enter for the period of the person's authorised stay.

10. The judge went on from [51] to deal with the respondent's position  and
    the Home Office guidelines. At [55] & [56] the judge concluded that  in
    considering the position of a dependent child, where on of the  parents
    is not included in the application and not entering the UK,  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer was  correct  to  apply  the  guidelines,  in  effect
    importing a  requirement  for  the  Turkish  ECAA  business  person  to
    demonstrate that she has had sole responsibility  for  the  appellant's
    upbringing.

11. The judge then went on to assess the factors relevant to the assessment
    of sole responsibility and concluded that the  sponsor  does  not  have
    sole responsibility for the appellant. Neither  did  the  judge  accept
    that there were any exceptional, serious or compelling family or  other
    considerations  which  would  make  the  exclusion  of  the   appellant
    undesirable. The appeal was dismissed.

12. It was and remains the appellant's argument that there  cannot  be  any
    qualification on paragraph 35 and that the Immigration Rules applied by
    the Entry  Clearance  Officer  via  the  guidelines  do  not  apply  to
    paragraph 35.

13. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Hollingworth  considered  there
    to be an arguable error of law in relation  to  the  interpretation  of
    paragraph 35 and the applicability of the respondent's guidance. "It is
    arguable  that  the  guidance  itself  does  not  possess  the   effect
    attributed to it by the Judge.  The  question  of  sole  responsibility
    becomes arguable in terms of its relevancy. It  is  arguable  that  the
    Judge should have provided a sufficient analysis of the effect  of  the
    Ankara Agreement."

14. The Rule 24 reply, dated 19.1.17, asserts that the judge's approach was
    correct and the judge was entitled to reach the conclusions she did  in
    assessing the best interests and wellbeing  of  the  appellant,  noting
    that the appellant has not lived with his mother since 2005.

15. At the hearing before me both Mr Nath and  Mr  Alsam  assured  me  that
    there has been no  previous  decision  on  whether  the  respondent  is
    entitled to qualify or limit the standstill effect of paragraph  35  of
    the Ankara Agreement. However, it transpired that was not accurate.  In
    OY (Ankara Agreement, Standstill Clause, Workers' Family) [2006]  UKAIT
    28, a decision which Mr Aslam was unaware of, the Upper Tribunal  panel
    comprehensively rejected the argument advanced by Mr Aslam at the First-
    tier Tribunal and before me. The standstill  clause  in  Article  6  of
    Association  Council  Decision  80/1  is  concerned  solely  with   the
    conditions relating to the worker's "access to employment" in  the  UK.
    "It is not concerned with the admission to the UK of a  Turkish  worker
    or his family. Consequently, the admission to the UK of the family of a
    Turkish worker is to  be  determined  on  the  basis  of  the  relevant
    immigration rule (and any policies) in effect at the date of the  entry
    clearance condition." I need not rehearse  the  extensive  and  careful
    reasoning for this  conclusion,  but  it  is  clear  that  it  disposes
    entirely of Mr Aslam's primary submission.

16. Mr Aslam's secondary submission, relying on  TD  (paragraph  2979i)(e):
    "sole responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT  00049,  is  that  the  judge
    erred in the  assessment  of  sole  responsibility.  In  TD  the  Upper
    Tribunal panel held that sole responsibility is a factual matter to  be
    decided upon all the evidence. "Where one parent is not involved in the
    child's upbringing because he  (or  she)  had  abandoned  or  abdicated
    responsibility, the issue may arise between the  remaining  parent  and
    others who have day-to-day care  of  the  child  abroad.  The  test  is
    whether the parent  has  continuing  control  and  direction  over  the
    child's upbringing, including making all the important decisions in the
    child's life. However, where both parents are  involved  in  a  child's
    upbringing, it will be exceptional that one of  them  will  have  'sole
    responsibility.'"

17. Mr Aslam also pointed to what were said to be factual  inaccuracies  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and, contrary to the  findings
    of the judge, asserted  that  there  were  no  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence submitted on the appellant's behalf in relation to whether the
    father worked.

18. I have carefully considered the submissions  in  [14]  onwards  of  the
    grounds, in particular at [19], but in essence this is no more  than  a
    disagreement with the  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  an
    argument as to weight, which is a matter for the  judge.  For  example,
    the judge took into account the Turkish  family  court  judgement,  but
    concluded  at  [64]  that  this  was  to  facilitate  the   appellant's
    relocation to the UK, and not on the basis that she already had care of
    him. The judge noted the court documents stated  that  the  father  was
    unable to care for the appellant, but  the  judge  concluded  this  was
    inconsistent with the order, which allowed him to care  for  the  child
    for a month each year. Thus at [66] the judge concluded that the  court
    documents do not support a  finding  that  the  sponsor  has  has  sole
    responsibility for the appellant's upbringing. That was a finding  open
    to the Tribunal.

19. In any event, it is clear that the core of the findings of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal at [61] and from  [62]  onwards  of  the  decision  stand
    independent of the various criticisms made. The judge has  given  clear
    and cogent reasons for concluding that on the facts of  this  case  the
    sponsor has not had sole responsibility for the appellant. It cannot be
    said that the decision was irrational or perverse. In this respect, the
    grounds of application for permission to appeal  are  no  more  than  a
    disagreement  with  the  findings  and  conclusion  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

20. I am not satisfied that there is any material error and  not  satisfied
    in any event that it the alleged errors are in any  event  material  to
    the issues in the case, namely sole responsibility.

Conclusions:

21. For the reasons set out above, I find that the making of  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a
    point of law such that the decision should be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        5 October 2021


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.
Given the circumstances, I make no anonymity order.


Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
been dismissed and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated        5 October 2021

