
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/08123/2014
                                                               OA/08129/2014
                                                               OA/08126/2014
                                                               OA/10373/2014
                                                               OA/10375/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 August 2016                              |On 18 August 2016             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                       ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - AMMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 Fatima [A]
                                    [R H]
                                    [M H]
                                    [H H]
                                    [Z H]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr A Adebayo, Solicitor, A2 Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer but I will  refer  to
    the original appellants as the  appellants  herein.  They  seek  family
    reunion in this country to join Mr [H], the  sponsor,  husband  of  the
    first-named appellant and father of the remaining appellants.   Mr  [H]
    has refugee status in  this  country.   The  first-named  appellant  is
    claimed to  be  a  Kuwaiti  Bidoon.  A  reference  hereinafter  to  the
    appellant is a reference to the first named appellant.

2.   The respondent refused the applications for  settlement  on  the  basis
    that he was not satisfied that there had been any  contact  between  Mr
    [H] and the first-named appellant and accordingly  that  the  appellant
    was not the spouse of a person granted refugee status and further  that
    the respondent was not satisfied that  the  parties  intended  to  live
    together  in  the  United  Kingdom.   The  respondent  noted  that  the
    appellant claimed to be a Kuwaiti Bidoon but a point was taken that  in
    a previous application she said she had been smuggled into Jordan  from
    Iraq in a car stating that the smuggler knew people and she had entered
    Jordan undocumented.  The respondent considered that having made checks
    with the relevant authorities both the appellant and her  children  had
    entered Jordan in November 2012 on valid Iraqi passports.  She had  not
    provided any information concerning her Iraqi nationality  or  why  she
    now claimed to be stateless.  Given that  she  had  entered  Jordan  on
    Iraqi passports and had not submitted  these  documents  to  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer he was not satisfied that the appellant was genuinely
    stateless.  No evidence had been provided about  how  she  had  entered
    Jordan and how she had been living in  Jordan  without  valid  national
    documents.  The application fell to be refused under  paragraph  320(3)
    and 320(10) of HC 395.  The respondent  was  not  satisfied  about  the
    appellant's claimed identity.  The refusal was on 26 May 2014.

3.   The appellants appealed and their  appeals  came  before  a  First-tier
    Judge on 4 December 2015.  They were then represented as they  are  now
    by  Mr  Adebayo.   The  respondent  was  represented  by  Mr  Williams,
    Presenting Officer.  On the point about the Iraqi passports it was  the
    appellant's case that she had been advised by the sponsor that she  and
    the children could apply to the British Embassy in Kuwait to  join  him
    under the family reunion policy.  However, it was said that the British
    Embassy in Kuwait did not entertain visa applications from undocumented
    Bidoons  who  did  not  have  Article  17  passports.   However,   visa
    applications would be accepted by the British Embassy in Amman, Jordan.
     An agent was found to take them there and they had arrived in November
    2012.  They had applied for visas at the British Embassy but these  had
    been refused on 26 May 2014.  The agent who had brought the  appellants
    to Jordan had provided them with Iraqi passports but the appellants had
    no idea how the agent had obtained them or  whether  they  were  valid.
    The family were now living in Amman where they  rented  a  house.   The
    sponsor had visited the family in 2013 and 2014.  Indeed he had been in
    Jordan at a previous hearing of an appeal involving the  appellants  on
    24 January 2014.  He had not been present because he had been  told  by
    his lawyer that the hearing had been on 10 March 2014.  Mr [H] produced
    two birth certificates for his wife.  A point was taken by Mr  Williams
    that these certificates showed two different dates  of  birth  for  the
    first appellant.  Mr Williams did not accept the point being made about
    the sponsor's failure to attend the previous hearing.  It was, however,
    accepted that the second, third, fourth and fifth appellants  were  the
    children of Mr [H] and his wife.

4.   In his findings of fact the judge refers to relevant  country  guidance
    and sets out an extract from NM  (documented  or  undocumented  Bidoon:
    risk) Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT 00356 (IAC).  The previous country guidance
    in respect of documented/undocumented Bidoon  was  maintained  but  the
    crucial document was a security card rather than  civil  identification
    documents.  Undocumented Bidoon faced a real risk  of  persecution  and
    those Bidoon who did not register between 1996 and 2000 and  hence  did
    not obtain security cards were as  a  consequence  undocumented  Bidoon
    although this must be seen in the context of  the  evidence  that  most
    Bidoon carried security cards.  The determination continues as follows:
         "62. There is no evidence  the  Appellants  had  obtained  security
             cards and it is said they do not have Kuwaiti passports.  What
             has been produced is  a  'birth  certificate'  for  the  first
             Appellant together with a translation, showing a date of birth
             of 03/09/1399 Hijri, said to  correspond  to  25/07/1979,  the
             document quotes as the place of  birth  Alfarwania,  which  is
             situated in Kuwait.  The document is said to have been written
             on the 14th August 1979.   At  the  hearing  Mr  [H]  produced
             another document also with a translation;  the  original  pink
             coloured document  is  referred  to  in  the  translation  as,
             'Ministry of Health-Notification of Birth.'  In that  document
             the first Appellant's date of birth is  quoted  as  20/07/1979
             and the date of the document as  being  the  27/07/1979.   The
             Country of Birth is referred to as Kuwait and the  nationality
             of the first Appellant's parents as being Bedoon.
         63.  Mr Williams points to the discrepancy in  the  date  of  birth
             shown on the two documents with Mr [H]'s evidence  being  that
             the first Appellant's correct date of birth  is  25/07/79  and
             the reference to the 20/07/79 was a mistake.
         64.  There is also reference in NM to  the  difficulties  faced  by
             undocumented Bidoon's in obtaining certain documents  such  as
             birth certificates and assessing certain schooling.   In  this
             case  the  first  Appellant  relies  on  a  number  of  school
             documents to show she was educated in Kuwait.
         65.  The Appellant's account of being Bidoons is also challenged on
             the basis of the first Appellant's account of their journey to
             Jordan with the Respondent stating in the refusal letter  that
             enquiries  with  the  relevant   authorities   indicated   the
             Appellant's had travelled on valid Iraqi passports.  I was not
             provided with details of precisely  what  enquiries  had  been
             made of which authority or what evidence those authorities had
             been relied upon.  I was  however  provided  with  a  LandInfo
             report dated 23 January 2014 entitled, 'Iraq: Travel documents
             and other identity documents'.  Included at paragraph  5.1  of
             the report is the following:
                  "Iraqi passports are relatively easy to  manipulate.   The
                  Norwegian  police  have  discovered   many   false   Iraqi
                  passports in the G-series and A-series....'
         66.  In asserting that the Appellant's may be  Iraqis  Mr  Williams
             also referred to the lengthy period of time Mr  [H]  spent  in
             Iraq in April 2015.
         67.  I accept there are some discrepancies in the Appellant's  case
             regarding such issues as dates of birth, schooling and  travel
             to Jordan, however I  have  also  seen  a  copy  of  Mr  [H]'s
             Immigration Status Document and his UK passport.  The Personal
             Details section of the Immigration Status Document, issued  by
             the UK  Border  Agency,  describes  Mr  [H]'s  nationality  as
             'Kuwait Bidoun' and his passport records  him  as,  'Stateless
             Refugee-1951 UN.
         68.  The Respondent's bundle of documents in respect of  the  first
             Appellant includes DNA evidence which shows that  Mr  [H]  and
             the first Appellant are the  parents  of  the  second,  third,
             fourth and fifth Appellant's.  I consider this  indicates  the
             first Appellant were in a relationship and given Mr [H] status
             as Kuwaiti Bidoun,  having  taken  into  account  the  various
             discrepancies I have identified, I am prepared  to  accept  on
             the balance of probabilities that the first  Appellant  is  an
             undocumented Bidoon and that is also the position  so  far  as
             the remaining Appellants are concerned.
         69.  The next issue so far as  the  first  Appellant  is  concerned
             relates to whether she is  the  spouse  of  a  person  granted
             refugee status and that she and  her  spouse  intend  to  live
             together  in  the  UK.   There  is  reference  in  the   first
             Appellant's refusal letter of the  20th  February  2013  to  a
             marriage certificate having been produced,  although  the  ECO
             had been unable to verify whether it was genuine.  I have  not
             been able to locate such a document in the papers before me in
             respect of this appeal.   Mr  [H]  in  his  witness  statement
             states that he and the first Appellant were married at the  Al
             Hamdi Mosque in Kuwait on the 18th March 2000.  Mr [H]  states
             they were not allowed to marry at the Kuwait Marriage Registry
             as they are undocumented Bidoons.
         70.   Having  accepted  the  first  Appellant  and   Mr   [H]   are
             undocumented Bidoons, I consider it plausible that  there  may
             be no official state documents confirming their marriage.  The
             DNA evidences  [sic]  confirms  they  are  the  parents  of  4
             children, the eldest of which was born on the 1st April  2004.
             I have also  been  shown  an  extract  from  Mr  [H]'s  asylum
             interview which took place on the 17th January 2010  in  which
             he names the first Appellant as his spouse and gives the  date
             of their marriage as the 18th March 2000.  On the  balance  of
             probabilities I am prepared to accept that the first Appellant
             was married to Mr [H] on the 18th March 2000.
         71.  As I have indicated I have seen a copy  of  Mr  [H]'s  Refugee
             Status Document issued by the UKBA.  The first Appellant's and
             Mr [H]'s youngest child was born on the 19th March  2009.   Mr
             [H]'s evidence is that he left Kuwait because  of  persecution
             on the 13th December 2010 to come to the UK.  Given the  dates
             of birth of the children, particularly the youngest, I  accept
             that the Appellants and Mr [H] were  living  together  as  one
             family unit immediately prior to Mr [H] leaving Kuwait."

5.   The judge then considered the issue of  whether  the  marriage  between
    the first appellant and Mr [H] was subsisting and resolved that  matter
    in the parties' favour and that the children were undocumented  Bidoons
    and that they were the children of the sponsor and the first appellant.
     They were part of Mr [H]'s family unit at the time he left Kuwait  and
    there had been contact since through Mr [H]'s visits to Jordan.

6.   The judge accordingly allowed the appeals of all the appellants.

7.   The Entry Clearance Officer applied for permission  to  appeal  on  the
    point that had been taken under paragraph 320(3) and (10) of the Rules.
     This was a mandatory refusal and should have  been  dealt  with  as  a
    preliminary issue.  Such an issue could not be defeated by a favourable
    credibility finding.  Reference was made to AM (Somalia)  [2009]  UKAIT
    00008.  Permission to appeal was granted on this point  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

8.   Mr Tarlow pointed out that the Entry Clearance Officer had  made  clear
    that there were issues with the documentation.   The  family  had  used
    apparently valid Iraqi documents.  The judge had failed to address  the
    point.  It was a narrow issue and reference was made to AM (Somalia).

9.   Mr Adebayo submitted that there was no material error  of  law.   There
    were several documents before the First-tier Judge.  The Rules provided
    not only for a valid national passport but also other  documents.   The
    judge's decision had been satisfactorily  reasoned  on  the  point  and
    reference had been made to a LandInfo report.  The first appellant  had
    submitted a marriage application with her previous application  to  the
    Entry Clearance Officer.  Mr Adebayo made  reference  to  the  IDIs  in
    relation to family reunion.  Among the  documents  that  could  be  put
    forward were passports, national  identity  cards  and  other  official
    documents which included as an  example  school  identification  cards.
    There was also reference to a marriage certificate as being an original
    document which might be unavailable to submit with an application.  The
    first appellant's birth certificate had been put before the  First-tier
    Judge.  There was a difficulty in obtaining official documentation.

10.  Mr Avery submitted that the judge had made no  findings  on  the  issue
    and had identified discrepancies in the  evidence.   The  evidence  was
    pretty sketchy, he submitted.

11.  He could not establish what documentary evidence had  been  before  the
    Entry Clearance Officer -  he  had  some  untranslated  documents.   Mr
    Adebayo  said  that  there  was  a  marriage  certificate   and   birth
    certificate and copies had not been returned  by  the  Entry  Clearance
    Officer.

12.  At the end of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I remind  myself
    that I can only interfere with the decision of the First-tier Judge  if
    it was materially flawed in law.

13.  The sole issue in this case concerns the point taken by the  respondent
    under paragraph 320(3).  This issue was dealt with by the  Tribunal  in
    AM (Somalia).  Just as in that case the point was not in fact taken  by
    the respondent at the hearing as a preliminary issue.  The first  point
    taken by Mr Williams was whether the appellant's marriage  was  genuine
    and subsisting.  The judge does, however, record Mr Williams taking the
    point during the course of  submissions.   In  relation  to  the  birth
    certificates the judge records  Mr  Williams  taking  a  point  on  the
    discrepancy in the dates of birth shown for the first appellant on  the
    certificates  but  not  that  they  otherwise  could  not  qualify  for
    consideration under the Immigration Rules which refer to a "passport or
    other document satisfactorily establishing" an applicant's identity and
    nationality.  As the Tribunal said in paragraph 11 of the decision,  it
    was  right  that  paragraph  320(3)  made  refusal  of  an  application
    mandatory -
         "... if the circumstances set out in that paragraph apply.  But the
         fact that the refusal is mandatory does not of course mean that  it
         is not the subject of appeal.  On appeal it is for  an  Immigration
         Judge to decide whether the circumstances said to  cause  paragraph
         320(3) to apply do in fact apply to the case."

14.  The judge did turn his attention to the documentation relied on by  the
    appellants at the outset of his findings of fact and I have  reproduced
    these above.  The judge refers to the marriage  certificate  which  had
    been produced which was not available for him in the  papers  which  he
    had been provided with.  Mr Avery was unable to locate a copy.

15.  Of course it is difficult  as  the  judge  found  for  Bidoon  who  are
    undocumented to put forward official documentation.  Indeed he accepted
    that it was plausible that there might be no official  state  documents
    confirming the marriage between the parties.   The  judge  nevertheless
    gave careful consideration to the documentary evidence relied  on.   In
    this case the first-named  appellant  was  married  to  Mr  [H],  whose
    nationality was stated in his immigration status  document  as  "Kuwait
    Bidoon".

16.   Although  Mr  Williams  took  issue  with  the  dates  on  the   birth
    certificates he did not submit that they were not evidence  that  could
    be relied upon by the first-named appellant to satisfy the requirements
    of paragraph 320(3).   It  is  plain  that  the  judge  considered  the
    submission in the light of the country guidance  and  the  difficulties
    faced by undocumented Bidoon in obtaining  certain  documents  such  as
    birth certificates.  The judge did note that the first-named  appellant
    had relied on school documents to show she was educated in Kuwait.

17.   The  judge  considered  the  submission  made  on  the  basis  of  the
    appellants having travelled to Iraq on valid Iraqi  passports  but  had
    not been provided with details of precisely  what  enquiries  had  been
    made of which authorities or what evidence those authorities had relied
    upon.  He did give consideration to the background material in relation
    to such documents at paragraph 65 of his decision.  The important point
    is that the judge accepted the material that the appellants had  relied
    upon as being satisfactory in the circumstances of this  case  to  show
    that the appellant was indeed an undocumented Bidoon.  It is plain that
    he rejected the submission that the appellants might be Iraqis based on
    the period of time Mr [H] had spent in Iraq in 2015.

18.  Even though the point had not been relied on by the respondent  at  the
    hearing as the principal issue the judge in my view did  satisfactorily
    deal with the matter in the  course  of  his  determination.  Paragraph
    320(3) is drafted in a way which caters  for  undocumented  Bidoon  who
    have special  difficulties  in  establishing  their  case  for  obvious
    reasons in the light of the background material.

19.  I  have  given  careful  attention  to  Mr  Avery's  customarily  clear
    submissions on the narrow issue he identified but I am  satisfied  that
    the judge did not materially err in law in concluding as  he  did.   No
    point is taken by the respondent on the  other  findings  made  by  the
    judge.  Accordingly I dismiss the appeal of the Entry Clearance Officer
    and direct that the decision of the First-tier Judge shall stand.




    Notice of Decision

    Appeal dismissed, decision of First-tier Judge to stand.




    Anonymity Order

    The First-tier Judge made no anonymity order and having considered  the
    matter I make none.




    Fee Award

    The judge made a fee award in the event that a fee  had  been  paid  or
    might be payable.  I see no reason to disturb the judge's fee award  in
    the circumstances of this case.


Signed                                  Date 17 August 2016

G Warr
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
