
  [pic]
IAC-FH-AR-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08658/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 July 2015                       |On 17 July 2015                      |
|Prepared 2 July 2015                 |                                     |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                HENRY TURTON
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 ECO - LAGOS
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss V Akintola, Legal Representative, Harrison
Morgan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of  Nigeria,  date  of  birth  3  June  1994,
    appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 26 February 2013,  to
    refuse  entry  clearance  with  reference  to  paragraph  297  of   the
    Immigration Rules HC 395.

2.   The appeal together with appeals by a sibling (Edwin)  and  his  mother
    (Emily), came before First-tier Tribunal Judge S  Russell  (the  judge)
    who, on 3 April  2014,  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  under  the
    Immigration Rules and, although the matter  was  disputed,  also  under
    Article 8 of the ECHR.

3.   Permission to appeal that decision [D] was first refused by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McCarthy on  5  September  2014  but  allowed  by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Coker on 29 January 2015.

4.   In her opening submissions Miss Akintola accepted that  the  judge  had
    made a finding on the Appellant's failure to meet the  requirements  of
    paragraph 297(ii) of the Immigration Rules.  It is correct  that  [D23]
    the judge concluded that the second Appellant (this Appellant) was,  at
    the date of application, over the age of 18  and  therefore  could  not
    succeed under paragraph 297 of the Rules.  It followed that  grounds1-3
    do not disclose any arguable error of law. In any event the  fact  that
    this Appellant had previously applied, when under 18 years of age,  was
    immaterial.

5.   Miss Akintola argued that the judge had failed to  consider  the  claim
    under Article 8 of the ECHR. At D3, D25 to 28 the judge referred to the
    Appellants ("Appellants").

6.   It is plain therefore from the outset the judge was not  confining  the
    issue of Article 8 to anything other  than  all  the  Appellants.   The
    judge theretofore concluded at D28 by saying:

         "I start my enquiry by looking at the Appellants' own evidence.   I
         accept that the first Appellant (Mrs Emily Turton)  and  Mr  Turton
         (the Sponsor) are in a genuine and subsisting marriage. I note  the
         efforts he is  making  to  reunite  with  his  wife  and  children.
         Nonetheless the cause of the separation of the family  is  not  the
         ECO's decision but the voluntary decision of Mr Turton  to  migrate
         to the UK.  In the intervening period, the  Appellants  have  lived
         without him and, in the case of the  second  (this  Appellant)  and
         third Appellants, grown up without the daily guidance of a  father.
         I find, therefore, that while  the  ECO's  decision  represents  an
         interference with their right to respect for family life, it is not
         so serious as to engage with Article 8 ECHR." (my parenthesis)

7.   The judge at [D27] in the decision had set out with reference to  Huang
    [2007] UKHL 11 and Razgar [2004] UKHL 27 the staged questions posed  in
    Razgar.  It was therefore clear that the judge  found  that  the  first
    question was answered in the affirmative but the  second  question  was
    answered in the negative. It followed there from that the remainder  of
    the questions posed in Razgar did not fall to be considered.

8.   With the help of Miss Akintola  I  examined  the  original  grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal from the Respondent's  decision.   It
    is plain that there are two references in the  most  generic  sense  to
    Article 8 ECHR.  I was therefore satisfied that as matter  of  approach
    the judge considered, as he was required to do, Article 8 of  the  ECHR
    insofar as it is was relevant to  the  each  of  the  three  Appellants
    before him including this Appellant.

8.   I further considered the evidence made  available  which,  in  fairness
    Miss Akintola she may only have had a part: It may be the  entirety  of
    the evidence but I cannot tell. The evidence included a statement  from
    the Sponsor in the UK, Mr Turton, making plain his wish to be  reunited
    with his wife.  Similarly there was a statement from Mrs Turton,  again
    speaking to her desire to be with her husband.  What is not revealed on
    the file are statements, letters or other information from or about the
    second Appellant (this Appellant) or the third Appellant touching  upon
    either the impact of separation  as  between  themselves  and/or  their
    parents. Nor was there evidence from their parents on the  implications
    of any separation between them and their children. I examined the  case
    files and did not find any related  documents.   In  the  circumstances
    Miss Akintola, but this is no criticism of her presentation, was unable
    to alight upon material evidence which could have informed and provided
    any assistance in  assessing  the  judge's  decision  consideration  on
    Article 8 as applicable  to  this  Appellant  or  his  sibling  or  his
    parents.

9.   In the grant of permission Upper Tribunal Judge  Coker  refers  to  the
    consideration  of  Article  8  by  the  judge  as   arguably   woefully
    inadequate.  She also referred to the judge failing

         "... to consider the intra-family relationships and the  effect  on
         the sibling who has been  unsuccessful under the Immigration Rules.
          It is arguable he makes no adequate analysis of  family  life  and
         that he gives no reasons for his findings that the interference  in
         family life is not sufficiently grave to engage Article 8."

10.  It seemed to me Upper Tribunal  Judge  Coker's  remarks  are  factually
    correct in some respects but the problem was that there simply does not
    appear,  nor was I taken to any,  to be evidence in  relation  to  such
    family life which would have been  pertinent to an assessment of family
    life or in intra family relations.  Thus to criticise the judge on  the
    basis of the insufficient  consideration  seemed  to  be  unsustainable
    given the voluminous case files and lack of evidence in his case .

11.  For my part I would have found it more helpful for the  judge  to  have
    provided more extensive reasons but it seemed to me, on the evidence to
    which I have been taken to and contained with  the  case  files,  there
    simply was not the evidence before the judge to make a positive finding
    under Article 8 ECHR grounds in relation to this Appellant.

12.  This Appellant fell by the wayside when the appeals of his  mother  and
    sibling succeeded under the Rules. Perhaps the danger  of  his  failing
    under the immigration  rules  because  of  his  age  should  have  been
    foreseen and a fallback position prepared based on Article 8 ECHR  with
    significant evidence relating to the impact  of  separation  and  other
    exceptional circumstances, bearing in mind this  Appellant  was  not  a
    child.  It is unfortunate that a difference should have arisen when the
    other Appellants succeeded under the Rules but that was  something  the
    Appellant's representatives were in the best position to judge and take
    steps accordingly.

13.  I am satisfied  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  Russell  made  no
    arguable error of law in the consideration of  this  Appellant's  claim
    under Article 8 of the ECHR.



Notice of Decision

14.  The Original Tribunal decision stands. The appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity Order

15.  No anonymity order was requested nor do I find none is appropriate.

16.  The appeal has failed and therefore there is no award of  costs  to  be
    made.



Signed   Date 10 July 2015

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

