
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/08863/2014
     OA/08869/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 November 2015                           |On 7 December 2015            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                      ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER - MANILA
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    S J B
                                    S J B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms Rebecca Harrington instructed by John Atkins


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I make an anonymity order under  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as  amended)   as   the
    respondents are children.  This order prohibits the disclosure directly
    or indirectly (including  by  the  parties)  of  the  identity  of  the
    respondents.  Any disclosure in breach of this order may  amount  to  a
    contempt of court.  This order shall remain in force unless revoked  or
    varied by a Tribunal or Court.

Introduction

 2. The Entry Clearance Officer appeals against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Troup) allowing the  appeals  of  the  respondents
    (hereafter "the  claimants")  against  refusals  to  grant  them  entry
    clearance for settlement as  the  children  of  a  person  present  and
    settled in the UK, namely their mother (hereafter "the sponsor")  under
    para 297 of the Immigration Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 3.  The  claimants  are  brother  and  sister  and  are  citizens  of  the
    Philippines.  They were born respectively on 16 February  2003  and  10
    March  2000.   Consequently,  they  are  now  12  and  15   years   old
    respectively.  They were 11 and 14 years old respectively at  the  date
    of decision.

 4. In July 2005, the sponsor and the claimants'  father  came  to  the  UK
    leaving the claimants in the care  of  the  sponsor's  parents  in  the
    Philippines.  In 2008, the sponsor and the claimants' father separated.
     Their father returned to the Philippines and he and the  sponsor  were
    subsequently divorced.  On 16  December  2011,  the  sponsor  became  a
    British citizen through  naturalisation.   On  16  December  2013,  the
    sponsor married a British citizen, "IP" and they live together  in  the
    UK.

The ECO's Decisions

 5. On 30 April 2014, the claimants applied for entry clearance to join the
    sponsor in the UK.  They were both interviewed by the ECO in Manila and
    on 10 July 2014 their applications were refused.  The  basis  of  those
    refusals was that the ECO was not satisfied that the sponsor had  "sole
    responsibility" for each of the claimants as required by para 297(i)(e)
    of the Immigration Rules.

 6. Each of the refusals is in similar terms.  In effect, the ECO  was  not
    satisfied that the sponsor had sole  responsibility  for  each  of  the
    claimants because of their continuing contact with their father in  the
    Philippines.  The ECO's reasoning, which as I say is mirrored  in  each
    of the decisions, was in respect of the first claimant as follows:

         "The Decision

           . You have applied for entry clearance to go to the UK to settle
             with your mother who holds a British passport.

           . Your mother relocated to the UK in July 2005  leaving  you  in
             the Philippines.  I note that your parents  married  in  Nueva
             Ecija on October 15th 1999 and that they separated  six  years
             ago.  Additionally, I note that your mother has  remarried  in
             the UK.

           . You have applied for settlement to the UK with  your  sibling.
             At present you and your two siblings live with  your  maternal
             grandparents.

           . Following initial  assessment  of  your  application,  it  was
             necessary to interview you, your sibling and  your  father  to
             assist with my decision.  It was requested for your father  to
             accompany you for a face to  face  interview  at  the  British
             Embassy.  The three of you were interviewed on Wednesday  July
             9th 2014.

           . It is noted that you and  your  sibling  provided  conflicting
             reports of your relationship with  your  father.   You  stated
             that you last saw your father in December 2013 and  that  your
             father telephones  several  times  per  week.   However,  your
             sibling stated during interview that your father  visits  your
             house for fifteen minutes several times a week.

           . I note an affidavit of parental consent to travel abroad dated
             the 21st March 2014 signed by your father.  This document  was
             supplied to assist with your application for settlement but in
             effect, this document demonstrates that your father  is  still
             involved with key decisions in you and your sibling's life and
             demonstrates that you are not solely dependent on your mother.

           . From the evidence above I note that your mother does not  have
             sole responsibility of your upbringing.

           . Furthermore, if you were genuinely solely  dependent  on  your
             mother then you would have had limited or even no contact with
             your father.  I am not satisfied that this application is  not
             one of convenience to gain entry to the UK  for  education  or
             economic  reasons  rather  than  that  your  mother  has  sole
             responsibility for you and that you are dependent on  her  for
             your care.

           . I acknowledge that your mother has sent  remittances  and  has
             returned to the Philippines for family visits.  In common with
             many Filipinos working overseas who send funds  back  to  help
             support family here.  I am  not  satisfied  that  her  limited
             visits are adequate evidence that she has sole  responsibility
             for you.  She has  not  been  involved  in  your  day  to  day
             upbringing and welfare for the past 9 years.

         I  have  therefore  refused  your  application  because  I  am  not
         satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that you  meet  all  of
         the requirements of the relevant Paragraph of  the  United  Kingdom
         Immigration Rules."

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The claimants appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.

 8. Before the First-tier Tribunal the claimants relied upon  a  number  of
    documents including statements from them dated 25 November 2014 and  19
    April 2015 and from the sponsor and her husband dated  respectively  15
    October 2014 and 9 November 2014 together with  statements  from  their
    grandparents in the Philippines with whom they live dated  26th  August
    2014 and 4 October 2014.  In addition, the sponsor and her husband gave
    oral evidence before Judge Troup.  At para 18 of his determination, the
    Judge found that  the  sponsor  had  established  that  she  had  "sole
    responsibility" for the following reasons:

         "It appears to be the Respondent's case that responsibility for the
         Appellants is shared between the  Sponsor  and  Father.   From  the
         evidence before me however it is plain that responsibility  is  not
         shared.   The  Sponsor  has  had  sole  responsibility  since   the
         breakdown of her marriage.  I accept that the Sponsor has  provided
         financial support exclusively; she has taken the major decisions in
         the children's lives; she is  in  frequent  contact  with  them  by
         telephone (several times  each  week  and  on  both  days  of  each
         weekend) and she visits them for four weeks every year; I find that
         Father lives a considerable distance from the Appellants' home  and
         that he rarely visits or contacts them.  Accordingly,  I  find  for
         the purposes of Paragraph 297(i) (e) of the Immigration Rules  that
         the Sponsor is present and settled in the U.K.  and  has  had  sole
         responsibility  for  the  Appellants'  upbringing.   The  remaining
         requirements of that Rule are not challenged by the Respondent  and
         I find in any event that those requirements are  met.   It  follows
         from the above that  I  allow  the  Appeal  under  the  Immigration
         Rules."

The ECO's Appeal

 9. Mr Richards, who represented the ECO adopted the grounds of appeal.  He
    submitted that the Judge's reasoning  in  para  18  was  inadequate  to
    sustain his finding in respect of  "sole  responsibility".   First,  he
    relied upon the  AIT's  decision  in  TD  (paragraph  297(i)(e):  "sole
    responsibility") Yemen [2006]  UKAIT  0049;  [2006]  Imm  AR  569.   He
    submitted that the Judge had not found, in accordance with TD, that the
    claimants' father had abdicated all responsibility for them.  He relied
    on the fact that the claimants' father had given permission for them to
    come to the UK; he had attended their interviews with the ECO  and  the
    evidence was that he had continuing contact with them.  In addition, Mr
    Richards submitted that even if the Judge had found that the claimants'
    father had abdicated all responsibility for them, he should  have  gone
    on and asked whether responsibility was shared between the sponsor  and
    the maternal grandparents with whom the claimants lived.

Discussion

10. The only requirement of para 297 in issue in these appeals is  that  in
    para 297(i)(e) that the sponsor should have "sole  responsibility"  for
    the claimants' upbringing.  The proper approach to the issue  of  "sole
    responsibility" is set out by the AIT in TD at [52]  in  the  following
    terms:

         "Questions of 'sole responsibility'  under  the  immigration  rules
         should be approached as follows:

               i. Who has 'responsibility'  for  a  child's  upbringing  and
                  whether that responsibility is 'sole' is a factual  matter
                  to be decided upon all the evidence.

              ii. The term 'responsibility' in the immigration rules  should
                  not to be understood as a theoretical or legal  obligation
                  but rather as a practical one which, in each  case,  looks
                  to who in fact is exercising responsibility for the child.
                   That responsibility may have been for a short duration in
                  that  the  present  arrangements  may  have  begun   quite
                  recently.

             iii.  'Responsibility'  for  a  child's   upbringing   may   be
                  undertaken by individuals other than a child's parents and
                  may be shared between  different  individuals:  which  may
                  particularly arise where the  child  remains  in  its  own
                  country whilst  the  only  parent  involved  in  its  life
                  travels to and lives in the UK.

              iv. Wherever the parents are, if both parents are involved  in
                  the upbringing of the child, it will be  exceptional  that
                  one of them will have sole responsibility.

               v. If it is said that both are not involved  in  the  child's
                  upbringing, one of the indicators for that  will  be  that
                  the other has abandoned or abdicated  his  responsibility.
                  In such cases, it may well be justified to find that  that
                  parent no longer has responsibility for the child.

              vi. However, the issue of sole responsibility is  not  just  a
                  matter between the parents.  So even if there is only  one
                  parent involved in the child's upbringing, that parent may
                  not have sole responsibility.

             vii.  In  the  circumstances  likely   to   arise,   day-to-day
                  responsibility  (or  decision-making)  for   the   child's
                  welfare may necessarily be shared  with  others  (such  as
                  relatives  or  friends)  because   of   the   geographical
                  separation between the parent and child.

            viii. That, however, does not prevent  the  parent  having  sole
                  responsibility within the meaning of the Rules.

              ix. The test  is,  not  whether  anyone  else  has  day-to-day
                  responsibility, but  whether  the  parent  has  continuing
                  control and direction of the child's upbringing  including
                  making all the important decisions in  the  child's  life.
                  If not, responsibility is shared and so not 'sole'."

11. Ms Harrington, who represented the claimants, submitted that the  Judge
    had, in fact, found that the sponsor made all the  important  decisions
    in the claimants' lives and consequently had given a  sound  basis  for
    finding she had "sole responsibility" for  the  claimants'  upbringing.
    At para 11 the Judge summarised the statements as follows:

         "In the Appellants' bundle are statements from the Appellants  (and
         translations) to the effect that following the  separation  of  the
         Sponsor and Father, Father provided no care or support for them  at
         all.  Care and support was provided exclusively by the Sponsor  and
         her parents."

12. Then at para 13, the Judge summarised the sponsor's  oral  evidence  as
    follows:

         "The sponsor told me that she had had sole responsibility  for  the
         Appellants since the breakup of her first marriage and has made all
         the  important  decisions  concerning  their  health,  welfare  and
         education.  She is in contact with the  children  every  other  day
         during the week and every day at weekends.  She  remits  �500  each
         month for the children's maintenance to her father's bank  account.
         She said that she works hard and has made great sacrifices for  the
         children particularly not being present in the Philippines  to  see
         them grow up.

         She closely monitors their educational progress."

13. At para 14, the Judge noted the sponsor's evidence that she returns  to
    the Philippines for four weeks every year and  that  her  evidence  was
    that the "father had had no say in the upbringing of  the  children  at
    all".

14. Her evidence was at para 15 that:

         "In the past two years father has visited the children three  times
         and telephoned the first Appellant two or three times in May  2014.
         He lives about 16 hours away from the Appellants' home."

15. At para 16, the Judge referred to the evidence of the sponsor's husband
    in relation to visits made to the Philippines with the sponsor in  2011
    and 2012 when they stayed with the  claimants  in  the  home  of  their
    grandparents.  In his evidence, the sponsor's husband confirmed that:

         "He and the sponsor support the appellants and he is not  aware  of
         any support given by the Father at  all.   The  sponsor  chose  the
         appellants' schools and is in  close  telephone  contact  with  the
         children."

16. The ECO identified an inconsistency  between  the  claimants'  evidence
    about contact with their father.  This was dealt  with  in  both  their
    written statements dated  19  April  2015.   In  particular  the  first
    claimant says that:

         "My father did not call a few  times  a  week,  as  stated  in  the
         refusal notice, and I do not know why my sister said that my father
         comes and visits us three times a week.  The last time  I  saw  him
         was in December 2013."

17. The statements go on to state that it is  the  sponsor  who  makes  the
    decisions about their lives.

18. There was, undoubtedly, evidence that the claimants' father remained in
    contact with the claimants.  There was, however, no  evidence  that  he
    exercised any "responsibility" for the claimants.  The only evidence in
    relation to  that  was  that  the  sponsor  alone  made  the  important
    decisions in their lives.

19. Mr Richards relied  upon  the  fact  that  the  claimants'  father  had
    attended the interview with the ECO.  However,  it  is  clear  that  he
    attended because he was required to do so by the ECO and the claimants'
    evidence was that they were surprised when they discovered that he  was
    there  having  been  taken  by  their  aunt  and  grandmother  to   the
    interviews.  I see no basis upon which it can be said that by attending
    the interviews in these circumstances the father could be  said  to  be
    exercising responsibility for his children.

20. Further, Mr Richards relied upon the fact that  the  claimants'  father
    had signed a document giving them  permission  to  travel  to  the  UK.
    Again, Ms Harrington reminded me that this was a requirement imposed by
    the UK Government.   That was not challenged by Mr  Richards.    It  is
    true that the Judge made no  reference  to  this  but,  again,  in  the
    circumstances in which a declaration of this sort is required by the UK
    Government the fact that the claimants' father signed such a  document,
    given all  of  the  other  circumstances  supported  by  the  evidence,
    provides  no  support  for  the  view  that  he  was   exercising   any
    responsibility for the children's upbringing.

21. In short, the evidence in these appeals was effectively  all  one  way.
    It  was  that  the  sponsor  exercised  sole  responsibility  for   the
    claimants' upbringing.  The suggestion by Mr Richards  that  the  Judge
    should have considered whether the claimants' grandparents were jointly
    exercising responsibility was not a matter raised by  the  ECO  in  the
    refusal decisions and, in the absence of a Presenting  Officer  at  the
    appeal  hearing,  was  not  raised  before   the   Judge.    In   these
    circumstances, it was not a matter that he was  required  to  consider.
    But, in any event, his finding is  clear  that  the  sponsor  had  sole
    responsibility and that is a finding which  is  soundly  based  in  the
    evidence before him and nothing in the evidence provided any basis  for
    a finding that responsibility was shared with the grandparents.

22. In my  judgment,  the  Judge's  finding  that  the  sponsor  had  "sole
    responsibility" for the claimants was  properly  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence.

Decision

23. For these reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow each  of
    the claimants' appeals under para 297 of the Immigration Rules did  not
    involve the making of an error of  law.   Those  decisions,  therefore,
    stand.

24. Accordingly, the ECO's appeals to the Upper Tribunal are dismissed.




Signed



A Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I see no basis for departing from Judge Troup's decision not to make  a  fee
award on the basis that the decisions  in  the  claimants'  favour  were  in
large part founded upon the evidence that the Judge heard at the hearing.



Signed




A Grubb
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



