
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
OA/08289/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14 August 2017                     |      On 29 August 2017               |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                       Entry clearance officer - lagos
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                       miss Abiola Abigail Aiyelabola
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Wilding, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A A J Aiyelabol, Sponsor


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In this appeal the Appellant is the Entry  Clearance  Officer  -  Lagos
    (ECO) and the Respondent is referred to as "the Claimant".
2.   An appeal was made by the Claimant against the  decision  of  the  ECO,
    dated 28 April 2015, to refuse entry clearance as a dependent child  of
    a person settled in the UK with  reference  to  paragraph  297  of  the
    Immigration Rules (the Rules).

3.   The application was dealt with on that basis because,  looking  at  the
    documentation it appeared that the application, on  the  basis  of  the
    'additional representations' made, was made as a child seeking to  join
    a parent settled in the UK with reference to paragraph 297 of the Rules


4.   It is clear that in fact the route for the  application,  as  an  adult
    dependent relative could no longer be made under paragraph 317  of  the
    Rules, but under Appendix FM of the Rules as  amended.  In  the  appeal
    against the  ECO's  decision   FtT  Judge  James  (the  Judge)  in  her
    decision, promulgated on 29 November 2016 said [at D9]:-

     "The main problem with the reasons for refusal is that  the  Respondent
         (ECO's) has singularly failed to consider  this  application  under
         the correct rule.  Although the Appellant is an adult there is only
         reference to the rule applicable to  a  minor  child  of  a  parent
         present and settled in the UK, under Paragraph  297.   There  is  a
         total failure to consider this application under  the  rule,  which
         apples to an adult dependent child, under the relevant rule  as  at
         date of refusal i.e. Paragraph 317 of the Rules.  In particular  in
         regards to Paragraph 317(1)(f)."

5.   It is most unfortunate that the Judge did  not  deal  with  the  matter
    with reference to Appendix FM.  There is quite simply no  way  to  save
    this decision when such an error of law was made. Indeed the Judge made
    abundantly plain that in fact it was she who applied the wrong Rule  in
    determining the appeal.  Paragraph 317(i)(f) was replaced  by  Appendix
    FM on 9 July 2012.

6.   Similarly her criticism  of  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  was  wrong
    [D10].

7.   It is further clear that the Judge whilst reaching a view on Article  8
    ECHR made some findings as to the Article being engaged  and  that  the
    decision was not proportionate, but the Judge simply failed to give any
    adequate or meaningful explanation of her conclusion, bearing  in  mind
    she was doing that in the context of having applied the wrong Rules; in
    terms of the consideration of the Rules relevant  to  the  exercise  of
    proportionality:   It  is  most  unfortunate  that  this  should   have
    happened.

8.   The Sponsor before me has indicated a number  of  matters  relating  to
    his personal circumstances, the circumstances of the Claimant  and  the
    circumstances of his dependent son presently in the  UK.   The  Sponsor
    wishes to present information which shows just what  were  or  are  the
    Claimant's circumstances and why she should join him  in  the  UK,  not
    least by reference to his ability to support her here, his  employment,
    and his personal health, about which questions  are  currently  raised.
    He has also, of course, been in the United Kingdom for many years.   It
    seemed to me that the appropriate outcome, when there are  no  material
    findings of fact that can stand, the matter will have to be  remade  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

9.   Decision
          The Original Tribunal's decision can not stand.  The  appeal  must
    be remade in the First-tier Tribunal




ANONYMITY
No anonymity direction was made, nor is one required.

Signed                                  Date 20 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
