
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: OA/08933/2015
                                                               OA/08935/2015


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 15 December 2016                  |On 16 December 2016                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     PD
                                     IU
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                           ENTRY CLEARANCE OFFICER
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellants:    Mr D. Nelson-Iye, Legal representative
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


   DECISION PURSUANT TO RULE 39 OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                                 RULES 2008

 1. The appellants are mother and son.  They  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT) against  decisions  to  refuse  entry  clearance  as  a
    partner  and  child.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Howard  ("the  FtJ")
    dismissed their appeals after a hearing on 6 May 2016.

 2. Permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  the  FtJ  having  been
    granted, their appeals came before me on the above date.

 3. By consent, the parties agreed the following:

    (i) that the FtJ erred in law  in  dismissing  the  appeals  under  the
    Immigration Rules, and/or under Article 8 of the ECHR proper;

    (ii) that the FtJ's decision should be set aside; and

    (iii) that the decision should be re-made, allowing the appeal of  each
    appellant.

 4. Having heard the parties on the issue, and considering rule 39  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I make a consent  order
    in terms expressed in [3] above, considering it appropriate to  do  so,
    and thus allowing the appeal of each appellant. The consent order is as
    contained herein, no separate document being required.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because of the age of the minor  appellant  I  consider  that  an  anonymity
order is appropriate. Therefore,  unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellants  are  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify them or  any  member
of their family. This direction applies both to the appellants  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            15/12/16

