
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
OA/08085/2015

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 27 January 2017                    |On 3 February 2017              |
|                                      |                                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                             Miss TARANDEEP KAUR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Slatter (counsel) instructed by Just Legal Group
For the Respondent: Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Swinnerton, promulgated on 9 September 2016, which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

3. The Appellant was born on 17 January 2003 and is a national of India.

4. On  22  April  2015  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
application for entry  clearance  to  join  her  parents  in  the  UK  under
paragraphs 297 and 301 of the Immigration rules.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  Swinnerton  ("the  Judge")   dismissed   the   appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision.

6. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 8  December  2016  First-tier  Judge
Nightingale granted permission to appeal stating inter alia.

      3. It is arguable that  the  Judge  fell  into  error  in  failing  to
      consider the appellant's circumstances under  paragraph  301(i)(a)  of
      the immigration rules. This ground is arguable. It  is  also  arguable
      that the Judge erred in  failing  to  give  due  weight  to  the  best
      interests of a child joining her mother and  father  and  siblings  to
      live in a family home.  Whilst  the  remaining  grounds  are  of  less
      immediately identifiable arguable merit, permission is granted on  all
      grounds pleaded.

The Hearing

7. (a) Mr Slatter, for the appellant, moved the grounds of appeal.  He  told
me that at the date of decision the  appellant's  father  had  been  granted
leave to remain outside the immigration rules for  30  months.  He  told  me
that the terms of the grant of discretionary leave to remain counted  toward
120 months lawful residence in the UK, which could lead  to  settlement.  He
told me that, as a matter-of-fact,  on  1  September  2015  the  appellant's
father  was  granted  limited  leave  to  remain,  as  the  partner  of  the
appellant's mother, within the immigration rules. (The date of  decision  in
this case is 22 April 2015)

(b) Mr Slatter reminded me that the appellant's mother  and  other  siblings
were granted indefinite leave to remain in 2012, &  the  appellant's  mother
is a British citizen. He told me that this case should have been  considered
under paragraph 301 of the immigration rules. He then took  me  to  [39]  of
the  decision,  and  told  me  that  there  the  Judge  considers  paragraph
301((i)(c) of the immigration rules. He reminded me that  paragraph  301  of
the immigration rules has three disjunctive subparagraph's. He accepts  that
paragraph 301(i)(b) has no application in this case,  but  argued  that  the
Judge had failed to consider paragraph 301(i)(a) of the rules.  He  told  me
that that is a material error of law.

(c) Mr Slatter told me  that  the  appellant  can  succeed  under  paragraph
297(i)(e)  of  the  rules  because   the   appellant's   mother   has   sole
responsibility for her. He told me that the Judge had failed  to  apply  the
three stage test set out in TD (Paragraph 297(i)(e): "sole  responsibility")
Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049. He told me that that is a material  error  of  law
because the Judge has failed to apply the correct legal  test.  He  told  me
that between [29] and [31] the Judge has misdirected himself in law.

(d) Mr Slatter told me that an inadequate  article  8  ECHR  assessment  has
been carried out. He insisted  that,  because  section  55  of  the  Borders
Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is mentioned in the grounds of  appeal,
permission to appeal had been granted on article 8 ECHR grounds. He told  me
that the Judge had failed to take guidance from SS(Congo) and Others  [2015]
EWCA Civ  387  so  that  [40]  of  the  decision  represents  an  inadequate
proportionality  balancing  exercise.  He  argued  that  the  are  no  clear
findings in relation to the best interests of the child in the decision.

(e) Mr Slatter urged me to allow the appeal and to set the decision  of  the
First-tier aside.

8. (a) For the respondent, Ms Fijiwala told me that the  decision  does  not
contain any errors of law, material or  otherwise.  She  told  me  that  the
appellant could not succeed under rule 301(i)(a) because,  at  the  date  of
decision, her father had discretionary leave to remain, which is a grant  of
leave to remain out-with the immigration rules which  (she  said)  does  not
lead  to  settlement.  She  told  me  that  the  Judge's  findings  at  [39]
adequately dealt with paragraph 301 of  the  immigration  rules,  and  that,
because the appellant's father was not settled  in  the  UK,  the  appellant
cannot succeed.

(b) Ms Fijiwala produced copies of the letters granting leave to  remain  to
the appellant's father. The letter from the respondent  to  the  appellant's
father dated 28 March 2014 grants discretionary limited leave to remain  for
30 months. On 1 September 2015, the  respondent  granted  limited  leave  to
remain to the appellant's father,  within  the  immigration  rules,  as  the
partner of the appellant's mother. She told me that  the  grant  of  limited
leave to remain within the immigration  rules  on  1  September  2015  is  a
change of circumstance which indicates that a  renewed  application  by  the
appellant would be successful under paragraph 301(i)(a) of the rules.

(c) Ms Fijiwala then turn to paragraph 297  of  the  immigration  rules  and
told me that that rule does not apply to this appellant and  her  family  at
all. For that rule to apply both parents would have to be settled in the  UK
and it is beyond dispute that the appellants father was not settled  in  the
UK at the date of decision. She referred me to paragraph 297(i)(e) and  took
me  to  the  guidance  contained   in   TD   (Paragraph   297(i)(e):   "sole
responsibility") Yemen [2006] UKAIT 00049. She told me that because both  of
the appellant's parents share joint responsibility for  her,  paragraph  297
of the rules cannot apply.

(d) Ms Fijiwala told me that the  decision  contains  adequate  findings  of
fact and correct guidance in law, leading to a conclusion  well  within  the
range of conclusions reasonably available to the  Judge.  She  urged  me  to
dismiss the appeal and allow the First-tier's decision to stand.

Analysis

9. Paragraph 297 of the Immigration Rules says


      Requirements for indefinite leave to enter the United Kingdom  as  the
      child of a parent, parents or a relative present and settled or  being
      admitted for settlement in the United Kingdom

      297. The requirements to be met by a person seeking  indefinite  leave
      to enter the United Kingdom as the child of a  parent,  parents  or  a
      relative present and settled or being admitted for settlement  in  the
      United Kingdom are that he:
           (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join a parent,
           parents or a relative in one of the following circumstances:
           (a) both parents are present and settled in the United Kingdom;
      or
           (b) both parents are being admitted on the same occasion for
      settlement; or
           (c) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom and
           the other is being admitted on the same occasion for settlement;
           or
           (d) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
           being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and the other
           parent is dead; or
           (e) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
           being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and has had
           sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or
           (f) one parent or a relative is present and settled in the
           United Kingdom or being admitted on the same occasion for
           settlement and there are serious and compelling family or other
           considerations which make exclusion of the child undesirable and
           suitable arrangements have been made for the child's care; and
                 (ii) is under the age of 18; and
                 (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and
                 is not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent
                 family unit; and
                 (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately by the
                 parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to join
                 without recourse to public funds in accommodation which the
                 parent, parents or relative the child is seeking to join,
                 own or occupy exclusively; and
                 (v) can, and will, be maintained adequately by the parent,
                 parents, or relative the child is seeking to join, without
                 recourse to public funds; and
                 (vi) holds a valid United Kingdom entry clearance for entry
                 in this capacity; and
                 (vii) does not fall for refusal under the general grounds
                 for refusal.
10. Ms Fijiwala's submission that paragraph  297  of  the  rules  cannot  be
considered is  not  entirely  correct.  Paragraph  297(i)(f)  of  the  rules
requires consideration. Paragraph 297(i)(f)  was  considered  by  the  judge
between [21] and [23] of the decision. At [22] of  the  decision  the  Judge
finds that there is suitable accommodation for the appellant in the UK.   At
[23] the Judge says

      However, the particular circumstances are  such  that  there  are  not
      serious and compelling family or other considerations which  make  the
      appellant's exclusion from the UK undesirable.

11. Between [24] and [39] the Judge sets out  a  detailed  analysis  of  the
degree of contact the appellant has had with her parents, and the extent  to
which the appellant's parents are involved  in  the  appellant's  day-to-day
care. At [35] the Judge finds that the appellant is  not  at  risk  of  harm
where she is, and between [34] and [39] finds that  the  appellant  is  well
cared for, happy and settled with her aunt  in  India.  At  [36]  the  Judge
finds that removal from  India  to  the  UK  would  be  disruptive  for  the
appellant.

12. Although all of those findings  are  evidence-based  and  carefully  set
out, they are insufficient to support the bald assertions made by the  Judge
at [23].  The  Judge   clearly  considers  whether  there  are  serious  and
compelling considerations in this case, but what requires  consideration  is
whether there are serious and  compelling  family  or  other  considerations
which make the appellants exclusion  from  the  UK  undesirable.  Inadequate
consideration has been given to compelling  family  considerations.  I  find
that the failure to consider compelling family considerations  is  an  error
of law. The decision contains inadequate findings of  fact  to  support  the
pivotal sentence (quoted above) at [23] of the decision. That error  of  law
is a material error of law because, had emphasis been placed on  the  phrase
"serious and compelling family or other considerations" a different  outcome
may have resulted.

13. Paragraph 301 of the rules is in the following terms

      Requirements for limited leave  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
      Kingdom with a view to settlement as the child of a parent or  parents
      given limited leave to enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  with  a
      view to settlement
           301. The requirements to be met  by  a  person  seeking  limited
           leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with  a  view  to
           settlement as the child of a parent  or  parents  given  limited
           leave to enter or remain in the United Kingdom with  a  view  to
           settlement are that he:
           (i) is seeking leave to enter to accompany or join or remain
           with a parent or parents in one of the following circumstances:
           (a) one parent is present and settled in the United Kingdom or
           being admitted on the same occasion for settlement and the other
           parent is being or has been given limited leave to enter or
           remain in the United Kingdom with a view to settlement; or
           (b) one parent is being or has been given limited leave to enter
           or remain in the United Kingdom with a view to settlement and
           has had sole responsibility for the child's upbringing; or
           (c) one parent is being or has been given limited leave to enter
           or remain in the United Kingdom with a view to settlement and
           there are serious and compelling family or other considerations
           which make exclusion of the child undesirable and suitable
           arrangements have been made for the child's care; and
           (ii) is under the age of 18; and
           (iii) is not leading an independent life, is unmarried and is
           not a civil partner, and has not formed an independent family
           unit; and
           (iv) can, and will, be accommodated adequately without recourse
           to public funds, in accommodation which the parent or parents
           own or occupy exclusively; and
           (iva) can, and will, be maintained adequately by the parent or
           parents without recourse to public funds; and
           (ivb) does not qualify for limited leave to enter as a child of
           a parent or parents given limited leave to enter or remain as a
           refugee or beneficiary of humanitarian protection under
           paragraph 319R; and
           (v) (where an application is made for limited leave to remain
           with a view to settlement) has limited leave to enter or remain
           in the United Kingdom; and
           (vi) if seeking leave to enter, holds a valid United Kingdom
           entry clearance for entry in this capacity.
14. The Judge considers paragraph 301 at [39] of the  decision.  There,  the
Judge considers paragraph 301(i)(c) alone.  He  gives  no  consideration  to
paragraph 301(i)(a). The focus on one subsection  of  the  paragraph  is  an
error of law. It is material because  a  different  outcome  may  have  been
reached if the entirety of the paragraph been considered.

15. Because the decision contains material errors  of  law  I  must  set  it
aside. There is sufficient information before me to enable me to  substitute
my own decision.

16. Although the First-tier decision contains errors of  law,  there  is  no
criticism  of  the  fact-finding  process.  From  that   decision,   it   is
established that the facts in this case are

(a) The appellant is a child. She lives in India with her aunt and  her  two
teenage cousins

(b) The appellant's mother is a British citizen. She entered  the  UK  on  5
October 2006. The appellant's father is in Indian national. He  entered  the
UK in 2005 as a visitor, when the appellant was only about  two  years  old.
He remained in the UK as an over stayer. On 28 March  2014  he  was  granted
discretionary  leave  to  remain  in  the  UK  for  30  months  outside  the
immigration rules. On 1 September 2015  he  was  granted  limited  leave  to
remain in the UK in accordance with the immigration rules.

(c) Both of the appellant's parents remain in the UK  with  the  appellant's
two siblings. The appellant is the only member of her immediate  family  who
remains in India.

(d) The appellant's parents are in regular telephone contact with  her.  The
appellant's mother visited the appellant in 2007, and again after 2013.  The
appellants father visited the appellant in 2014.

(e) The appellant attends the same school  as  her  cousins  in  India.  The
appellant has never been to the UK. The appellant's parents  sent  money  to
the appellant's aunt to pay for the appellant's education and maintenance.

17. In Mundeba (s.55 and para 297(i)(f)) [2013] UKUT 88(IAC)   the  Tribunal
held that (i) the exercise of the duty by the  Entry  Clearance  Officer  to
assess an application under the Immigration Rules as to  whether  there  are
family or other considerations  making  the  child's  exclusion  undesirable
inevitably involves an assessment of  what  the  child's  welfare  and  best
interests require; (ii) Where an  immigration  decision  engages  Article  8
rights, due regard must be had to the UN Convention on  the  Rights  of  the
Child. An entry clearance decision for the admission of a child under 18  is
"an    action    concerning    children...undertaken     by...administrative
authorities" and so by Article 3 "the best interests of the child  shall  be
a primary consideration"; (iii) Although the statutory duty  under  s.55  UK
Borders Act 2009 only applies to children within the UK,  the  broader  duty
doubtless explains why the Secretary of State's IDI invites Entry  Clearance
Officers to consider the statutory guidance issued under s.55.

18. Paragraph 297(i)(f) of the rules is in straightforward terms.  The  only
question to be answered is whether  or  not  there  are  serious  compelling
family  considerations.  The  First-tier  Judge  correctly  found  that  the
appellant is well cared for & not at risk of  harm,  but  that  is  not  the
determinative issue. The compelling family considerations in this case is  a
question of the reunion between parent and child and  the  ability  of  this
appellant to spend the rest of her childhood with her siblings and  parents.
The stark choice is should the appellant continue to be looked after by  her
auntie or should she be looked after by her mother and  father.  That  is  a
compelling family consideration and so falls within paragraph  297(i)(f)  of
the rules.

19. It has long been established that it is in the interests of children  to
remain with their parents. It is not the  appellant's  fault  that  she  has
been separated from her parents. The appellant can now be reunited with  her
family  of  origin.  That  solitary  compelling  family   consideration   is
sufficient to meet the requirements of paragraph 297(i)(f) of the rules.

20. The reasons that the respondent argues that the appellant cannot  fulfil
paragraph 301(i)(a) of the rules is the quality of the  grant  of  leave  to
remain that the appellant's father enjoyed at the date  of  decision.  There
has been  a  change  in  circumstances  since  the  date  of  decision.  The
appellant's father secured limited leave to remain within  the  rules  on  1
September 2015. The Home Office presenting officer  conceded  that,  if  the
appellant submits a new application, she will now meet the  requirements  of
paragraph 301(i)(a) of the rules.

21. At the date of decision  the  appellants  father  enjoyed  discretionary
leave  to  remain  in  the  UK.  I  have  a  copy  of  the  letter  granting
discretionary leave to remain dated 28 March 2014. The last sentence of  the
first paragraph of that letter says

      you can apply to renew this leave, and  you  may  become  eligible  to
      apply for indefinite leave to remain (settlement) after 120 months  if
      you qualify.

The letter goes on to explain that to qualify for settlement  the  appellant
must complete at least 120 continuous months in the UK  with  limited  leave
granted because of his family life.

22. The grant of leave to remain on 28 March 2014 was granted on  article  8
ECHR grounds. It was  limited  leave  granted  because  of  the  appellant's
father's family life. The grant of leave might have been discretionary,  but
the wording of the grant indicates that it is a grant of limited leave  made
with a view to settlement. On that basis (and on the facts as  I  find  them
to be) the appellant meets the requirements of paragraph  301(i)(a)  of  the
immigration rules

23. Permission to appeal was not granted on article 8 ECHR grounds, but  for
the sake of completeness, and because the First-tier's decision is  now  set
aside, I consider the article 8 ECHR grounds.  As  I  have  found  that  the
appellant fulfils the requirements of the immigration rules,  by  analogy  I
find that family life is established within the meaning of article 8 ECHR.

24. In SS(Congo) and Others [2015] EWCA Civ 387 Lord Justice  Richards  said
at paragraph 33 "In our judgment, even though a test of exceptionality  does
not apply in every case falling within the  scope  of  Appendix  FM,  it  is
accurate to say that the general  position  outside  the  sorts  of  special
contexts referred to above is that compelling circumstances  would  need  to
be identified to support a claim for grant of LTR outside the new  Rules  in
Appendix FM. In our view, that is a formulation which is not as strict as  a
test of exceptionality or a requirement of  "very  compelling  reasons"  (as
referred to in MF (Nigeria) in  the  context  of  the  Rules  applicable  to
foreign criminals), but  which  gives  appropriate  weight  to  the  focused
consideration  of  public  interest  factors  as  finds  expression  in  the
Secretary of State's formulation of the new Rules in Appendix  FM.  It  also
reflects the formulation in Nagre at para. [29], which has been  tested  and
has survived scrutiny in this court: see, e.g.,  Haleemudeen  at  [44],  per
Beatson LJ".

25. Section 117B of the 2002 Act tells me that  immigration  control  is  in
the public interest. In AM  (S  117B)  Malawi  [2015]  UKUT  260  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that an appellant can obtain no positive right to a  grant  of
leave to remain from either s117B (2) or (3), whatever  the  degree  of  his
fluency in English, or the strength of his financial  resources.  In  Forman
(ss 117A-C considerations) [2015] UKUT 00412 (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the
public  interest  in  firm  immigration  control  is  not  diluted  by   the
consideration that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at  no
time been a financial burden on  the  state  or  is  self-sufficient  or  is
likely to remain so indefinitely.  The  significance  of  these  factors  is
that where they are not present the public interest is fortified.

26. Because I find that  the  appellant  fulfils  the  requirements  of  the
immigration rules, and because it is  the  respondent's  position  that  the
immigration rules fully  embrace  all  article  8  considerations,  then  by
analogy the respondent's decision must be  a  disproportionate  interference
with the right to respect for article 8 family life.

27.  I am mindful of Section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration
Act 2009, and the case of ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD  [2011]  UKSC 4.   I  remind
myself  of  the  cases  of  Azimi-Moayed  and  others  (decisions  affecting
children; onward appeals), [2013] UKUT 00197 and PW [2015] CSIH 36.  It has
long been established that it is in the  interests  of  children  to  remain
with their parents. On the facts as I find them to  be  family  life  exists
because of the degree  of  relationship  and  the  quality  of  relationship
between the appellant and her parents.

28. The respondent's decision reinforces separation  between  the  appellant
and her parents & siblings, and prevents  the  appellant  from  joining  her
parents and siblings and enjoying the full  benefits  of  integrated  family
life. On the one hand the respondent  says  the  decision  is  made  in  the
interest of immigration  control,  on  the  other  I  have  found  that  the
appellant fulfils the requirements of the immigration rules.

29. The fact that the appellant fulfils the requirements of the  immigration
rules  indicates  that  the  appellant's  article  8  rights  outweigh   the
respondent's  need  to  preserve  a  firm  immigration  policy.  The  public
interest  in  Immigration  control  is  outweighed  by  the  impact  of  the
respondent's decision on the appellant's article 8 family life.

30. The appellant fulfils the immigration rules because  there  are  serious
family considerations involved in this  case.  I  therefore  find  that  the
respondent's  decision  is  a   disproportionate   interference   with   the
appellant's family life within the meaning of the 1950 convention.


Decision

The Judge's decision promulgated  on  9  September  2016  is  tainted  by  a
material error of law. I therefore set it aside.

I substitute my own decision.

The appeal is allowed under the Immigration Rules

The appeal is allowed on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

Signed:
                                           Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
                                                      Date:  2 February 2017
