
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: oa/08272/2014
                                                               oa/08267/2014


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On:  28 May 2015                     |On 30 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                          MR RAJU JOSE MULVARICKAL
                              MASTER ABDEL RAJU
                       (Anonymity directions not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the appellant:     Ms Watterson of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr S Witwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are born on 25 May 1974 and 19 February  2013,  and  are
    citizens of India. They are father and son. They appealed  against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 13 June 2014 refusing  them  leave  to
    remain in the United Kingdom as Tier  4  (General)  Student  dependents
    pursuant to paragraph 320 (7B) of the  Immigration  Rules  HC  395  (as
    amended).

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese in a determination dated 26  January
    2015 dismissed the appellant's appeal pursuant to the Immigration Rules
    and Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Tribunal Judge Zuker  on
    8 April 2015 stating that it is arguable that the Judge wrongly  placed
    the burden of proof on the appellants and there has been unfairness. He
    further noted that it is also arguably that the Judge failed adequately
    to consider whether there had been any dishonesty.

First-tier Tribunal's decision

 4. The First-tier Tribunal made the following findings which I summarise.

 5. [8] "At paragraph 8 he stated "the appellant  brings  this  appeal  and
    therefore bears the burden of proof. The appellant  must  satisfy  this
    burden on a balance of probabilities".

 6.  [9]  "The  Tribunal  has  taken  into  consideration  the  appellant's
    additional  grounds  of  appeal,  witness  statements  of   the   first
    appellant's spouse Mrs Raji and also the  witness  statement  and  oral
    evidence of Raji Joshi. The appellant's additional grounds of appeal at
    paragraph 5 state: "the entry clearance manager has conducted an appeal
    review of the appellant's PBS dependent application  after  receipt  of
    the appeal papers. It is stated in the review the decision of the entry
    clearance manager that Empire College  London  did  provide  a  written
    notification to the entry clearance manager's  office  confirming  that
    the appellant had been notified of the withdrawal  of  the  sponsorship
    prior to the appellant submitting his visa application. The  respondent
    has not provided a copy  of  the  correspondence  from  Empire  College
    London containing this information  with  the  appeal  bundle  or  even
    subsequent to that. This information is  material  to  the  appellant's
    appeal and the confirmation letter from Empire College London ought  to
    be produced before the Honourable Tribunal".

 7. [10] "The appellant at paragraph 6 of the additional grounds of  appeal
    make the following point: "the appellant has confirmed that he provided
    all the relevant documents and had paid half of the course fees to  the
    Empire College London. The college had assigned the CAS letter  to  the
    sponsorship management system of the UK Border Agency and had  provided
    the CAS number to the appellant to submit with  his  visa  application.
    The appellant was  not  informed  by  the  College  that  his  CAS  was
    withdrawn before submitting his Tier 4 application. The appellant  only
    came to know about the withdrawal of  the  CAS  when  he  received  the
    refusal letter relating to his Tier 4 application".

 8. [11] The appellant stated further that the first  appellant  would  not
    have submitted his application if he had known that his  CAS  had  been
    withdrawn.

 9. [12] The Tribunal finds that First appellant  was  aware  that  he  had
    previously submitted an application which had  been  refused  and  that
    refusal was on 28 August 2009. The  First  appellant  was  specifically
    asked in his application, whether or not he has been refused a visa for
    any country including the United Kingdom in  the  last  10  years.  The
    first appellant responded to this question by indicating  that  he  had
    made a visa application in this country as a student and that had  been
    refused. The appellant was asked to state the reasons for  the  refusal
    and he stated in his application form, "insufficient  documents".  This
    would have been the opportunity for the appellant  to  expound  on  the
    issues which were pertinent to his previous application and  failed  to
    do so.

10. The fact is that based on the information before the Tribunal that  the
    First appellant only refers to the information  which  relates  to  his
    previous application after he had  been  refused  by  the  ECO  in  his
    current application. The Tribunal found therefore that  the  respondent
    is not in a position to go behind the previous decision made by the ECO
    based on  the  fact  that  the  appellant  knowing  that  he  had  been
    previously refused an application in the spirit of candour should  have
    cited as much information as he was aware of and the fact that  he  did
    not do so left the ECO to make a  decision  based  on  information  and
    responses that had been provided to him.

11. The  appellant's  appeal  pursuant  to  Article  8  has  been  properly
    considered by the  ECO  and  the  appellant's  spouse  and  the  second
    appellant's mother can make periodic visits to see  the  appellants  in
    India if she so wishes. Furthermore  she  may  adjust  her  educational
    studies accordingly in light of the refusal of  the  application/appeal
    of the First and Second appellant.

Grounds of appeal

12. The grounds of appeal state the following which I summarise.

13.  The  only  ground  of  refusal  raised  for  refusing  the   appellant
    application is the general  ground  of  refusal  from  Part  9  of  the
    Immigration Rules which is Paragraph  320  (7B).  The  First  appellant
    denies using any deception in his application for  entry  clearance  in
    2009.

14. There was a material misdirection of law as to the burden and  standard
    of proof when the Judge stated at paragraph 8 of his determination that
    the appellant brought this appeal and therefore  bears  the  burden  of
    proof. It is well established that when the respondent relies on one of
    the general grounds of refusal in Part 9, the burden  is  proof  is  on
    her. Further where an allegation of deception is made,  the  respondent
    is required to discharge that burden. The Judge's  misdirection  had  a
    material effect on the outcome of the appeals  because  had  the  Judge
    directed  herself  appropriately,  she  would  have   appreciated   the
    importance of the failure  by  the  respondent  to  produce  supporting
    evidence  which,  the  Entry  Clearance  Manager  claimed  was  in  the
    respondent's position.

15. The appellant sought disclosure of the written  notification  from  his
    college which  allegedly  showed  that  he  knew  that  his  offer  was
    withdrawn. This was not produced by the  respondent.  It  was  for  the
    respondent to produce clear evidence of the allegation as per the  case
    of RP (proof of forgery) Nigeria [2006] UKAIT 00086. The  Judge  failed
    in his determination to refer to this matter at all, proceeding on  the
    basis that it was for the appellants to prove his  explanation  and  to
    persuade the Tribunal to go behind the previous decision of  the  Entry
    Clearance Officer.

16. The Judge failed to take into account the First appellant's explanation
    that he did not know at the time of making  his  application  that  the
    offer from Empire College London had been withdrawn.  He  stated  quite
    logically that "if I knew that the CAS was withdrawn, then I would  not
    submitted material for application because it was definite that it will
    be refused, I was not at all aware". The  appellant  sister,  Ms  Joshi
    also gave evidence which has largely corroborated  this  evidence.  She
    played a role in arranging her brother's place at  Empire  College  and
    produced bank statement showing the transfer of funds. The Judge failed
    to make a clear finding on the matter whether the appellant  knew  that
    his offer had been withdrawn  when  he  applied  for  leave.  This  was
    crucial to the appeal.

17. The First-tier Tribunal's reasons for dismissing the appeal in his view
    that the First appellant did provide his  explanation  earlier  to  the
    respondent, and in particular on the application form. This is  also  a
    material error of law. First the evidence before the Tribunal  was  not
    that the appellant gave his explanation after refusal.  He  first  give
    his explanation in response to  the  2009  respondent's  refusal  in  a
    request for administrative review. The ECM's comments clearly show that
    the respondent did request a review albeit that the review was  without
    a positive outcome for the first appellant. The first appellant was not
    entitled to an appeal to an independent Tribunal of that 2009 decision.

18. The Judge further fell into error when he  found  that  it  was  either
    appropriate or physically possible to provide, at question  28  of  the
    application form, a full explanation challenging the previous  refusal.
    The Judge appears to have considered his jurisdiction as supervisory to
    assess whether the respondent was entitled to come to the view  he  did
    on the evidence. The first-tier Tribunal by  exercising  his  appellant
    jurisdiction was entitled, indeed obliged to  go  behind  the  previous
    decision and decide for himself whether the allegation of deception had
    been proved.

The respondent's Rule 24 response

19. The  respondent  stated  the  following.  The  respondent  opposes  the
    appellant's appeal and will argue that  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal directed himself  appropriately.  The  Judge  noted  that  the
    submissions made by the appellant's representatives in respect  of  the
    evidence to be provided by the respondent. It is therefore  clear  that
    the submissions has been taken into account.

20. The Judge's findings  are  contained  within  paragraph  12.  They  are
    adequately reasoned. The Judge goes into detail about  the  appellant's
    response to the opportunity to expand on issues regarding his  previous
    visa application.  He  found  that  the  appellant's  failure  to  give
    sufficient explanation about his previous application and  the  refusal
    thereof damages  his  credibility.  The  information  provided  to  the
    respondent was insufficient to grant the appellant visa.

Findings as to whether there is an error of law

21. The Judge stated at paragraph 8 of the determination  under  the  title
    "Burden and Standard of Proof" the following.  "The  appellant  brought
    this appeal and therefore bears the burden of proof. The appellant must
    satisfy this burden on the balance of probabilities". It is established
    law that in cases where the respondent alleges  fraud,  the  burden  of
    proof is on her  to  show  on  a  balance  of  probabilities  that  the
    appellant used deception. The burden was on the respondent to show that
    the appellant in his previous  application  for  entry  clearance  used
    deception.

22. The features of the general grounds  for  refusal  in  Part  9  of  the
    Immigration  Rules  were  considered  by  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
    Tribunal in JC (Part 9 HC395 - burden  of  proof)  China  [2007]  UKAIT
    00027 ('JC').  Part  9  of  the  Immigration  Rules  contains  'general
    grounds' for the refusal of entry clearance or  leave  to  enter.   The
    applicant is not showing why he qualifies; rather the decision-maker is
    seeking  to  show  why  the  applicant  is,  or  should  normally   be,
    disqualified.  (See JC, paras. 8, 10  and  14.)  Each  of  the  general
    grounds depends for its application on the decision-maker being able to
    establish a precedent fact or facts, and in  relation  to  all  of  the
    general grounds the  burden  of  proof  is  on  the  decision-maker  to
    establish the facts relied upon (JC, para. 10).   The  reason  why  the
    burden rests on the  decision-maker  is  that  each  of  these  grounds
    alleges in one way or another failing or a wrongdoing on the part of an
    applicant (JC, paras. 11-12).  The standard of proof is at  the  higher
    end of the spectrum of balance of  probability,  but  the  standard  is
    flexible in its application, and the more serious the allegation or the
    more serious the consequences if the allegation is proven, the stronger
    must be the evidence before a court will find the allegation proved  on
    the balance  of  probabilities  (JC,  para.  13).   However,  once  the
    decision-maker establishes the underlying facts, the burden  shifts  to
    the appellant, stating why the refusal was not properly refused.

23. At paragraph 11 the Judge noted the submissions by Miss  Watterson  who
    submitted that the respondent did not provide the required evidence  in
    relation to the allegation of breach of the Rules and use of  deception
    in a previous application made by the first appellant. This is  because
    the fact of a breach of the Rules  brings  about  a  10  year  ban  and
    therefore the evidence has to be cogent.

24. It is implicit in the determination that the Judge found that it is for
    the respondent to first prove that the appellant has used deception. It
    is equally implicit in the determination that the Judge then considered
    the appellant's evidence and found it not to be credible.

25. The Judge who considered all the evidence in the appeal was entitled to
    find on the evidence that the First appellant was  aware  that  he  had
    previously submitted an application  which  had  been  refused  by  the
    respondent pursuant to paragraph 320 (7B) on 18 September 2009.

26. The Judge found that the first appellant was specifically asked in  his
    application form whether or not he had been  refused  a  visa  for  any
    country including the UK in the last  10  years.  The  First  appellant
    responded to this question by  indicating  that  he  had  made  a  visa
    application in this country as a student and which  had  been  refused.
    The appellant was asked to state the reasons for  the  refusal  in  the
    application form and the appellant stated the reason  as  "insufficient
    documents".

27. The Judge was entitled to find that the  reason  for  refusal  was  not
    "insufficient documents" as stated  by  the  First  appellant,  to  his
    knowledge but the appellant knew that his application had been  refused
    under paragraph 320 (7B). Failure by the appellant  to  give  the  true
    reason in his application form, even if the  appellant  did  not  agree
    with the decision, was found by the Judge not to be a credible response
    by the appellant.

28. The Judge stated that it was incumbent on the appellant to state in his
    application form that not only that he felt that he  had  been  wrongly
    refused under paragraph 320 (7B) but also that he  required  notice  of
    any relevant documentation which they  may  have  in  their  possession
    which might have been sent to them by the Empire College of London.

29. It is implicit in the determination  that  the  Judge  found  that  the
    respondent had refused the appellant's previous application pursuant to
    paragraph 320 (7B). It was now for the appellant to show why he did not
    state in his application form this reason but instead stated  that  his
    previous refusal was  because  of  "insufficient  documents"  which  is
    clearly not the case. The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant
    lacked credibility when he did not  give  the  correct  reason  in  his
    application form even if  as  he  says,  he  did  not  agree  with  the
    respondent's previous decision.

30. It was evident to the Judge found  that  the  appellant  gave  a  false
    answer to the question in his application form he did not state that he
    had been refused pursuant to paragraph 320 (7B) because  he  knew  that
    this would have led to his application being automatically refused. The
    Judge took into account that  the  appellant  did  request  a  judicial
    review of that earlier decision which did not have a  positive  outcome
    for the first appellant. The appellant clearly intended to mislead  the
    respondent by his response of "insufficient  documents"  when  he  knew
    this was not true. This was not a case of simply being incorrect.

31. I therefore find that the Judge did not materially err in law  or  fact
    in his decision which he arrived at based on all  the  evidence  before
    him.

Conclusion

32. I find that the Judge did not begin error  of  law  and  I  uphold  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

DECISION

Appeal dismissed



                                            Dated this 27th day of June 2015
Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper tribunal
Mrs S Chana
