
IAC-FH-CK-V1
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08135/2013


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 June 2015                       |On 11 June 2015                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCWILLIAM
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                           Mrs Fartun Omar Mohamed
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Bild, Camden Community Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Somalia  and  her  date  of  birth  is  2
    February 1983.  She made an application for entry clearance to join her
    spouse here in the UK, a British citizen, Mr Abdihakim Noor Hassan.

2.   The appellant, though a citizen of Somalia,  made  an  application  for
    entry clearance in Ethiopia.

3.   The application was refused by the ECO in  Ethiopia  for  a  number  of
    reasons in a decision of 12 March 2013.  The appellant appealed against
    the decision of the ECO and her appeal was dismissed by  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Napthine in a decision that was promulgated  on  14
    March 2014 following a hearing on 26 February 2014.

4.   Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Chapman in a decision dated 6 May 2015.  Thus the  matter  came  before
    us.

The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

5.   The appeal was dismissed  on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's  English
    language  ability.   Paragraph  E-ECP.4.1.  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    (Appendix FM) requires the appellant to have passed an English language
    test.   E-ECP.4.2.  contains  exemptions  from  the  requirement  which
    includes (at  (c))  that  there  are  exceptional  circumstances  which
    prevent the applicant from being able to meet the requirement prior  to
    entry to the UK.

6.   At the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the appellant  relied  on
    a policy in force at the time of the decision (neither party  was  able
    to provide us with a copy of this but both agreed about what  it  said)
    in relation to exceptional circumstances (E-ECP.4.2.(c)) which reads as
    follows:

         'If the applicant is a long-term resident of a country with no test
         centre, and they are applying from the country  for  a  visa  as  a
         partner, then they will be exempt  from  the  requirement  to  have
         passed an English language test'.

7.    The  judge  considered  the  applicability  of  the  policy   to   the
    appellant's case and made the following findings:

         "29. Finally there is  the  question  of  the  Appellant's  English
             language ability.  She has twice (in July  and  October  2013)
             taken a test which she has not at  present  managed  to  pass.
             She has attended classes in English whilst living in Ethiopia.

         30.  The Appellant was living in Ethiopia for over 4 months at  the
             date of application.  Over a year has passed since the date of
             decision (12/3/2013).  She is still living in Ethiopia.

         31.  It is said that due to her complete lack of  formal  education
             she has found learning English difficult.

         32.  The head of 'Standard Institute of Languages' states:-

                  'She started learning English  from  pre-elementary  level
                  since she hadn't learnt English before.  She is  now  good
                  at understanding simple and familiar situations.  Now  she
                  can speak a little English because she didn't  get  enough
                  chance to attend spoken classes.'

         33.  On the Appellant's behalf it was submitted that because she is
             from Somalia, where she was a long term resident she should be
             exempt from the English language requirements as Somalia is  a
             country without a test centre.

         34.  There would be some  force  in  that  submission  if  she  had
             remained a resident of Somalia.

         35.  However, the wording of the exception  (as  submitted  for  my
             consideration by Ms. Scott) is:-

                  'If the applicant is a long-term  resident  of  a  country
                  with no test centre,  and  they  are  applying  from  that
                  country for a visa as a partner, then they will be  exempt
                  from the requirements to have passed an  English  language
                  test.'

         36.  The Appellant may have been a long-term resident of Somalia (a
             country on the list), however, she  has  for  some  time  been
             resident in Ethiopia and it is  from  Ethiopia  that  she  has
             applied for her entry clearance.

         37.  I find that the Appellant  is  not  exempt  from  the  English
             language  requirements.   She  has  availed  herself  of   the
             opportunities in Ethiopia to  learn  English.   She  has  been
             making some progress.

         38.  I find nothing unreasonable  in  requiring  the  Appellant  to
             satisfy the  normal  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
             including those  concerning  English  language  ability.   She
             intends to come to the UK where such ability will be vital  to
             her everyday life and ability to take part in society."

The Grounds of Appeal

8.   The grounds of appeal argue that the decision of the judge relating  to
    the applicability of the policy is irrational.  There is no test centre
    in Somalia.  The appellant travelled to Ethiopia  in  October  2012  in
    order to marry.  She made an application for entry clearance on 5 March
    2013 which was refused on 12 March 2013.

9.   We heard oral submissions from Mr Bild in the context  of  the  grounds
    of appeal and Mr Nath made oral submissions in the context of the  Rule
    24 response.

Conclusions

10.  The appellant in this case is a long-term resident of Somalia, but  she
    did not make an application from there. She made an  application  in  a
    country where she was not a long-term resident and  where  there  is  a
    test centre and thus the policy is of no assistance to  her.  How  long
    the appellant has spent in Ethiopia is not in our view material to  the
    decision.   She was able to travel to Ethiopia and her evidence did not
    disclose exceptional circumstances that would prevent  her  from  being
    able to take the English language test in Ethiopia. The policy  is  for
    those who are not able to sit the test in their  country  of  long-term
    residence and who are  unable  to  travel.   We  appreciate  that  this
    appellant could not make an application from Somalia and had to  travel
    elsewhere to make an application, but we do not  consider  this  to  be
    material. Although we have  reservations  about  the  judge's  decision
    concerning the appellant's country of long term residency, any error is
    immaterial because the policy does not apply.

11.  The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam       Date 9 June 2015

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
