
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: OA/08633/2012


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 9 January 2014                             |On 17 January 2014           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                TINA OGBONNA

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     no appearance by sponsor or legal representatives
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   1. There was no appearance by the appellant's  legal  representatives  or
      her sponsor. An application for an adjournment had been emailed to the
      Tribunal at 15.18 the day before the hearing. Although not  considered
      by me until 9th January,  I  refused  the  adjournment.  There  is  no
      indication on the face of the email  that  the  legal  representatives
      have complied with Rule 21 of the Asylum and  Immigration  (Procedure)
      Rules in seeking the adjournment; in particular  the  application  was
      not notified to the respondent and furthermore I was satisfied on  the
      basis of the content of the email that  the  appeal  could  be  justly
      determined without an adjournment. The representatives stated that  to
      renew the application orally would result in significant expense. They
      did not state that they intended to renew the application  if  refused
      and no such application was made to me. Later in the email  the  legal
      representatives stated that if the adjournment application was refused
      they invited the Tribunal to reach a determination  on  the  basis  of
      previous written submissions. This  I  have  done,  also  taking  into
      account the submissions incorporated in the email.


   2. This is an appeal against a decision of a First-tier Tribunal Judge to
      dismiss an appeal by Miss Ogbonna against  a  decision  by  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer dated 29 February 2012 to refuse her entry clearance
      as a spouse on the grounds that she did not meet the  requirements  of
      paragraph 281 of the Immigration  Rules.   Permission  to  appeal  was
      granted on the basis that although there was no challenge to the First-
      tier  Tribunal  decision  that  the  appellant  did   not   meet   the
      requirements of the rules, the judge should have considered the appeal
      on Article 8 grounds.


   3. The First-tier Tribunal found that the  appellant  did  not  meet  the
      requirements of the Rules as regards the  language  qualification  and
      that although there was likely to be  adequate  accommodation  without
      recourse to public funds the appellant could not meet the  maintenance
      requirements.  The judge did not make a finding on the  sustainability
      of the marriage having found that there was no requirement  to  do  so
      given the failure to meet the requirements of the Rules.

   4. Although the grounds seeking permission to appeal sought to  challenge
      the decision under the Rules, permission to appeal was not granted  on
      those grounds, the decision by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  being
      unassailable.  Permission was however granted on the basis that it was
      arguable that the judge should have considered the appeal on Article 8
      grounds.

   5. The First-tier Tribunal Judge records that Article 8 was  not  raised.
      The appellant  was  not  legally  represented  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal but her spouse gave evidence on her behalf.

   6. Miss Pal initially said that there was an error of law such  that  the
      decision should be set aside because of the failure of  the  judge  to
      make a finding on whether the marriage was subsisting  and  that  that
      may impact on the Article 8 assessment.

   7. After exploring this further, however, she withdrew that view and said
      that at its highest, if the marriage is subsisting there would  be  no
      material error because the appellant failed to  satisfy  the  language
      requirement.  She refers to the case of BB where it was found  by  the
      Court of  Appeal  that  the  failure  to  meet  the  English  language
      qualification did not render a decision disproportionate in Article  8
      terms.

   8. Article 8 can be engaged in entry  clearance  cases.   In  Shamin  Box
      [2002] UKIAT 02212 it was held that adjudicators  as  they  were  then
      known should not treat the Article 8 question in entry clearance cases
      whether there had been an unjustified interference with the  right  to
      private and family life but whether there  had  been   an  unjustified
      lack of respect for private and family life and whether in  the  light
      of the positive obligations on the UK  to  facilitate  family  reunion
      there has been a failure to act in the particular circumstances of the
      case.  However similar principles should be applied as for in  country
      cases.

   9. Since then of course there has been  considerable  litigation  and  of
      particular relevance is VW (Uganda) and AB (Somalia) Court  of  Appeal
      [2009] EWCA Civ 5 and of course the case of Nagre [2013] EWHC 720  and
      MF (Nigeria) [2013] EWCA Civ 1192.

  10. The issues in connection with this case are that  the  appellant  does
      not meet the Immigration Rules both in terms of  maintenance  and  her
      language qualification.  The sponsor did not attend the hearing before
      me and nor was the appellant's representative present.  Taken  at  its
      highest that the marriage is subsisting, there is  no  other  evidence
      that was placed before the First-tier  Tribunal  or  before  me  which
      would render this  decision  disproportionate.   There  is  inadequate
      evidence as to maintenance and the appellant has not produced evidence
      in connection with her English  language  qualifications  despite  the
      length of time that has now elapsed.  There is no  specific  reference
      to Article 8 in the grounds seeking permission  to  appeal  the  Entry
      Clearance Officer's  decision  and  although  the  appellant  was  not
      represented, there is no indication that the  sponsor  was  not  given
      every assistance to present the case as he  wished  and  there  is  no
      indication that he was prevented from  putting  such  evidence  as  he
      could  as to the marriage.

  11. On this basis therefore I am satisfied that although the  judge  ought
      perhaps to have considered the issue of Article 8, the  fact  that  he
      did not although amounting to a potential error of law does not render
      the decision unlawful because the outcome of the decision  would  have
      been the same, namely the judge would have found that the decision was
      not disproportionate.

  12. I find that there is no  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      decision such as to set aside the decision to be remade.


Signed                                  Date 15th January 2014


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker

